hcv infections are on the rise in the united states, reflecting increasing rates of opioid addiction (zibbell et al., 2018) . an hcv vaccine is urgently needed to control the epidemic, but vaccine development is challenging due to the enormous genetic diversity of the hcv envelope proteins (yusim et al., 2010) . the hcv genome encodes two structural proteins, e1 and e2, that associate to form a noncovalent heterodimer, e1e2 (freedman et al., 2016) . potent bnabs isolated from hcvinfected individuals predominantly target conserved epitopes in the front layer of the e2 glycoprotein. the majority of bnabs that bind to the front layer are derived from vh1-69 genes , which are also associated with bnabs that target conserved epitopes on influenza virus and hiv-1 envelope glycoproteins (chen et al., 2019) .we recently described crystal structures of two vh1-69 bnabs, hepc3 and hepc74, isolated from individuals who spontaneously cleared hcv infection (flyak et al., 2018) . both bnabs utilized a disulfide motif in their cdrh3 regions to recognize a conserved epitope in the front layer of e2. while the hepc3 and hepc74 cdrh3 loops adopted a straight ß-hairpin conformation, the vh1-69-encoded ar3a and ar3c bnabs that were isolated from an individual with a chronic hcv infection included bent cdrh3 loops that contained an analogous disulfide motif (kong et al., 2013) . since the two bnabs with straight cdrh3s were isolated from individuals who spontaneously cleared hcv infection and the two bnabs with bent cdrh3s were isolated from a single chronically-infected individual, we wondered if some individuals are naturally predisposed to make antibodies with straight or bent cdrh3s and/or whether the straight cdrh3 conformation was related to the ability to clear hcv infection. among bnabs isolated from a chronically-infected individual (law et al., 2008) , we found ar3x, a vh1-69-encoded antibody that included a cdrh3 with a disulfide motif and an unusually long 14-amino acid-long insertion in cdrh2 ( figure 1a) . ar3x provided an opportunity to explore the structural plasticity of vh1-69-derived anti-hcv bnabs with a disulfide-containing cdrh3 and to determine the impact of a long cdrh2 insertion on the recognition of the conserved epitope in e2 front layer.the most likely scenario resulting in the insertion into the cdrh2 of ar3x involves a duplication event, as the cdrh2 insertion has 69% identity with the n-terminal sequence preceding the cdrh2 ( figure 1b ). similar to other front layer-specific bnabs with the cdrh3 disulfide motif ( figure 1e ), the cysteines in the ar3x cdrh3 region are encoded by the human d gene segment 15 (ighd2-15) ( figure 1c ). the c-terminal portion of the ar3x cdrh3 is likely encoded by human j-gene segment 3*02 (j3*02). not including the 14-amino acid insertion in cdrh2, ar3x shares 91% nucleotide figure 1 . ar3x includes a 14-residue insertion in cdrh2. (a) sequence alignment of a portion of the heavy chain variable region gene sequences of ar3x and the ar3x germline precursor (ar3xrua) (uppercase letters) and the vh1-69 gene segment (lowercase letters). the cdrh2 insertion is indicated by a dark gray box with the position of the potential duplication site indicated by a light gray box. cdr loops were defined based on kabat nomenclature kabat and national institutes of health (u.s.). office of the director, 1991) . dots indicate identical nucleotides and dashes indicate gaps. (b) sequence alignment of the cdrh2 insertion and the potential duplication origin site in vh1-69. (c) amino acid sequence alignment of the ar3x cdrh3 and the ar3x germline precursor genes determined by imgt/v-quest. dots indicate identical amino acids and dashes indicate regions encoded by other gene segments or n-nucleotide additions. two cysteines encoded by the d gene segment are highlighted in bold and underscored. (d) amino acid sequence alignment of the heavy chain variable region sequences of ar3x, ar3x dins (ar3x without insertion), ar3xrua (germline precursor of ar3x), and ar3xrua + ins (germline precursor of ar3x with insertion). cdr loops were defined based on kabat nomenclature and colored purple (cdrh1), orange (cdrh2), and blue (cdrh3), with the cdrh2 insertion highlighted in bold. dots indicate identical amino acids and dashes indicate gaps. (e) alignment of ar3x, ar3a, ar3c, hepc3, and hepc74 cdrh3 sequences. the ar3x sequence is highlighted in red and the two cysteines in each cdrh3 are underscored. identity with the v h 1-69 gene segment and includes 17 somatic mutations ( figure 1d ). to investigate the importance of the cdrh2 insertion and the effects of somatic mutations on ar3x binding and neutralization, we generated a panel of ar3x variants: ar3x dins (ar3x without the cdrh2 insertion), ar3xrua (germline precursor of ar3x, which lacks the cdrh2 insertion and somatic mutations), and ar3xrua + ins (germline precursor of ar3x with the cdrh2 insertion) ( figure 1d) .we evaluated the binding of ar3x and ar3x variants to a panel of e2 ectodomain (e2ecto) proteins representing the e2 envelopes from 19 hcv genotype 1 strains. we also tested the binding of ar3x and ar3x variants to e2ecto proteins from genotypes 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 strains. ar3x recognized all 19 e2 envelopes from genotype 1 including the 1a116 strain, which was not recognized by other front layer-specific bnabs that include the cdrh3 disulfide motif ( flyak et al., 2018) . ar3x also recognized e2 envelopes from genotypes 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 ( figure 2a) . in contrast to mature ar3x, the ar3x dins protein that lacks the cdrh2 insertion bound only 4 of the 25 variants, indicating that the cdrh2 insertion mediates the breath of binding. while ar3xrua failed to bind any e2ecto proteins, ar3xrua + ins recognized 1 of the 25 variants, further highlighting the importance of the cdrh2 insertion in initial recognition of the e2 antigen by naïve b cells. the fact that ar3xrua + ins only bound to one hcv strain, whereas mature ar3x recognized all strains, indicated that somatic mutations, in addition to the cdrh2 insertion, are required for breath of binding and optimal e2 recognition. consistent with our previous studies in which the strain 1a157 e2ecto envelope was recognized by hepc3, hepc74, ar3c and their germline precursors (flyak et al., 2018) , ar3x and two ar3x variants (ar3x dins, ar3xrua + ins) also bound to 1a157, suggesting that immunogens based on the genotype 1 1a157 ectodomain sequence could be used to stimulate the development of potent front layer-specific bnabs ( figure 2a , figure 2-figure supplement 1) .to evaluate the neutralization breadth of ar3x variants, we evaluated antibodies in an in vitro neutralization assay using a panel of 19 genotype 1 hcv pseudoparticles (hcvpp) that represents 94% of the amino acid polymorphisms present at >5% frequency in a reference panel of 643 genotype 1 hcv isolates from genbank (munshaw et al., 2012) . only mature ar3x exhibited neutralization activity, neutralizing 17 of 19 hcv strains ( figure 2b, figure 2-figure supplement 2) . the neutralization breadth of ar3x (89%) was slightly lower than the breath of ar3c bnab (100%) (flyak et al., 2018) , which was isolated from the same hcv-infected individual (law et al., 2008) . ar3x variants failed to neutralize hcv isolates, suggesting that both the cdrh2 insertion and somatic mutations are required for the broad neutralization activity of ar3x.we and others described two classes of vh1-69 bnabs with a cdrh3 disulfide motif: bnabs with a straight cdrh3 (hepc3 and hepc74) and bnabs with a kinked cdrh3 (ar3a and ar3c) (flyak et al., 2018; kong et al., 2013; tzarum et al., 2019; figure 3) . to determine to which class ar3x belongs, we determined the crystal structure of ar3x in complex with e2ecto from the 1b09 hcv strain (figure 4, figure 4 -figure supplement 1). the 2.2 å ar3x-e2ecto structure demonstrated that, similar to previously-characterized hcv bnabs that recognize the neutralizing face of e2 (flyak et al., 2018; kong et al., 2013; tzarum et al., 2019) , ar3x binds to the conserved epitope in the e2 front layer ( figure 4a ). the ar3x cdrh3 loop contains two cysteines that form a disulfide bond, as seen in multiple other e2 front layer-binding bnabs, and the ar3x cdrh3 adopts the straight conformation we previously described in the hepc3 and hepc74 bnabs that were isolated from an individual who cleared hcv infection (flyak et al., 2018 ; figure 3 ). by contrast, the cdrh3s of ar3a and ar3c, which were isolated from the same hcv-infected individual as ar3x (law et al., 2008) , are bent (kong et al., 2013; tzarum et al., 2019) . the tip of the ar3x cdrh3 loop interacts with the same conserved residues in the front layer of e2 as the cdrh3 tips in the other hcv bnabs (figure 4e, figure 4-figure supplement 2) .overall, ar3x has a similar binding footprint to the footprints of hepc3, hepc74, ar3c, and ar3a, sharing multiple contact residues in the front layer and cd81 receptor-binding loop (figure 4-figure supplement 2) . as also found for these other front layer-specific bnabs, ar3x's contacts with e2ecto almost exclusively involved v h domain residues, burying 1,250 å 2 (98% of the total fab buried surface area; bsa) ( figure 4b) , with the cdrh3 accounting for 44.5% (556 å 2 ) of the total bsa on the v h domain ( figure 4b, figure 4-figure supplement 2) . however, in contrast to other front layer-specific bnabs in which the cdrh3 plays a dominant role in the interactions with e2 envelope (flyak et al., 2018; kong et al., 2013; tzarum et al., 2019) , the main contributor to the ar3x-e2ecto binding interface was cdrh2, which accounted for 48.2% (602 å 2 ) of the total bsa of the v h domain, with the majority of the binding footprint provided by the cdrh2 insertion (45.4% or 567 å 2 of total bsa of the v h domain) ( figure 4c) .we next investigated the frequency of antibodies with 14-residue cdrh2 insertions. while the size of an insertion or deletion in human antibody genes ranges from 3 to 33 nucleotides (kanyavuz et al., 2019) , ar3x has a unusually long 42-nucleotide insertion, which results in a 31-residue cdrh2 (kabat definition: [kabat and national institutes of health (u.s.) . office of the director, 1991] ). according to the abysis database (swindells et al., 2017) , a typical human cdrh2 is 17 residues (relative frequency 67%) ( figure 4d) , and cdrh2s longer than 20 residues are rare (relative frequency <1%). to our knowledge, ar3x with its 31-residue cdrh2 represents the longest cdrh2 among antibody structures available in the protein data bank (pdb).although the cdh3s of ar3x, ar3a, ar3c, hepc3, and hepc74 cdrh3s make similar binding footprints on the e2 surface ( figure 5) , the difference in fab approach angles and the presence of the long insertion in the ar3x cdrh2 result in different footprints on e2 for the v h 1-69-encoded cdrh2 loops of the bnabs: ar3x cdrh2 contacts the c-terminus of the e2 a1-helix, the portion of the e2 front layer between the a-helix, variable region 2 (residues 446-448), and the back layer of e2 (residues 444, 445) ( figure 4f and figure 4-figure supplement 2) . in contrast, the ar3a and ar3c cdrh2 contacts are reduced to hydrophobic residues in a1-helix (kong et al., 2013) , whereas the hepc3 and hepc74 cdrh2s contact the e2 a1-helix and the portion of the e2 front layer between the a1-helix and variable region 2 (residues 446-448) (flyak et al., 2018) .a feature of vh1-69-derived antibodies is the presence of two hydrophobic residues at the tip of the cdrh2 loop that facilitate interactions with hydrophobic epitopes. the cdrh2s of ar3a and ar3c contain an ile/val-pro-met/leu-phe motif in which hydrophobic residues interact with the e2 front layer and cd81 binding loop (chen et al., 2019) . the cdrh2s of hepc3 and hepc74 are less hydrophobic and contain a thr/ser-pro-ile-phe/ser motif (chen et al., 2019) . in addition to hydrophobic interactions with the e2 front layer, the hepc3 cdrh2 also makes a single hydrogen bond with e2 (flyak et al., 2018) . by contrast, ar3x is a not a typical vh1-69 antibody in which hydrophobic residues in cdrh2 mediate the binding to hydrophobic residues in e2 (chen et al., 2019) . instead, the ar3x cdrh2 forms eight hydrogen bonds with the e2 glycoprotein, four of which are mediated by ar3x residue arg52g (ar3x-e2ecto: pro52c-his445, pro52e-thr444, arg52g-ala440, arg52g-phe442, arg52g-tyr443, arg52g-pro612, asn52n-tyr443, trp52i-tyr613) ( figure 4f, figure 4-figure supplement 2) . notably, these differences in binding interactions have functional implications, as these mabs differ in potency of neutralization of individual hcv strains in the hcvpp panel. for example, the ar3x neutralization ic 50 for strain 1b21 is~17 fold lower than the ic 50 of hepc3 (1.2 vs. 20.5 mg/ml). in contrast, the ar3x neutralization ic 50 for strain 1a142 is~9 fold higher than the ic 50 of hepc3 (16.2 vs. 1.9 mg/ml) (figure 2 ; flyak et al., 2018) .a signature feature of the ar3a/ar3c and hepc3/hepc74 types of hcv bnabs is the long cdrh3 that forms multiple main chain-main chain hydrogen bonds with e2 front layer residues (flyak et al., 2018; tzarum et al., 2019) . similar to other front layer-specific bnabs with a cdrh3 disulfide motif, the first cysteine residue of the ar3x cdrh3 (cys100a) hydrogen bonds with e2 residue cys429 ( figure 4g loop residue (glu531), further stabilize the interaction of ar3x with e2. the ar3x-e2ecto crystal structure also shows contacts between the ar3x cdrh3 and n-glycans attached to e2 residues asn423 and asn430 ( figure 4g ).we and others previously described hcv bnabs that utilize the vh1-69 gene segment and a germline-encoded disulfide motif in cdrh3 to recognize the conserved epitope in e2 front layer (flyak et al., 2018; keck et al., 2019; kong et al., 2013; tzarum et al., 2019) . here we structurally characterized a front layer-specific hcv bnab that is encoded by the vh1-69 gene that includes an ultralong insertion in cdrh2 as well as the disulfide motif in cdrh3. we found that ar3x, isolated from the same chronically-infected patient as ar3a or ar3c (law et al., 2008) , surprisingly exhibits the straight cdrh3 conformation found in the hepc3 or hepc74 bnabs isolated from individuals who spontaneously cleared hcv infection (figure 3) . this indicates that a single individual can produce potent hcv-specific bnabs using the common vh1-69 and d2-15 genes that bind to the conserved region of e2 in at least three different configurations (straight cdrh3 with cdrh2 insertion, straight cdrh3 without cdrh2 insertion, or bent cdrh3 without cdrh2 insertion), highlighting the intrinsic plasticity of the vh1-69-encoded cdrh1 and cdrh2 loops that accommodate different antibody approach angles ( figure 5 ). it's likely that the cdrh3s of these bnabs dictate the preferential mode of engagement of bnab germline precursors with the conserved epitope in the e2 front layer. overall, these data demonstrate that b cells using vh1-69 and d2-15 genes can follow multiple pathways of affinity maturation to achieve broad neutralizing activity.in the four bnabs that were previously characterized structurally (flyak et al., 2018; kong et al., 2013; tzarum et al., 2019) , the first cysteine residue of the cdrh3 hydrogen bonds with e2 residue cys429 ( figure 4g, figure 4-figure supplement 2) . we hypothesize that after the initial recognition of the front layer by cdrh3, the vh1-69-encoded cdrh1 and cdrh2 further stabilize the interaction while subsequent somatic mutations increase the bnab affinity and breadth. other antibodies that utilize a cdrh3 stabilized by a disulfide bond have been also described in the literature (sui et al., 2009; thomson et al., 2008; ying et al., 2015) . for example, m336, a potent human antibody that neutralizes severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (ying et al., 2014) , is encoded by the vh1-69 gene segment and includes a germline-encoded disulfide bond in its cdrh3 (ying et al., 2015) .nucleotide insertions and deletions play an important role in diversification of the antibody repertoire (de wildt et al., 1999; reason and zhou, 2006; wilson et al., 1998) . insertions are produced by sequence duplications; while the average size of insertion varies from 3 to 33 nucleotides, the majority of antibodies contain short insertions (kanyavuz et al., 2019; wilson et al., 1998) . ar3x with its 42-nucleotide insertion in cdrh2 represents an interesting case of an antibody that utilizes an ultralong cdrh2 to bind its epitope (figure 4) . the insertion was required for recognition of e2 glycoproteins across multiple hcv strains, as evidenced by the poor binding activity of ar3x variants lacking the cdrh2 insertion ( figure 2) . while several neutralizing antibodies with insertions have been described (kepler et al., 2014; krause et al., 2011) , ar3x is unique for its exceptionally long cdrh2 insertion, which makes extensive contacts with e2, but does not change the preconfigured mode of ar3x interaction with e2 based on its straight cdrh3 containing a disulfide motif. thus the conserved epitope in the hcv e2 front layer, which is recognized by multiple human bnabs containing a disulfide motif in their cdrh3s (figure 5) , remains a promising target for lineage-based immunogen design. genes encoding the v h and v l domains of the ar3x bnab called antibody 'a' in supplemental table 1 in law et al. (2008) were synthesized as gblocks gene fragments (idt) and cloned into ptt5-based expression vectors (nrc biotechnology research institute). reverted unmutated ancestor (rua) variants of ar3x and the location of the insertion were inferred with imgt/v-quest using complete sequences of heavy and light chain variable domains. iggs were produced in expi293f cells (national research council of canada) by co-transfecting appropriate heavy and light chain plasmids. hitrap protein a hp column (ge healthcare) was used to isolate iggs from filtered culture supernatants followed by purification by size exclusion chromatography (sec) using a superdex 200 increase 10/300 gl column (ge healthcare).for elisa experiments, his-tagged e2ecto proteins (residues 384-643) were expressed by transiently transfecting expi293f cells (national research council of canada) and purified from clarified supernatants using a histrap ff column (ge healthcare) followed by sec on a superdex 200 increase 10/300 gl column (ge healthcare) to separate monomeric e2ecto proteins from oligomeric species. for structural studies, the his-tag was removed from an expression vector encoding a strain 1b09 e2 ectodomain.expression and purification of an e2-fab complex ar3x fab-1b09 e2ecto complexes for structural studies were produced in hek293-6e or expi293f cells (national research council of canada) in the presence of 5 mm kifunensine (sigma) by co-transfecting expression vectors encoding his-tagged fab and untagged e2ecto to allow isolation of stable fab-e2 complexes (flyak et al., 2018) . ar3x-e2 complex was purified from supernatants using ni-nta chromatography on histrap hp column (ge healthcare) followed by sec on a superdex 200 increase 10/300 gl column (ge healthcare).commercially-available screens (hampton research and molecular dimensions) were used to screen initial crystallization conditions by vapor diffusion in sitting drops. ar2x-e2ecto crystals were grown using 0.2 ml of protein complex in tbs and 0.2 ml of mother liquor (0.25 m ammonium tartrate dibasic ph 7.0, 20% peg 3,350) and cryoprotected in mother liquor supplemented with 20% (w/v) glycerol. x-ray diffraction data from cryopreserved crystals were collected at the stanford synchrotron radiation lightsource on beamline 12-2 using a pilatus 6m detector. images were processed and scaled using imosflm (battye et al., 2011) and aimless as implemented in the ccp4 software suite (evans and murshudov, 2013) . the ar3x-e2 complex structure was solved by molecular replacement using the ar3c (pdb 4mwf) and 1b09 hcv e2ecto (pdb 6mei) structures as search models. the models were refined and validated using phenix.refine (adams et al., 2010) . iterative manual model building and corrections were performed using coot (emsley and cowtan, 2004) . glycans were initially interpreted and modeled using f o -f c maps calculated with model phases contoured at 2s, followed by 2f o -f c simulated annealing composite omit maps generated in phenix in which modeled glycans were omitted to remove model bias (adams et al., 2010) . the quality of the final models was examined using molprobity . models were superimposed and figures rendered using the pymol molecular visualization system (version 1.7, schrö dinger, llc). buried surface areas (bsas) were determined using the pdbepisa web-based interactive tool (krissinel and henrick, 2007) . potential hydrogen bonds were assigned using criteria of a distance of <4.0 å and an a-d-h angle of >90˚, and the maximum distance allowed for a van der waals interaction was 4.0 å . rmsd calculations were done in pymol following pairwise ca alignments without excluding outliers. ar3x residues were numbered according to the kabat numbering scheme, and kabat definitions of cdrs were used throughout the paper (kabat and national institutes of health (u.s.). office of the director, 1991) . values to show the length distribution of cdrh2 in humans were extracted from the online abysis system (http://www. bioinf.org.uk/abysis/) using the kabat numbering scheme.soluble forms of full-length e2 ectodomains were coated overnight onto 96-well plates (corning) at 1 mg/ml. plates were blocked with 1% goat serum and 1% powdered milk in tbst buffer (tbs with 0.05% tween-20) for 1 hr. purified iggs were assayed in duplicate at 4-fold serial dilutions, starting at 10 mg/ml. iggs-e2ecto complexes were detected using goat anti-human igg horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (southern biotech, 1:4000 dilution) and 1-step ultra tmb-elisa substrate (thermo fisher scientific) and reading the optical density read at 450 nm after stopping the reaction with 1m hcl. a non-linear regression analysis was performed on the resulting curves using prism version 5 (graphpad) to calculate ec 50 values.hcvpp were produced by lipofectamine-mediated transfection of hcv e1e2 and pnl4-3.luc.r-eplasmids into hek293t cells as described (hsu et al., 2003; logvinoff et al., 2004) . a panel of 19 heterologous genotype 1 hcvpp has been described previously (bailey et al., 2015; osburn et al., 2014) . neutralization assays were performed as described (dowd et al., 2009) . briefly, iggs were serially diluted five-fold, starting at a concentration at 100 mg/ml and incubated with hcvpp for one hour prior to addition to hep3b hepatoma cells. luciferase activity was measured after three days and compared to that of hcvpp in media alone.management practice of allergic rhinitis in china during the covid-19 pandemicup in our hospital to identify the cause of the fever and distinguish the actual covid-19 cases from patients with fever and/or respiratory symptoms similar to those found in covid-19 cases. during the covid-19 epidemic, the number of outpatient visits to allergy clinic of beijing tongren hospital decreased by 90% compared with the same period in the previous year; however, this has now gradually recovered to 50%, i.e., 100 patients per day. all 423 local ar outpatients are receiving immunotherapy continuously, and account for 75% of the total patients undergoing scit.the management of ar includes allergen avoidance, pharmacotherapy, ait and patient education. 3 a panel of allergy/immunology specialists from the us and canada has recently published an expert panel consensus document, which provides a prioritization rational to help guide decision-making for allergist/immunologist when they need to limit services to their patients during the covid-19 pandemic. 4 based on the experience of allergy clinic of beijing tongren hospital, one of the largest and best-known allergy clinics in china, we have developed an algorithm specifically for management of ar ( figure) during the covid-19 pandemic in china. this involves a strict screening protocol to ensure that the patients who are coming to the allergy clinic are not infected by covid-19; as initially indicated by a body temperature lower than 37.3°c 5 and a negative epidemiological history, which indicates that the patients had remained in beijing for over 14 days prior to the hospital visit. thus, for screening purpose the entrance to the hospital has been arranged with infrared human body temperature screening door that a patient's temperature is measured and a history of their movement over the last 14 days are recorded before the patient can enter the hospital. the epidemiological history is an important part of screening, and a record of the patient's movement within 2 weeks can be obtained by scanning a smartphone at the entrance of the hospital. only patients with both a normal temperature and a negative epidemiological history are allowed to proceed to the outpatient departments and a second body temperature measurement with contactless forehead temperature grab will be performed before entering each targeted department; whereas patients with a body temperature higher than 37.3°c are guided to the fever clinic to have additional screening examinations; including routine blood tests and chest computed tomography scanning. throat swabs are also taken for sars-cov-2 rna testing if necessary to separate patients with fever and/or respiratory symptoms including cough, runny nose, sore throat along with nasal congestion and sneezing, similar to those found in covid-19. when a patient's viral nucleic acid test result is found to be positive, the patient is transferred to one of the covid-19 designated hospitals for further treatment.there is presently inconclusive evidence on the safe use of corticosteroids in asthmatic patients affected by covid-19. however, in the case of ar patients infected with covid-19, the aria-mask study group and the european academy of allergy and clinical immunology have recently developed an expert consensus statement, which recommends that use of intranasal corticosteroids (ins) in ar should be continued at the recommended dose, as stopping the ins would increase sneezing and lead to more spreading of the virus. 6 in regard to the influence of continuous use of ins in ar patients infected with covid-19 on the disease of covid-19 as well as immune defenses and health outcomes of affected patients, there is a paucity of real-world experience and thus the recommendation for ins should be adjusted accordingly based on the new data confirmed. in view of the fact that droplets caused by respiratory symptoms such as sneezing and coughing, and tears caused by conjunctivitis 7 may be an important source of viral transmission, the protection of hcws is particularly important, when close inspection or contact with allergic patients is necessary, for example when administering ait injections. besides taking the standardized basic https://e-aair. precautions; including wearing work clothes, disposable surgical masks and waterproof medical caps; all hcws in allergy clinics take extra precautions by wearing anti-fog protective goggles and protective face shields. during an outpatient visit, the patient is admitted to a single consulting room with good ventilation, and at most one doctor and one nurse in attendance in the room at the same time. patients are required to observe social distancing regulations with other patients when waiting for their consultation with the doctor or when under observation following the immunotherapy injection. during this consultation, all specialized examinations such as anterior rhinoscopy, endoscopy, rhinomanometry and acoustic rhinometry, pulmonary function and serum allergen tests are suspended. apart from the outpatient visit, the patient can obtain knowledge of prevention and control of ar via the general public media platform.currently, 564 patients are receiving scit in our clinic before covid-19 epidemic; of whom 75% of these patients are long-term residents in beijing and undergoing continuous scit following the screening process during the covid-19 epidemic. the remaining 25% of the patients, who live outside beijing, have each been contacted by telephone and been advised that in order to reduce the risk of infection in the process of transportation, their treatment should be suspended until the end of the epidemic. fortunately, to date all the local patients have successfully been treated by ait, with no case of infection with covid-19 being recorded among these patients. based on this experience, it is clear that there needs to be a high level of cooperation between doctors, nurses, technicians and the patients, for a successful outcome.at present, as beijing enters the peak of the spring pollen season, beijing tongren hospital is cooperating with the china meteorological administration (http://www.weather.com.cn/ forecast/hf_index.shtml?id=101010100&from=singlemessage&isappinstalled=0) and beijing meteorological bureau (http://bjweather.iyuebo.com/weather.php?a=chart2) to establish a pollen monitoring network for to predict pollen counts, providing useful information towards the patients with pollen allergy. this service is being popularized via the internet and mobile app technology (wechat), and also provides medical services such as online consultations and delivery of medications to patients. moreover, the specialists will also increase tv media publicity (https://item.btime.com/f2ig2sk409q9m5pasnv85tns89e) and provide more online lectures on diseases using zoom or tencent real time conferencing software during the outbreak. the doctors will also recommend to the patients the over-the-counter drugs, which can be bought from their local pharmacies, to control their allergic symptoms.we suggest that the experience and lessons learned from allergy clinics in various countries during the current covid-19 pandemic need to be summarized and shared in time, in the hope that this will help in the provision of better services and management of patients suffering from allergic diseases during this pandemic.in late december 2019 in wuhan city (china), a new coronavirus called sars-cov-2 (initially ncov-2019) caused the outbreak of a respiratory disease known as the infectious disease due to the new coronavirus (covid-19) (zhou et al., 2020; zhu et al., 2020) . soon after learning about the potential for transmission of this virus in the context of a globalized world, countries took swift and extreme measures such as border closings, rigorous follow-up of contacts, and mandatory preventive isolation. in colombia, the first case of covid-19 was identified on march 6, 2020, shortly before the world health organization (who) declared covid-19 as a pandemic after it had spread in 114 countries in all continents and having claimed the lives of 4,291 people (who, 2020a).the first case of covid-19 in colombia was imported from italy, a country that had the most alarming epidemic peak in europe at that time. shortly afterwards, cases of covid-19 were diagnosed in travelers from other origins, as well as in multiple of their contacts. on april 20, 2020, community transmission cases already exceeded 10% of the total cases registered in the country, which is why the transition to the mitigation phase was declared. until may 24, 2020, around 5,361,000 cases and 343,000 deaths have been reported globally, and in colombia, 20,177 cases and 705 deaths have been reported (dong et al., 2020) . a high similarity between the amino acid sequence in the receptor-binding domain (rbd domain) of subunit 1 (s1) of the spike protein of sars-cov-2 and that of pangolin-cov , but the latter lacks the polybasic furin processing site, exclusive to sars-cov-2 (andersen et al., 2020) . accumulated evidence suggests a zoonotic origin of the virus as a result of recombination with a yet unidentified coronavirus or convergent evolution driven by natural selection to optimize interaction with the human ace2 cell receptor who, 2020b) . after the publication of the complete sars-cov-2 genome in genomic data repositories such as ncbi (mn908947.3) and the global initiative on sharing all influenza data (gisaid) in mid-january 2020, health agencies and researchers from different countries quickly developed sars-cov-2 screening tests based on real-time rt-pcr (rrt-pcr) that amplify different sars-cov-2 gene regions. hundreds of commercial kits are under development and many of the m have been licensed for emergency use (https://www.finddx.org/covid-19/pipeline/). various in-house protocols were also developed and published on the website of the world health organization (who) for informational purposes without implying endorsement, preference or validation by this entity (who, 2020c) . however, most of these protocols were published during january 2020 when only 230 virus sequences were available that circulated exclusively in asia and europe, except for a few cases in the united states and canada (holshue et al., 2020) .since then, refinements of these protocols are not known in the context of more than 31,000 sequences reported on may 24, 2020, worldwide, including latin america, which provide a more complete perspective of the accumulated genetic variability and sequence particularities of viruses circulating in specific regions that could affect the efficiency and sensitivity of the rrt-pcr protocols currently shared by who. the mutation rate of sars-cov-2 as a virus with an rna genome is higher than that of viruses with a dna genome (tang et al., 2020) , with an estimated mean evolutionary rate of 2.24 x 10 -3 substitutions/site/year ; therefore, changes in the sequence could occur over time that compromise the operational performance of diagnostic tests (paho, 2020) . the objective of this study was to describe the genetic variability of colombian sars-cov-2 genomes in hybridization regions of oligonucleotides of the main in-house methods for sars-cov-2 detection. nasopharyngeal swab samples from 30 patients with suspected sars-cov-2 infection were received at the instituto nacional de salud (ins) between march 6 th -24 th 2020, as part of the virological surveillance of covid-19 from 11 colombian departments and the capital district (antioquia, bogotá d.c., bolivar, caldas, cauca, magdalena, norte de santander, quindío, risaralda, santander, tolima and valle del cauca), through the national public health laboratories network to the ins for diagnostic confirmation.viral rna was obtained using the automated magna pure lc nucleic acid extraction system (roche diagnostics gmbh, mannheim, germany) and viral rna detection was performed by rrt-pcr using the superscript iii platinum one-step quantitative rt-kit. pcr (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa), following the charité-berlin protocol (corman et al., 2020) for the amplification of the sars-cov-2 e (betacoronavirus screening assay) and rdrp (sars-cov-2 confirmatory assay) genes.the complete sars-cov-2 genome sequence of 30 patients was obtained through ngs, ten genomes with oxford nanopore (oxford nanopore technologies, oxford, uk) and 20 genomes with illumina miseq (illumina, san diego, ca, usa) technologies, following the artic.network "ncov-2019 sequencing protocol" (quick, 2020) . in both strategies, sars-cov-2 specific oligonucleotides were used for the generation of amplicons by means of a q5® high fidelity dna polymerase (new england biolabs inc., uk), in order to avoid the introduction of artificial mutations. the genomes were assembled by mapping to the reference genome (nc_045512.2) using the bwa and bbmap (brian-jgi, 2020) software to generate a consensus genome by the two assembly tools.the colombian genomes and oligonucleotides from of the in-house protocols were aligned with the muscle tool (edgar, 2004) using the mega x software (kumar et al., 2018) . substitutions matrices of the colombian genomes respect to the reference genome (nc_045512) at the nucleotide and amino acid levels were generated for the 13 rrt-pcr protocols published at the who website (who, 2020c), which several countries have established as their preferred diagnostic protocol for sars-cov-2.a total of 39 primer and probe sequences from the main in-house rrt-pcr protocols for sars-cov-2 detection published at who website were aligned to the reference sequence derived from the first confirmed case at wuhan, hubei province, china, and named wuhan -1 strain (genbank accession number: nc_045512.2). the protocols targeted 13 different genome regions inside the orf1ab (nsp9, nsp10, nsp11, rdrp, exon), e (envelope) and n (nucleocapsid) genes with 61, 5% (8/13) of the assays targeting the n gene ( figure 1 ).the alignment of the 39 oligonucleotides to the reference and colombian sars-cov-2 sequences, 5 showed mismatches with at least one colombian sequence ( table 1 ). the conflicting sites in the primer/probe sequences were due to 1) a mismatch between the oligonucleotide and the reference and colombian sequences or 2) a mismatch between the oligonucleotide and one or more colombian sequences.the hong kong(2020) hku-np probe (chu et al., 2020) ( figure 2 ) was extremely different to all the reference and colombian sars-cov-2 by four nucleotide sites. this probe also presents the formation of a highly stable hairpin and self-dimer structures (table s1 ). the corman-berlin (2020) rdrp sarsr-f2 (corman et al., 2020) ( figure 3 ) region was variable in one colombian sars-cov-2 sequence from the department of valle del cauca (id: 79943), involving a critical site at the 3' pentamer. this site is supposed to prevent the correct hybridization of the 3' end of the primer, leading to inefficient or unsuccessful extension by the dna polymerase. the rdrp sarsr-r1 primer (corman et al., 2020) showed a degenerate site which does not comprise the nucleotide found in the reference and colombian sars-cov-2 sequences. however, this mismatch was located at an internal site of the primer, only partially affecting the thermodynamic profile of the primer-target hybridization. the zhu 2020 cdc-china set i probe(orf1ab) (figure 4 ) was found to be almost completely complementary with the colombian sars-cov-2 sequences, except for a viral sequence obtained from a human case in the department of antioquia (id: 79253), bearing a single substitution at the seventh probe position, without considerable effect on the thermodynamic features for probe-target hybridization (table s1 ). the zhu 2020 cdc-china set ii fw (n) primer ( figure 5 ) hybridization was found to be critically affected by the accumulated genetic diversity of the colombian sars-cov-2 strains. at the 5' end of the primer a triplenucleotide substitution gggaac in three sequences from bogotá and valle del cauca affected the tm and g. at the 3' region, two sequences from quindío displayed a substitution affecting the 3' pentamer stability.the primers and probes sets proposed by pasteur 2020 (france) ncov ip2 (fig. s1 ), hong kong (2020) hku-orf1b-nsp14 ( j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fcodon positions in coding regions are differentially susceptible to nucleotide substitution, being the third codon position associated with a higher substitution rate. on the other hand, the perfect matching of the last nucleotide at the 3' end of every forward and reverse primer is critical for dna polymerase-based extension during pcr amplification (staheli et al., 2009) . therefore, the rational design of primer to be used with rapidly evolving rna viruses should have the requisite of avoiding third and sometimes first codon positions.codon position of the last nucleotide at the 3' end of every analyzed primer was identified according to the corresponding open-reading frame. the 3' end of 11 primers corresponded to the first codon position, another 11 primers had 3' ends located at the second codon position and the 3' end of 4 primers aligned with the third codon position ( table 1) . one of the primers (nao 2020(japan)niid 2019-ncov n f2) had the 3' end aligned with the first codon position of the codon cua which encodes for alanine. this codon allows a substitution at the first codon position (c to u) to be synonymous and therefore may escape to the selection pressure at the protein level. next generation sequencing (ngs) technologies are a valuable tool in determining the whole genome of microorganisms impacting on public health, they have accelerated our ability to understand important factors in the biology of infectious diseases such as the identification of determinants of virulence, drug-resistance associated substitutions, vaccine design and genomic epidemiology, a powerful approach to integrate epidemiologic and genetic information in reconstructing transmission patterns and infectious disease dynamics (gwinn et al., 2019) . ngs has also enabled pathogen discovery in a timely manner compared to traditional methods, being essential to the virus taxonomic classification during the beginnings of covid-19 pandemics (zhou et al., 2020; zhu et al., 2020) . this robust molecular information is also the raw material for the development and refinement of molecular and serological diagnostic methods and all sequence-based designs are susceptible to improvement as the virus disseminates and its genetic variability increases.mutation is the fundamental source of genetic variation and rna viruses are particularly susceptible to have high mutation rates during the genome replication (sanjuan et al., 2010) . therefore, rna viruses display high substitution rates when analyzed through time. although sequence identity between the analyzed genomes and the wuhan reference strain (nc_045512) j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f was around 99.9%, the estimate substitution rate for sars-cov-2 is in the range of 1.67-4.67 x 10 -3 /site/year (tang et al., 2020 ).an enormous effort of every official and private laboratory around the word has led to the availability of hundreds of commercial kits and in-house protocols for the molecular detection and covid-19 diagnostic confirmation. while this effort is welcome and some recommendations have been provided by regional agencies, the availability of all these methods imply the need for an evidence-based criterion for decision-making about the best option at country level. in this study, based on ngs data of complete sars-cov-2 genomes from colombian cases, timely evidence is provided on the genetic variability of representative strains of the circulating viruses in the country that should be considered for an evidence-based improvement of the routine diagnostic tests.the majority of the evaluated in-house molecular assays displayed genetic stability at the primers/probes target regions. however, some these oligonucleotides displayed mismatches that were considered of minor or major importance for the test performance based on the in silico analysis. some of the analyzed primers/probes displayed mismatches when compared to target sequences of some colombian sars-cov-2 strains. polymorphic sites in the complete sars-cov-2 genomes obtained in this study, were supported by sequencing depths between 123 and 390x, sufficient to identify these sequence variations unequivocally. the analyzed genome sequences corresponded to the early introduction and dispersion of the virus in the country. it is expected that some of the identified nucleotide substitutions remain stable in subsequent transmissi on chains of the corresponding clusters of cases, as demonstrated in the present study as character states shared by two or more sequences.by the time of this report, more than 31.000 sequences have been made available on gisaid by researchers across the globe; in line with the "common primer check for high-quality genomes 2020-05-22" analysis from this database (bii/gis, 2020), the zhu 2020 cdc-china set ii (n) showed the higher percent of genomes with mutation in both, the entire -and the 3' end primer region, which can affect the sensitivity of this protocol given the genetic variability present in the country . furthermore, our analysis with the hong kong(2020) hku-np, showed excessive base mismatch against all tested genomes, so it is highly recommended to improve the design of this probe.prior to the arrival of sars-cov-2 in colombia, the charité-berlin protocol described by corman and collaborators was established as a routine in detection (corman et al., 2020) following the recommendation of the pan american health organization (paho). their three molecular targets (rdrp, e and n genes) were analyzed and rdrp displayed some conflicting nucleotide sites. the antisense primer rdrp sarsr r1 presented a degenerate site at the nucleotide position 15,519 equivalent to nucleotides g or c (s) while the reference and all colombian sequences displayed t at that position. however, this mismatch was expected not to affect seriously the overall stability of its hybridization. there was an important finding in the sense primer rdrp_sarsr_f1 which displayed a mismatch at position 15,451 when compared to the hcov/colombia/valle_del_cauca/79943/2020 genome. this mismatch located at the second base of the 3' end of the primer is expected to severely affect the primer hybridization and subsequent dna polymerase-mediated extension. in the present study, we propose to include a degenerate site (r) as follows (rdrp_sarsr-f2 mod 5'-gtgaaatggtcatgtgtggcrg-3'). thus, covering the genetic variability and improving the thermodynamic stability with this genetic variant to avoid j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f false-negative results (table s2 ). the nucleotide identity of the colombian genomes with respect to the corman berlin (2020) e sarbeco and n sarbeco designs was 100%. these results supported the paho recommendation of diagnostic confirmation based on the single e gene in the context of sustained transmission at high levels in this region where other coronavirus species of the subgenus sarbecovirus are expected to be absent (paho, 2020).another critical characteristic of the primers/probes of the current in-house protocols listed by who and assessed in the present study was the codon position at the 3' end of the sense and antisense primers in coding regions. the major and minor susceptibility to nucleotide substitutions for the third and second codon positions, respectively, is widely known. as any change at the 3' end can affect the primer hybridization, it is highly recommended that this position aligns with the second (preferable) or first codon position. some primers and indeed primer sets were found to be coincident with the third codon position. despite not finding substitutions at these sites in the colombian strains, that position is expected to be unstable through time.genomic data available from this study allowed the in silico evaluation/refinement of the protocols for molecular detection of sars-cov-2 circulating in colombia. it is highly recommended to establish routine molecular surveillance of the virus in order to determine the real impact of every mutation in the diagnostic test's performance (paho, 2020).finally, the implementation of molecular tests at country-level should be supported by the estimation of the analytical sensitivity (limit of detection [lod] in copies/reaction), specificity (corman et al., 2020) , and the accumulated genetic variability should be tested during the implementation of a molecular detection protocol including the clinical sensitivity in different biofluids (corman et al., 2016) , reproducibility, repeatability, inter-operator, inter-instrument, inter-site and inter-batch assays (hu et al., 2019) .detection of sars-cov-2 viral rna using nucleic acid amplification techniques such as rrt-pcr continues to be the gold standard for the diagnosis of covid-19 (who, 2020d) . however, all sequence-based methods are susceptible to nucleotide substitution affecting the oligonucleotide hybridization efficiency and resulting in false negatives. some of the in-house protocols analyzed in the present study require an experimental evaluation of their performance in the context of virus genetic variability. the genomic data of this study allow the refinement or even the design of more precise and efficient protocols for the molecular detection of the genetic variants of sars-cov-2 circulating in colombia. however, more ngs data from colombian sars-cov-2 will be determinant to a better comprehension of the impact of genetic variability on specific molecular assays of routine use as the virus evolves. orf1ab (nsp9, nsp10, nsp11, rdrp, exon) , e (envelope) y n (nucleocapsid) genes. target hybridization regions of the primers / probes employed by the principal in -house protocols for molecular detection of sars-cov-2. the different genes and protein products, as well as the coordinates in kilobases (kb) of the genes and protein products to which they are directed were estimated according to the sars-cov-2 reference genome available at genbank (nc_045512.2). (2020) _rdrp_sarsr-f2 hybridization region. the substitution is located in the penultimate position at the 3 'end of the promer, generating a mismatch that could interfere with the 3' pentamer stability. a degenerate base (s = c or g) in the primer corman_berlin (2020) _rdrp_sarsr-r1 at position 15,519 (highlighted in red) produces a mismatch with all the colombian genomes and the refseq as they have t in the sense sequence, so the degenerate base should be one that includes an a among degenerate alternatives. genomic positions were estimated according to the sars-cov-2 reference genome available at genbank (nc_045512.2). j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f figure 5 . genetic diversity at the target region of the zhu_2020_cdc-china_set ii assay. three colombian genomes, hcov/colombia/bogota/78390/2020, hcov/colombia/ valle_del_cauca/81279/2020 and hcov/colombia/valle_del_cauca/81251/2020 have the same pattern of substitutions (ggg to aac) in primer zhu_2020_cdc-china_set ii fw (n) in the first three nucleotides at the 5' end (highlighted in red). furthermore, the hcov/colombia/quindio/79911/2020 and hcov/colombia/quindio/80663/2020 genomes displayed a substitution (g to t) at position 28,899 where this oligonucleotide hybridizes (highlighted in red). genomic positions were estimated according to the sars-cov-2 reference genome available at genbank (nc_045512.2). table s1 . thermodynamic characteristics of the primers/probes showing mismatches with the reference or colombian sars-cov-2 sequences. faced with both scarce resources and pressures to keep pace with innovation, health systems in most developed nations emphasize the comparative value of health interventions in payment policies and coverage decisions [1, 2] . such appraisals of value rely on assessments of clinical efficacy, economic efficiency and, increasingly, societal values. growing recognition that democratic commitments warrant more room for public voice in health and social policy decisions particularly when allocating public resourceshas spurred attempts to incorporate citizens' values and preferences in health technology assessment (hta) in an increasing number of developed countries [3] . while approaches to measuring clinical and economic value are wellspecified, the means of identifying and assimilating relevant societal values in hta are not [4, 5] .to bridge this gap, a growing academic literature has sought to address the measurement and interpretation of societal value judgements for health system priority setting. two contrasting approaches to the elicitation of societal values have prevailed: population-based surveys and exercises in deliberative engagement. both admit of strengths and limitations. while survey methods are able to elicit preferences from a large swath of the public, they often preclude in-depth reflection and discussion about the complex ethical issues involved in setting priorities [5, 6] . by contrast, deliberative engagement with patients or publics offers rich opportunities for nuanced and recursive consideration of the values that motivate allocative decisions, but from the bounded perspective of a small and select group of persons [7] . a few attempts have been made to marry deliberative and survey methods, either by bookending deliberative events with survey questions or by embedding opportunities for deliberation within survey designs [8] [9] [10] . we adapt an approach to the latter to investigate societal preferences for allocating health care resources to children as compared to adults.age represents one of the most prominent issues explored in the literature on social values for health system resource allocation [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . the focus on age stems in part from the utilitarian assumptions that anchor prevailing methods of health economic evaluation [17, 18] . qualityadjusted life years (qalys) have played a dominant role in assessing the value of health interventions, as a universal metric for comparisons of benefit among different technologies that incorporate quantity and quality of life into a unified indicator. closely allied to the use of qalys as an outcome measure in applied health economic evaluation is the assumption of utilitarian qaly maximization as a normative goaland thus decision-criterionwhen selecting the best alternative among competing interventions [19] .the prominence of qaly maximization as a decision-criterion in applied health economic evaluation, including by hta institutions internationally, has prompted theoretical and empirical inquiry into the strength of societal preference for qaly maximization [20] [21] [22] [23] . moral philosophers and social choice theorists have challenged the moral legitimacy of purely consequentialist approaches to health care rationing, including qaly maximization, citing the relevance of ethical concepts ranging from distributive justice, priority to the worst off, and rightsbased entitlements in health resource allocation [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] . empirical studies of public preferences for health care resource allocation often employ recipient age as a proxy for qaly gains. studies of public preferences have yielded considerable evidence favouring priority to younger populations [13] [14] [15] [16] . such studies have often compared adults of various ages; select studies include a childhood age range among their comparators (15, (30) (31) (32) (33) . however, few studies have explored public preferences for health resource allocation decisions related to children as such. underlying societal preferences for health resource allocation: 1) 'health maximization ageism' (constant relative value of life-years, irrespective of age); 2) 'productivity ageism' (higher value of life-years in young adulthood, related to greater social and economic productivity); and 3) 'fair innings ageism' (emphasis on opportunity for equal aggregate lifetime health (or qalys) through priority to those expected to experience less, such as the young or disadvantaged) (16) . each of these approaches is outcome-oriented and concerned with health gains, though calibrated to prioritize different groups based on alternative ethical arguments.'health maximization ageism', which corresponds to pure qaly maximization, receives its strongest support in age-based stated preference studies that focus on life-saving interventions, or those that result in more aggregate qalys for younger recipients. even so, evidence for societal disavowal of pure qaly maximization exists, with some studies yielding majority preferences for equal allocation in the face of discrepant potential qaly gains across age groups (17, 33) .importantly, studies that test preferences for age-based allocation in terms of qaly maximization alone cannot discern whether distinct moral principles inducing priority to the young (be it children or younger adults) are at play.when controlling for qalys gained, the evidence in support of priority to younger groups is mixed. stated preferences consistent with both 'fair innings ageism' and 'productivity ageism' are evident in select studies examining age-based trade-offs in the context of fixed benefits. when the duration of benefit across age groups is standardizedthereby in effect neutralizing 'health maximization ageism', or pure qaly maximizationconsistent prioritization by age breaks down, with participants alternately preferring allocation to children, people in middle age, or equal allocation across age groups (15) (16) 30, (34) (35) . it is, however, often difficult to disentangle evidence in support of one of these forms of ageism from the other in the extant literature.in addition to studies of age-based priority setting that focus on health outcomes, a number of studies explore the moral bases for allocative decision-making by examining the relevance of causes. anand and wailoo demonstrate weak societal preference for consequentialist rationing rules, including qaly maximization, through experimental rationing decisions that force tradeoffs between hypothetical adult recipients of different ages (17) . notably, they also empirically examine the relevance of deontological considerations in health care rationing, including personal responsibility for one's health state, socioeconomic status, and procedural considerations in priority setting. their work demonstrates a disavowal by participants of pure qaly maximization, and highlights other salient normative considerations for potential incorporation into rationing exercises, including equality of treatment, individual rights and duties, and procedural fairness (17, 36) . relatedly, a limited body of evidence points to the impact of embedded moral reasoning on attenuated public preference for the young, suggesting that deliberation on a range of ethical principles can influence stated preferences for allocating resources based on age (10) . however, this evidence pertains to age variations amongst adults.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f despite this focus on age as a morally relevant variable, the extant literature contains little dedicated inquiry into allocative preferences regarding children per se (37) . this lack of evidence has contributed to a vacuum of both theoretical and context-specific knowledge about societal preferences related to the prioritization of health system resources for children. the need for more and better knowledge of public values attached to health care priority-setting affecting children is underscored by inherent challenges associated with the assessment of child health technologies [38] [39] [40] . health system funding decisions for children are often constrained by limited evidence for the clinical efficacy or economic efficiency of child health technologies [41] . childhood diseases are typically rare, the conduct of research in pediatric populations is complex, and standard metrics of clinical and economic assessment fail to incorporate unique dimensions of childhood, such as family context and life-course impacts [1, 42] to better understand societal values for health resource allocation, we conducted a population-based stated preference survey with a nested randomized controlled moral reasoning intervention. our objective was to generate evidence to inform economic evaluation and policymaking on health care priority-setting and payment reform in developed health systems.uniquely, we sought to explicitly assess societal preferences for allocation to children, and to test j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the influence of structured deliberationin the form of an individual-level moral reasoning exerciseon allocative preferences. our principal aims were to: (1) understand the direction and strength of public preferences for health resource allocation between children and adults for varied treatment scenarios, (2) assess the impact of a moral reasoning intervention on the expression of such preferences, and (3) identify sociodemographic factors that impact the expression of public preferences on health resource allocation between children and adults. we also sought to test the divergence of participant preferences for children or adults from an assumption of age-neutrality, to understand the treatment scenarios within which significant preferences for either children or adults emerge. finally, we aimed to characterize the principles that most influenced participants' allocative decisions, to gain a deeper understanding of the moral reasoning behind societal preferences for health resource allocation.in keeping with much of the prior literature on age-based resource allocation, we expected that control group participants would display an aggregate mean preference for allocation to children, particularly in scenarios where theoretical qaly gains were largest (i.e. cancer treatment and eating disorders therapy). in scenarios with fixed and equal life-year gains across children and adults (i.e. chronic disease drug, liver transplant), we hypothesized that participant preferences for children would be less pronounced, but persist on average, due to intuitive conceptions of 'fair innings'. we included a palliative care scenario to test the direction and strength of age-based preferences in a context focused on relief of suffering rather than hypothetical qaly gains, anticipating weak or no preference for allocation to children. in terms of participant sociodemographics, we presumed that younger adults and those with children of their own would j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f preferentially favour allocation to children, due to temporal and emotional proximity to childhood states.in contrast to prior evidence demonstrating diminished preference for younger adults induced through moral deliberation [10] , we hypothesized that a moral reasoning exercise would increase the strength of public preference for allocation to children, as compared to adults. this hypothesis was predicated on insights from foregoing normative analyses of public policies for children, which have identified distinguishing characteristics of childhoodsuch as vulnerability, dependency, rarity, social distinction, and future potentialas drivers for policy development [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] . we postulated that the moral reasoning exercise, which incorporated a number of valuesbased considerations specific to children, would prompt participants to consider their allocative preferences in light of these unique concerns. given the ethical tools to unpack intuitions about what children might deserve relative to adults, we anticipated that participants randomized to the moral reasoning arm would apprehend justifications for preferential allocation to children that may not be immediately apparent. we further hypothesized that participants in the intervention arm would display stronger aggregate preference for children across all the clinical scenarios tested, regardless of the duration of life years gained, as a result of their access to a varied palette of ethical principles by which to justify preferential allocation to children, including vulnerability, dependency, potential, and social distinction.we conducted a population-based stated preference survey of societal views on the prioritization of health resources among children and adults, administered to a non-probability sample of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f canadian adults. participants were recruited through letters of invitation emailed to a random sample from a panel of over one million canadians maintained by a survey research firm. a limitation of non-probability sampling is the absence of general statistical theory to predict sample representativeness from survey design assumptions [49] . to minimize sampling bias and maximize the potential for national population representativeness, we employed interlocking quotas for stratified sampling (age, gender and region), balanced against statistics canada norms, and evaluated the composition of our final sample in comparison to the canadian population on a range of sociodemographic characteristics. the survey was web-based and loyalty program rewards were offered to encourage participation.development of the survey instrument drew on prior literature on the ethics of health resource allocation and social values relevant to child health policy. the principles included in our moral reasoning exercise were derived from a systematic review of the literature on social values relevant to child health and social policy, refined through an in-depth qualitative case study of health technology assessment and policymaking for children in canada [47, 48] . iterative refinements to the survey were informed by a pilot phase with experts (n=3) and laypersons (n=2) and field testing with members of the public (n=32). the final survey questionnaire directed respondents to assign numerical preference scores for the allocation of resources in different health care scenarios based on age-related criteria. it presented each participant with the same five hypothetical treatment scenarios (chronic blood disease, liver transplant, cancer therapy, palliative care, and eating disorder); these scenarios were intended to provide variation in disease characteristics such as acuity, morbidity, mortality, potential for cure, and nature of participants chose between funding for treatment among adult (average age 40) and child (average age 10) patients, from the perspective of a citizen advisor to a health system administrator. preferences were captured as continuous variables on a visual analog scale (vas) from -5 (full preference for children) to +5 (full preference for adults), with zero representing neutrality. we employed a vas design to explore changes in the strength of participant preferences for children or adults in order to capture more subtle variation in preference than would have been possible with categorical choices, while still allowing for preference neutrality.demographic data related to age, sex, income, education, employment, health status, and family structure were collected.randomization of participants to either an intervention or control group was achieved via a leastfill approach, employing computational logic to assign respondents to the group with the lowest current quota count, which enabled random assignment with respect to stratification variables (age, gender, region). we subjected participants in the intervention group to a moral reasoning exercise prior to each choice scenario. the exercise presented subjects in the intervention group with a list of twelve ethical principles relevant to allocative decisions ( figure 2 ). we fashioned principles to capture concepts identified as uniquely germane to health resource allocation involving adults and children, including 'fair innings', vulnerability, dependency, future potential, and distinction, as derived from a foregoing systematic review of social values relevant to health and social policy for children [47] . balance was sought between principles that might inherently favour allocation to either children or adults. participants in the intervention arm were j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f asked to select the three principles that most influenced their choice in each scenario. subjects in the control arm responded to the choice scenarios without exposure to a moral reasoning exercise. to minimize question order bias, we randomly rotated the order by which health care scenarios were presented to participants; in addition, we randomly rotated the order of principles within the moral reasoning exercise for the intervention cohort. participants were prevented from revising their prior responses as they proceeded through the questionnaire.quantitative survey data were imported into sas (version 9.4) for analysis. descriptive statistics were employed to characterize the respondent population and compare groups using the student's t-test for continuous variables (age) and chi-squared for categorical variables. we compared select sociodemographic variables from the overall sample with general canadian population demographics from the 2016 statistics canada census of population using onesample proportion tests [50] .we employed a linear mixed-effects random intercept model, which allows for modelling of correlated continuous data, to analyze the strength of participant preferences for each of the scenarios presented and examine the impact of experimental group, scenario, and sociodemographic variables on mean preferences scores, while accounting for the correlation between repeated measures within the same subject. the model examined: 1) the difference in mean preference scores by group, scenario, and demographic characteristics and 2) the difference in mean preference scores between the intervention and control for each scenario. we analyzed the interaction of group and scenario on preference scores to understand whether group mean preference scores varied by scenario type, controlling for covariates (including age, geographic j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f region, gender, language, education, employment, income, health, and family structure) (emethods).to further characterize the strength of participant preferences for children or adults, and explore potential choice uncertainty, we analyzed the proportions of respondents displaying any allocative preference beyond the bounds of a 'neutral' construct (zero midpoint), and modelled differences in neutral versus preferential responses as a binary outcome between groups and across scenarios through generalized estimation equation (gee) modelling. odds ratios with 95% confidence limits were computed to indicate the likelihood of a neutral response for each scenario, using chronic disease as the reference scenario. gee was also used to assess the likelihood of a neutral response by experimental group in each scenario, with moral reasoning as the exposure.lastly, we quantified the proportion of respondents selecting each allocation principle overall and by scenario. we tested equality of proportions across scenarios to detect significant differences in the proportions of respondents selecting a given allocative principle. chi-squared analyses were used to compare the proportions of participants selecting each moral reasoning principle in a given scenario, using one scenario (chronic disease) as a referent.mcmaster university. informed consent was obtained online as part of the survey panel opt-in process prior to individual survey initiation. the authors received no funding related to study design; collection, analysis, and interpretation of data; the writing of the report; or the decision to submit for publication.between april 18 and 24, 2017, a total of 12,803 individuals were screened for inclusion: 10,026were deemed ineligible or declined to participate and 2,777 individuals were randomized. of these, we excluded 1,048 for incomplete surveys. a total of 1,729 (62.3%) respondents completed the survey; 173 were subsequently excluded for poor quality (e.g., racing). our final sample included 1,556 participants, with 773 in the intervention group and 783 in the control group (efigure 1). respondent characteristics were similar across groups (etable 1). as compared with 2016 canadian population census data, our sample evinced an overrepresentation of individuals with higher educational attainment.we present our results in sequence corresponding to the hypotheses listed above. we begin with an exposition of control group results, to ascertain whether a baseline predilection for allocation to children was apparent in our sample, and how it varied across disease-specific scenarios. we then move to analysis of mean preference scores in the intervention group, and observed differences between the intervention and control group, to isolate the impact of the moral reasoning exercise on participant preferences. our analysis of preference divergence from an age-neutral construct (-0.5 to +0.5) follows, to test the strength of allocative preference in either direction. finally, we analyze participant choices about the moral principles guiding their allocative preferences, focusing on the frequency and patterning of principle selection across scenarios.allocative preferencesanalysis of mean preference scores demonstrated a consistent aggregate preference by control group participants to allocate scarce health system resources to children across all trial scenarios ( figure 3 ; table 1 ). the strongest control group preference for children was observed in the cancer therapy (-1.77, 95% ci -2.06 to -1.48, p<0.0001) and eating disorders treatment (-2.01, 95% ci -2.30 to -1.71, p<0.0001) scenarios, in which the theoretical qaly gains were largest.mean scores were statistically significantly higher (more positive) in the intervention group overall, suggesting a weaker preference for allocation to children in those subjected to the moral reasoning exercise (figure 3 ; table 1 ). in the intervention group, a significant preference for allocation to children was retained in the cancer therapy (-0.83, 95% ci -1.11 to -0.54, p<0.0001) and eating disorder treatment (-1.11, 95% ci -1.39 to -0.82, p<0.0001) scenarios, but there was no age preference in the chronic disease drug, liver transplant and palliative care scenarios ( table 2) .when analyzing the difference in mean preference scores between experimental groups for each scenario, the intervention had the largest absolute impact for the cancer therapy (0.94, 95% ci where the benefits of an intervention were most obvious and different between adults and childrenas they were in respect of life-years gained from cancer and eating disorders therapy -j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f a choice to prioritize those benefitting most may have seemed easiest, even in the face of exposure to competing moral principles. this explanation is supported by theories of rational decisionmaking from the field of cognitive psychology that posit dual-process thinking, distinguishing intuition from reasoning [51] [52] [53] . the design of our studyincluding the survey format and pacing, question framing, and lay samplemay have induced intuitive responses from some participants, in the face of complex moral problems characterized by inherent uncertainty. in particular, participants may have allowed more obvious differentiators, such as discrepant benefits in length of life, to intuitively shape their preferences, rather than take the time and cognitive effort to work through conflicting moral choices in a rule-bound manner. this is likely particularly true of those unexposed to the moral reasoning intervention, and might explain why preference score differences between the intervention and control groups were largest in respect of cancer therapy and eating disorders treatment. it may also explain why variance in preference scores narrowed consistently across scenarios in the intervention group as compared to the control group: it is possible that this reduction in variance represents a reduction in choice uncertainty, in the context of enhanced participant reliance on analytical reasoning induced by the study intervention.proportions of neutral response (score between -0.5 and +0.5) were consistently higher in the intervention group across all scenarios (etable 4). univariate gee analysis revealed the impact of the moral reasoning intervention on preference neutrality across children and adults, with neutral responses significantly more likely in the intervention group than the control group we made a conscious attempt to incorporate principles related to an array of individual and societal benefits and costs, to induce reflection on the range of moral reasons one might consider germane to health system resource allocation. we also sought balance between principles that might intrinsically engender preference for children or adults. participants exposed to the moral reasoning exercise demonstrated remarkable consistency in their prioritization of principles for allocative decision-making. the top three principles guiding participants' allocative decisions were: 1) treat equally (54.3% -63.9%), 2) relieve suffering (39.6% -66.1%), and 3) rescue those at risk of dying (37% -40.8%). in all cases except palliative care, 'treat equally' ranked number j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f one, with a proportion uniformly greater than 50%; subjects deemed 'relieve suffering' most important (66.1%) in the context of palliative care, followed closely by 'treat equally' (63.9%).the least endorsed principles (10%) for assigning allocative preference were: priority to rare diseases, priority to special populations, and priority based on societal productivity.despite consistency in ranking of principles, the proportion of participants selecting a given principle to guide allocative decision-making varied significantly across scenarios ( table   3 ). as compared to the chronic disease treatment scenario, the cancer therapy scenario prompted significantly more participants to cleave to principles that, in theory, justify preferential allocation to children: opportunity to live a full life (24.7% vs 19.2%, p<0.0028), duration of benefit (34.5% vs 19.5%, p<0.0001), and concern for special populations (11.9% vs 7.4%, p<0.0026). they also tended to disavow principles favouring allocation to adults, including family responsibilities (14.2% vs 24.7%, p<0.0001) and economic productivity (7.9% vs 16% p<0.0001). a similar pattern was observed for the eating disorder treatment scenario, with the addition of vulnerability (36.1% vs 21.9%, p<0.0001) to the principles endorsed. by contrast, in the palliative care scenario, participants displayed significantly more concern for equality of treatment (63.9% vs 55.2%, p<0.0005) and relief of pain and suffering (66.1% vs 39.6%, p<0.0001), and less concern for 'fair innings' (the entitlement to a full lifespan) or duration of benefit.a principal finding of our study is the consistent preference for allocation to children across health care scenarios in the overall cohort. this finding is in keeping with much of the extant evidence on societal preferences for allocation to the young, but adds depth and specificity in preference in response to changes in the duration of benefit from a given intervention [16] . in the face of life-long benefits (e.g. life-saving interventions), their study participants gave consistent precedence to younger groups when allocating scarce resources. by contrast, when juxtaposed with life-long benefits, fixed benefits induced a preference pattern that privileged young to middle adulthood. our results may indicate similar moral intuitions behind participant choices, though with the notable difference of an equal allocation option. where pure qaly maximization was possiblenamely, in the cancer therapy and eating disorders treatment scenariosparticipants seemed to adjudge the life-long benefits that would accrue to children too large to overlook. conversely, in the scenarios with fixed benefits, preference for allocation to children was weaker in the control group, and a trend toward preference for equal allocation j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f emerged in the intervention cohort. an alternative explanation could be that participants perceived scenario-specific differences in duration of benefit more readily than other benefits that, though not explicitly mentioned, also retain moral relevance in the context of these and similar scenarios. such benefits could include reduction in inequality of outcomesfor instance, founded on inherent characteristics of the disease (rarity) or population (vulnerability, dependency)or equitable chances to live a full life ('fair innings') [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] .interestingly, our results at once confirm and challenge prior evidence that suggests decision-making from an impersonal vantage point (e.g. a budgetary decision-maker) makes it easier to discriminate in favour of one group as against another. nord et al. elicited allocative preferences from study participants within two different assumed perspectives: a 'veil of ignorance', in which the participants themselves might need the health intervention in question one day; and a health system administrator role, in which they were tasked with decisions about resource allocation to others from a budgetary standpoint [15] . they found that the tendency to privilege younger people in allocative decisions was more evident amongst those who assumed the latter perspective, and argued that the degree of emotional remove induced by the shift in perspective might account for this difference. evidence from our study for the moderating effect of a moral reasoning exercise on participant preferences for allocation to children, from an administrative perspective, suggests the opportunity for ethical reflection mitigated participant willingness to discriminate between groups on the basis of age. this may reflect choice uncertainty and a resultant instinct for preference neutrality, rather than evidence of real, rich moral deliberation. alternatively, this may represent a 'depersonalizing' effect of moral deliberation on allocative decision-making, one sufficient to impact societal preferences for health resource allocationbut in the opposite direction to that observed by nord et al.counter to our hypothesis, exposure to a moral reasoning intervention diminished participant preferences for allocation to children. evidence of a moderating effect of moral reasoning on allocative preference for children suggests the opportunity for ethical reflection mitigated participant willingness to discriminate between groups on the basis of age. this relationship may have been driven by a more varied set of ethical principles with which to draw conclusions. interestingly, this is the same consideration that motivated our hypothesis of increased preference for children through moral reasoning. we presumed that the ethical nuances attached to funding health interventions for childrenincluding distinguishing features such as vulnerability, dependency, neglect, and future potential, that stood out in prior normative analyses of child health and social policywould come through more clearly to participants when exposed to a range of principles touching on them [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] .notably, the strength of preference for equal allocation increased among those randomized to the moral reasoning exercise. one interpretation of this is that the intervention prompted participants to evaluate the relationship between their moral intuitions and their stated preferences, and induced a reasoned judgment about the importance of equality as a guiding principle for resource allocation. an alternative explanation is that, despite the study intervention, it remained cognitively difficult for participants to reason through the uncertainty inherent in weighing competing moral principles. the greater predilection for neutrality in the experimental group may have represented retreat to equality in the face of difficult choices.our study admits of potential limitations. in relation to the survey instrument, the brief statements used to evoke the meaning of each principle may have failed to capture its ethical nuances.different framing of the principles may have led to different patterns of preference among participants; however, randomly varying the sequence of principles mitigated any ordering effect bias [60, 61] . use of a continuous scale overlapping zero to measure the strength of allocative preferences in the context of a binary choice task (fund either intervention a or b) may have led some participants to misinterpret zero as a choice to allocate equal sums of money to each population, rather than agnosticism about which intervention to fund. we sought to mitigate this potential limitation through simple, explicit scenario instructions; however, it is possible that misapprehension of the 'neutrality of preference' state by some participants impacted our results.the study was not designed to measure the time it took to read the principles in the moral reasoning intervention separately from completing the choice tasks. this could have given a proxy sense of whether participants read and engaged with the ethical ideas and choices involved. the assembly and composition of our study sample may have also limited the external validity of our results.values endorsed by the canadian public may not reflect those of other polities. the use of covariate-adaptive randomization to form balanced treatment groups with respect to relevant covariates has both benefits and inherent shortcomings; use of stratified randomization may have permitted some selection bias and only balanced a limited number of potentially relevant covariates [62] . more specifically, the survey firm generated cohorts from an opt-in panel of eligible canadians recruited and incentivized through brand loyalty points programs. some of the inherent selection bias associated with online opt-in panels was evident, privileging those with higher education who are web literate. however, the lack of statistically significant impacts of education and income on preference scores in the multivariate model attenuates theoretical concerns about sociodemographic bias.our study also has important strengths. it is, to our knowledge, the first to experimentally examine the values behind health and social policy decisions about children, their valence in relation to adult needs and priorities, and their stability in the face of moral deliberation. its randomized design and large, heterogeneous population-based sample allowed for robust conclusions about the effect of the intervention on participant preferences. our findings demonstrate a convincing relationship between exposure to a range of relevant moral principles and the priorities set. this affirms the complexity of such decisions and the impact of ethical deliberation on them. these findings challenge reflexive trust in survey-based preference elicitation, and imply the need to complement such modalities with deliberative modes of public engagement on questions of social importance, such as the allocation of scarce public resources.in policy terms, our work both supports and challenges conceptions of value in health care based primarily on qaly maximization. dominant modes of health economic evaluation privilege interventions that maximize aggregate individual and societal utility, typically in the form of the duration and magnitude of benefits reaped and the size of the population reached. our results demonstrate a stronger preference for children in the hypothetical scenarios (cancer and eating disorders) in which the duration of benefit accrued mainly to children; this may represent an underlying motivation by participants to maximize benefits. however, we also observed a strong inclination for equality and humanitarianism amongst study participants, regardless of experimental group. the three principles deemed most salient to priority-setting were equal treatment, relief of suffering, and rule of rescue. none of these prioritizes age as a relevant variable; each starts from a belief in the intrinsic value of all human life, and resists grading that j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f value by social context or circumstance. our results, therefore, suggest the need to incorporate other values into health care priority-setting, as some value frameworks for funding decisions have begun to do [63] . the salience of these findings to priority-setting efforts in the context of public health emergenciesincluding access to scarce ventilators or drugs in the context of the covid-19 pandemicis readily apparent. they furnish empirical evidence for the adjudication and refinement of ethical frameworks for triage and resource allocation during the pandemic based on public values in canada [64, 65] . efforts to incorporate a broader range of public values and preferences in health and social policy decisions also involve inherent risks. among them is the need to confront and grapple with public attitudes that conflict with the fundamental normative or legal principles that structure most democratic societies, including basic commitments to the protection of individual rights and nondiscrimination [66] . future research to explore this tension and ways to resolve or address it is warranted.allied to this, our study affirms the importance of process in health care priority-setting exercises. the opportunity to explicitly consider varied normative ideas appears crucial to informed allocative decisions based on public values. the observed changes in public preferences in the face of competing moral principles imply the impact, and potential relevance, of structured opportunities for moral reasoning when making such consequential decisions. this includes the potential value of deliberative public engagement to health policymaking, particularly in domains where distinct ideas about the public good may compete. specific to children, few efforts to incorporate public deliberation in research and policy on child health and social policy priorities have prevailed to date. in the face of resource scarcity, evidence-informed child health and social policies will depend on the careful elicitation and integration of public values. this and allied work bear potential relevance in social policy domains beyond health, including public attitudes to j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 'deservingness' attached to welfare state distributional policies in domains as diverse as labour markets and education [67] [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] . crucial future areas of inquiry and application include the inclusion of child voices in research and policymaking, and the exploration of social values for priority setting within public policies and programs for children.our study underscores the relevance of age in public preferences for the allocation of scarce health care resources, extending evidence of this calculus to trade-offs involving children. nevertheless, it demonstrates the mutability of such preferences in the face of structured moral deliberation. this finding has three main repercussions. it furnishes a critical lens for the interpretation of stated preference surveys; introduces a note of caution into dominant modes of health care funding allocation decisions premised on utility maximization; and implies the value of deliberative methods as a complement to both. we observed a strong inclination for equality and humanitarianism amongst study participants, regardless of experimental group. these moral impulses prevailed over consequentialist logic, including priority to the young founded on aggregate benefit. the stability of these principles in the face of changing allocative preferences signals their importance as public valuesbut it also hints at the complexity of values-based decision-making. the public seems, at face value, to believe in equality of access and defend a set of shared human entitlements to care. it also seems to assign intuitive priority to children. the challenge of reconciling these convictions demands processes nimble enough to negotiate this paradox. spaces for moral deliberationwhether in large-scale surveys or focused qualitative engagementare essential to arrive at health care priorities that reflect what we collectively hold dear.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f contributions: ad conceived and designed the study. sc and ad performed the statistical analysis. ad prepared the first draft of the manuscript. all authors contributed to study design, critically revised the manuscript, and approved the final version. as corresponding author, ad accepts responsibility for the work, had full access to the data, and controlled the decision to publish. ad attests that all listed authors meet authorship criteria and that no others meeting the criteria have been omitted.acknowledgements: during the period of this research, ad was supported by grants from the canadian institutes of health research, pierre elliott trudeau foundation, canadian child health clinician scientist program, and pediatric oncology group of ontario.imagine that two different medicines are available to manage an incurable chronic blood disease: one drug treats the child form of the disease, while a different drug treats the adult form of the disease. without treatment, patients die of the disease within 6 months of diagnosis. with drug treatment, both child and adult patients can be expected to live about 20 years from diagnosis, after which they usually die from progressive complications of the disease.each drug costs the same amount of money and would serve the same number of people. the health system can only afford to fund one of the two drugs at present, and cannot split the money between the two drugs.please slide the bar to any point on the scale from -5 to +5 to show your strength of support for funding one of the drugs.a drug is available for patients with childonset blood disease.a drug is available for patients with adultonset blood disease. patients live about 20 years with the treatment, at which point they usually die of complications from the disease.without the drug, the disease causes death within 6 months.without the drug, the disease causes death within 6 months. fund treatment based on evidence that it works  "fund treatments best proven to be safe and effective."  "since it is harder to study treatments in children, evidence is usually stronger for adult treatments." "the older patients have had their turn."  "give the younger patients a chance for a full life."treat people who will benefit longer  "giving the treatment to the younger group makes sense, since they will enjoy it longer."  "lifelong potential should be factored into decisions about which health interventions to fund." "at 40, people may be raising families or have others who rely on them." "resources should be directed to help those that cannot protect or advocate for themselves."  "children are still developing, so can suffer lifelong consequences from untreated disease."treat people who are productive  "helping people who are in the workforce has benefits for all."treat everyone equally  "all patients deserve equal access to medical care."  "both groups should have the same chance."treat those who are dependent on others  "children are dependent on their parents or caregivers, so their illness has direct impacts on the lives of others." r 2 : the full model with predictors explained 9.7% of within-subjects variance and 4.3% of between-subjects variance, as compared with the null model (without predictors). comparing the full model with a parsimonious model (non-significant predictors removed), the two models were almost identical. the parsimonious model explained 0.05% more of the between-subjects variance; there was no difference in within-subjects variance explained. most relevant lessons from the course taken by the disease will take time. in particular many perplexing questions have not yet found adequate answers, that would be crucial for the design of optimal treatment policies and healthcare strategies, both at the individual and societal level. among these questions, prominent ones are: why are the mortality patterns so skewed toward higher ages? what is the common denominator of the observed comorbidities that affect in a non-negligible way the outcome of the disease? what is the size of the asymptomatic cohorts? are asymptomatic (or paucisymptomatic) cases a barrier or an accelerator of the disease propagation? etc. to these salient questions, which deal with the present situation, we should add questions relative to future outbreaks, their severity and characteristics. this is particularly important as health authorities have, for obvious reasons, focused on the design of vaccines, despite the fact that vaccines are sometimes extremely difficult to obtain [17] . in particular while a response to previous infections is usually protective it can sometimes be deleterious and result in severe outcomes (see e.g. [16] ). answering many of these questions requires deep understanding of the immune response of the host, whether innate or acquired, at the cellular or humoral level. recent research pointed out that it is critical to investigate previous history of interaction between host and infective virus strains [1] . in this context, the question of whether previous infection with coronaviruses is beneficial or detrimental to the immunity of the host is a matter of active debate, see for instance [2, 21, 22] .here, we focus on the so-called antibody-dependent enhancement (ade) mechanism (related to the more colorful name of cytokine storm). ade corresponds to a situation where antibodies that normally alleviate the consequences of a viral infection end up doing the op-posite: they fail to control the virus' pathogenicity by failing to be neutralizing (i.e., the antibodies are not able to kill the virus), or even enhance its virulence either by facilitating its entry into the cell (thus enhancing the viral reproduction potential), or by triggering an extensive and misadapted reaction, thereby causing damage to the host organs through hyper-inflammation (cytokine storm).several documented examples are known that give rise to ade: in sars (see [3] ), dengue (see [11] ), hiv-1 [25] to cite but a few. this is even already documented in the case of covid-19 as the similarity with dengue fever has resulted in false-positive identification when using diagnostic tests based on serology (see for example in singapore [26] ). let us illustrate the first two situations more in detail: for dengue fever it is established that a previous infection with a virus belonging to a particular serotype family can cause adverse reaction upon re-infection with a virus from another serotype (see [11] ). this unwanted outcome was demonstrated in a study that monitored two dengue fever outbreaks: a first one in cuba in 1977 [9] , followed by a second one twenty years later (1997) [12] . being infected during the first epidemic was proven to negatively influence the outcome of patients infected in the 1997 epidemic (with a dengue fever serotype that differed from that of 1997). to put this otherwise, the acquired immune response was fit for a given serotype but detrimental upon challenge with a different serotype. in the present context, the large time lapse between the two dates is worth emphasizing. irrespective of whether or not the challenge is or is not related to a different serotype, we will call this situation a "cuban hypothesis" and discuss it below.a misadapted immune response is not limited to infection by the dengue virus (denv). another documented ade case in animal models concerns the coronavirus family. m. bolles and his collaborators (see [3] ) tested a coronavirus vaccine on animal models and the results differed, depending on the age of the vaccinated animal: while the vaccine provided partial protection against both homologous and heterologous viruses for young animal models, the same performed poorly in aged animal models and was potentially pathogenic. this shows that a faulty immune response can depend on the general maturation of the immune system, with a significant age-dependent component.at least four human coronaviruses [229e, nl63, oc43 and hku1 [5] ] are known to be endemic. they infect mainly the upper respiratory tract. to these we must add the now well-known strains sars-cov-1 (responsible for the 2003 epidemic), mers-cov and sars-cov-2. if a "cuban hypothesis" is found to account for the persistent development of related diseases, the challenge by any one of these viruses or novel variants may reach human populations in a variety of forms. this dire anticipation prompted us to investigate the impact of such a scenario on the immune system status within the population at large. in this context, we address here the following questions: in the absence of any relevant serological information, we compared age-dependent case fatality ratios of the sars 2003 and covid-19. more precisely, using data from [15] (see [4, 13] for additional data) we computed the age-dependent death rate for all 1755 sars 2003 patients in hong kong. the benefit of using this database is that is contains information on all patients and therefore has no representation bias. for covid-19 such data is not yet available so we use the institut national d'études démographiques (ined) database [7] at the date of may 4th 2020. the two bases do not allocate cases exactly to the same age groups, we grouped together the 5-year 2003 data to fit the 2020 ined 10year database ranges and on the other hand use uniform attribution for ages in the "above 75" 2003 hk class) to fill two corresponding classes "70-79" and "80+".the epidemic model we explored is the following: any patient starts in a "susceptible" (notation "s") class, can progress to the "exposed" (notation "e") class and then either to a "severely infected" (label "i") or "mild infected" class (including the asymptomatic and undetected individuals, denoted "m"). the mild infected progress to a "mild recovered" "r m " class while the "infected" can either die (class "deceased", "d") or recover, class "r". the model is structured by immunity . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108860 doi: medrxiv preprint level and k is the immunity index; in practice a immunity group corresponds here to a decennial age group in the list "0-9 years" (k = 1), "10-19 years" (k = 2), ..., "80-89 years" (k = 9), "90+ years" (k = 10). note that, as in the pasteur institute study [19] , we excluded from this analysis the dynamics of the covid-19 epidemic within the retirement homes for aged people in france, as both the demographics of this part of the population and the transmission dynamics are very specific, while the data used to describe the covid-19 dynamics in this setting is very uncertain.mathematically the model is written (see figure 1 for an illustration):(1)with the notationsto model the impact of previous infections on the next possible epidemic we have to take several facts into account: while the sars 2003 had a negligible asymptomatic class (see [14] ) the covid-19 has nonnegligible number of mild or even asymptomatic individuals. those patients are usually not detected and their estimation is statistically challenging. even more difficult is to extrapolate the state of the immune system after a mild or severe infection and how this can be translated to future immune unbalanced response. our hypothesis is the following: a coronavirus infection will sensitize all infected persons to future infections. to quantify such an additional sensitivity we can only use data from the severely infected classes and take death as the extreme case of severity, statistically, within the group as a whole. thus, when we consider the severely infected persons this group experienced a deleterious alteration of their immune system, which is quantified by the intensity of the outcome (death). we calculated, using the data from santé publique france [20, obtained as r c = 70/(70 + 922) = 7, 05%. we subsequently compared this rate with the natural death rate of the french population which is r n = 0, 9%. following this approach we concluded that it would take f c = log(1 + r c )/ log(1 + r n ) 7.6 years of natural evolution to match the unfavorable outcomes of the group (i.e., to observe the same death rate) as that experienced for severe covid-19 patients. as coronavirus infection is the cause of this outcome, we extrapolated the outcome assuming that each covid-19 patient "lost" 7.6 years of immune function quality in what coronavirus adequate response is concerned (this is not to be related to chronological or biological age). on the other hand, if we compare with the data from the e-cdc [6] concerning the whole set of covid-19 patients the rate r c becomes 25987/137779 = 18.86% and f c = 19, 28 years. we see that there is a large uncertainty arising from the way we count the cases. this is not specific to the situation we try to model but a very general difficulty in similar situations. to simplify, we considered that patients who had a first infection with sars-cov-2 will experience an alteration of their immune function (relative to coronavirus infections or related medical conditions) and that their immunity parameters will be similar to those of a patient in the next immunity class. in the model (1)-(7) this means that a patient that ends up in r k or r m k will start the next epidemic as if being virtually in the group s k+1 (which means having d k+1 and f k+1 parameters), even if his biological age is still be counted with those in the class s k . note that this assumption does not imply that the patients that had a mild form of covid will experience the next time a severe form (there are still mild forms starting in s k ) but only that the parameters f k , d k will change.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108860 doi: medrxiv preprint 3 resultsthe comparison of the 2003 and 2020 data in figure 2 shows a striking difference between a panel of several european countries (france, spain, italy) with respect to the hong kong results. all curves share a common shape: a constant null range followed by a marked (exponential) increase starting in the "30-39" age group for the 2003 data and "50-59" group for all countries in 2020. this 20 years shift at the onset of the exponential regime can be interpreted as resulting from the existence of a common cause (situated approximately 30-40 years before 2003 and 50-59 years before 2020, that is, between 1960 and 1970) that affected all people living at that date and which could explain why there are, 30 (respectively 50) years later, affected by the coronavirus outbreaks in a more severe way. since the cause occurred before 1970 people born after this date will have no fragility, which is precisely what is seen in the plot. we interpret this as an evidence that previous infection history can negatively impact the individual outcome of a future infection. note that historically the 1960-70 decade is rich in epidemic / virus related events: the hong kong flu of 1968-1969 (that killed an estimated 1 million people worldwide) but also the start of the identification of the four endemic human coronaviruses (mid-1960s). note that such a conclusion is consistent with recent investigations, see [10] that showed that individuals are prone to repeated infection with coronaviruses, with the unfortunate consequence that not only the immunity may vanish (sometimes within a year) but that the re-infection can be more severe. data displayes in the figure 2 substantiates the same conclusion.here, we made use of the methodology described in section a and more specifically the formulas (16) and (19) to estimate the constants f k and d k ; note that there is an important uncertainty in the mortality data (especially for low aged groups) which induces uncertainty in the estimations. same is true for the overall epidemic size used as input in our model and took from [19] . however the figures are generally in line with known results, in particular the strong correlation between the presence of mild (including asymptomatic) cases and age; see table 1 for details. table 1 to estimate parameter d k we used formula (16) and the data from [8] to estimate f k we use (19) and data from ined to fit the total deaths for given attack rate α t = 5.7% as in [19] . here we compared the outcome, in terms of deaths by age groups and severe cases by age groups, of the cuban hypothesis described in section 3.1. namely, under the assumption that a patient who had a previous infection will move to another immunity group, we derived the distribution of deaths by age and severe cases by age, computed as detailed in appendix a, proposition 2. the results are plotted in figures 3, 4 and 5. the mean death age goes down from 79.13 to 76.15 and the total number of deaths goes from 16705 up to 20481 (+22.6%). even more spectacular, the evolution of the number of severe cases goes from 134 000 up to 457 000 (+340%). note that in both cases the results depend on the total epidemic infection rate, which is between α t = 5.7% (present) and the group immunity rate 1 − 1/r 0 (i.e., 70% for r 0 = 3.3). the hypothesis of a 70% infection . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108860 doi: medrxiv preprint fig. 3 distribution of deaths by age (as ratio d k /d with respect to overall death toll) for the initial infection and projection for a similar secondary infection event. note that since the ratio is time independent the time at which we compute it does not need to be specified. we consider that after a first infection, recovered individuals in r k and r m k will share the immunity parameters with individuals in the k + 1 group. we take r 0 = 3.3 from [19] , use α = 1−1/r 0 as total attack rate of the first infection within the population and the estimation method described in proposition 2. rate is probably too strong (although mass vaccination may contribute to it) so it should not be taken as an operational forecast but rather as an extreme scenario.based on a epidemic model structured by immune function (age groups), we evaluate the probability for a per- son to become a severe case. this quantitative parameter has a large incertitude because of the presence of asymptomatic cases and mild infections. we used figures from the literature that imply that children are largely asymptomatic while the older age classes show up to 20% severe forms.next we moved to the heart of our scenario, namely the quantification of the immune function alteration induced by an initial sars-cov-2 infection, similar to the antibody-dependent enhancement phenomenon. note first that the relatively controlled nature of the 2003 sars epidemic did not allow us to draw conclusions on how the 2003 epidemic influenced the infected (too few cases); by contrast, if a sensitizing process in the immune response triggered by sars-cov-2 exists, the pandemic nature of the 2019/20 covid-19 outbreak will likely have noticeable effects on the overall population health state. in particular, this implies that additional care has to be observed when validating vaccines against the covid-19.we developed a scenario meant to explore the consequences that a previous infection changed the likeliness to get a severe form when challenged by a new infection, increasing the death risk of severe forms. irrespective of the precise figures, we expect that this could be used as a promising methodology to quantify the epidemiological impact of ade, with coronaviruses as key examples.the deterioration of the immune function can be evident on two occasions: either when a second epidemic occurs or when submitted to a challenge the challenge can be very diverse, not necessarily in the form of a fully-fledged epidemic but also a small infection with an endemic coronavirus. this may manifest in the form of multi-organ inflammation as witnessed in uk, france, . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 21.20108860 doi: medrxiv preprint canada and the us with some presentations recalling the kawasaki syndrome [24, 18, 23] .we present simulation data that quantify the possible impact of such a immune function evolution. of course, our model has many limitations and further investigation into the determinants of the immune dynamics is necessary to wholly the conditions of the correct and impaired immune response. until this is carried over, past covid-19 patients should not be considered as having a life-time permanent acquired immunity to sars-cov-2 or other coronaviruses.we denote π k the proportion of people in class k within the total population at t = 0 and make the convention that this is strictly positive (otherwise the class is entirely deleted):lemma 1 suppose that the initial state of the system (1)-(7) satisfies the relations:then for any time t ≥ 0 and k, l = 1, ..., k:before giving the proof we note that, if all quantities are strictly positive, the hypothesis can be written in a more convenient form as:, ∀k, l = 1, ...k, which is intuitively not surprising, for instance the first identity says that at the beginning of the epidemic the probability for an individual to belong to the e k class is proportional to the number of people in the s k class. moreover, we can prove a stronger version of the hypothesis stating that the conclusion is true in an approximate sense even if the hypothesis is not verified (with exponentially vanishing error). in all cases this is true when s(0)/(s(0) + ... + d(0))) 1 which is a generally accepted hypothesis.another remark is to be made on the different status of the two identities in (16) : the first one allows to set the d k constants bacause the corresponding data (deaths over deaths plus discharged) is available. on the contrary the second one is not of immediate use because the proportions of mild forms are not known to reasonable precision. on the contrary (17) can be used to compute f k if an estimation of the relative instantaneous epidemic size (α t in the equation below) is available.relative instantaneous epidemic size:α t = s(0) − s(t) s(0) .note that the estimation (17) involves e(t) which can only be computed after f k are known. so in full rigor this is a fixed point procedure but in practice, given the uncertainties in the value of α t we will neglect e(t) for small values of α t and use the formula:proof to prove the assertions we note that for instance equation (2) implies that for any t ≥ 0:with η(t) a positive function that does not depend on k and l. together with the hypothesis this proves the first part of (14) . we see that even if the hypothesis is not verified the error term [e k (t)s l (t) − s k (t)e l (t)] (with respect to the conclusion) will decay exponentially fast. the second part of (14) follows from the formula s k (t) = s k (0)e − t 0 (m +i)(τ )dτ . the other parts are obtained in a similar way.proposition 1 under the hypothesis of lemma 1 the aggregate quantities s, e, m , i, r m , r and d follow the reduced semir2d model:wheref = k f k π k ,d = k d k π k f k /f . in addition,proof the proof uses the previous results. for instance from first part of (14) we obtain e k (t) e(t) = s k (t) s(t) which together with the second part of (14) gives the first identify in (31). the other relations are obtained in order from (3) and then (7).note that the proposition 1 implies in particular that the distribution { d k (t) d(t) = π k f k d k fd , k ≥ 1} of deceased by age is constant in time, as is the distribution { d k (t)+r k (t)= π k f k f , k ≥ 1} of severe forms by age.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108860 doi: medrxiv preprint proposition 2 suppose (e + m + i)(0) 0 and that the epidemic is over at t = ∞ (that is (e + m + i)(∞) 0), and denote by α = (s(0) − s(∞))/s(0) the epidemic size in percentages of s(0). then:suppose now that we migrate r k (∞) and r m k (∞) to the k + 1-th class (note that their age still corresponds to the class k). then the newly formed groups have the following constants f k andd k :in particular if one compares the initial epidemic and the challenge (denoted with˜superscript) at the same point in time, i.e., i(t)+d(t)+ r(t) =ĩ(t) +d(t) +r(t), then the ratio of severe forms in the class k between the two outbreaks will bef k /f k and for deathsd k /d k .proof: equation (33) is a consequence of the relation (14) if one sums over l, recall that π k = s k (0)/s(0) and take t → ∞. relation (34) results from (31),(32): in a similar manner as for (33) one notes that where for the last equation we used both hypothesis. thus in the class k there will be, at challenge, two types of individuals, the ones from s k (∞) having parameters f k and d k and the ones from r k (∞) + r m k (∞) with parameters f k+1 and d k+1 . using (33), (34) we obtain (35) and (36).the past two decades have seen the emergence of three novel betacoronaviruses that have been associated with outbreaks in the human population including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2002 1 , middle east respiratory syndrome (mers-cov) in 2012 2 , and sars-cov-2 in 2019 3, 4 . all three coronaviruses appear to have originated from bats and likely were transmitted to humans by zoonotic transmission possibly through an intermediate vertebrate vector 5, 6 .corona virus disease -2019 (covid-19) is the infectious disease caused by the sars-cov-2. the first confirmed case dates to december 8, 2019 in a patient from wuhan city in the hubei province of china 7 . the virus quickly spread through wuhan and neighbouring parts of hubei province despite rapid and aggressive public health interventions 8 . the following months led to global spread of the virus and was officially classified as a pandemic by the who on march 11, 2020 . the spread of sars-cov-2 has had devastating consequence to human health with over 9.12 million documented cases and 473,797 deaths as of june 24, 2020 including 101,637 confirmed cases and 8436 deaths in canada (who situation report number 156).sars-cov-2 is a spherical, enveloped particle, positive-sense, single stranded rna genome that is 29.9 kb in length 3, 9 . genome organization of sars-cov-2 has the characteristic gene order 5'replicase orf1ab, spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleocapsid (n)-3' 6 . coronavirus s proteins bind the host receptor enabling viral entry to the cell and have demonstrated the highest sequence variability in the viral genome 10 . the s protein in both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 interact with the host's angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) 11 ; however, the spike protein in sars-cov-2 has ~10-to 20-fold higher binding affinity than sars-cov 12 .the complete sars-cov-2 genome was published on jan 12, 2020 from a patient in wuhan, china 3 . the collaborative effort of many labs around the world have now published the genomes of many sars-cov-2 genomes including 53,992 in gisaid (www.gisaid.org), 24,438 in ncbi (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), and 7,989 in vipr (www.viprbrc.org) (as of june 24, 2020). allelic differences with biased geographic distribution have been observed between three major sars-cov-2 clades, likely the consequence of founder effects 13 . superclade i (a superset of vclade defined in gisaid epicov portal 14 ) , has limited variability with respect to the reference genome and has been described in the majority of isolates in asia 13 . superclade ii (s-clade) has two characteristic variants at c3037t and t28144c 13 and includes most viral isolates from the usa, especially the west coast 13, 15 . superclade iii, (g-clade) has four characteristic variants at c241t, c3037t, c14408t, and a23403g 13 , and includes most viral isolates from europe and many on the east coast of the usa 13, 15 . the a23403g mutation results in a d614g substitution in the s protein which may result in increased fitness as this viral strain is rapidly and repeatedly replacing other forms of the virus around the globe 16 . this mutation is also embedded in an immunological epitope which elicited antibody production in patients during the 2003 sars-cov epidemic 17 , and may mediate antibody escape, making individuals susceptible to a second infection of covid-19 16 .databases containing tens of thousands of sars-cov-2 genomes provide an unprecedented opportunity to reconstruct the establishment and spread of the virus in specific locales. we demonstrate the ability to trace the origin and community spread of sars-cov-2 using sequence data from twenty-five viral genomes isolated from some of first cases of covid-19 in the eastern region of the province of ontario, canada. this knowledge may improve the effectiveness of public health interventions to prevent future pandemicssample collection: nasopharyngeal (np) swabs were collected in viral transport media from symptomatic patients being tested for sars-cov-2 at kingston health sciences center (khsc) and the surrounding hospitals. extraction of total rna from viral transport media was performed using the maxwell rsc whole blood rna/dna kit (promega corporation, madison, wi) on the maxwell rsc 16 automated nucleic acid extractor. each sample was tested for the presence of sars-cov-2 using a laboratory developed multiplex real-time pcr assay targeting the envelope (e) and rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) genes 18 on the viia7 real-time pcr system. sars-cov-2 genome sequencing: the extracted nucleic acids from covid-19 positive cases were anonymized and shared with queen's genomics lab at ongwanada (q-glo). rna from each sample (5 μl) was reverse transcribed to complimentary dna using the superscript vilo cdna synthesis kit on a simpliamp thermal cycler. libraries were constructed manually using the ion ampliseq sars-cov-2 research panel, ion xpress barcodes, and the ion ampliseq library kit plus following the manufacturer's recommendations including amplification cycles based on viral load. templating and chip loading were performed on the ion chef system using the ion 510 & ion 520 & ion 530 kit-chef. up to sixteen samples were multiplexed on an ion 530 chip and sequenced using the ion genestudio s5 plus semiconductor sequencer. chart review: demographic data and travel history were extracted from a review of laboratory requisitions, hospital charts, and public health case investigation charts. assessment of linked cases were based off public health case investigation charts. data analysis: preliminary analysis was performed on a torrent suite server and using custom plug-ins created by thermofisher scientific specifically for the ion ampliseq sars cov-2 panel including assemblertrinity for genome-guided assembly of the viral genome, irmareport to build a consensus sequence, and covid19annotatesnpeff to annotate variants. vcf files generated by torrent suite variant caller were filtered to remove eleven variants with read depth less than 1000 and quality score less than 400. filtered variants were used for sample clustering with the maximum likelihood tree 19 in molecular evolutionary genetics analysis (mega) software 20, 21 . phylogenetic analysis: a data analysis pipeline using molecular phylogenetics was developed to reconstruct infection origins and spread utilizing two main assumptions. first, identical sequences are identical by descentthat is, the same variants are unlikely to have evolved independently. second, new mutations accrue at an average rate of 1 base pair (bp) every 7 to 21 days. this is based on an average of 24.225 bp substitutions per year in the nextstrain analysis 22 of the gisaid 14,23 database. briefly, the viral genome sequenced from each patient was used as the query sequence in a blast+ 24 search against a local reference containing 25,132 sars cov-2 genomes from the gisaid database (accessed may 15, 2020). only highly similar sequences with no more than two mismatches were retained from the database reducing the number of reference genomes from 25,132 to 1,251. many references were identical genomes isolated in separate individuals, which were collapsed to 72 unique reference sequences. a reference sequence from wuhan (wuhan-hu1/2019) was added to root the phylogenetic tree. fifty-nine of these 72 reference sequences shared the same common ancestor but differed by one or two substitutions, or otherwise formed derived groups that were not informative to reconstructing the ancestry of the sample genomes. these extraneous tips were removed, leaving only the patient-derived genomes and 13 unique and informative ancestral sequences. phylogenies were built using the ape (v5.3) package in r, using the maximum likelihood approach implemented in the optim.pml function with 100 bootstrap iterations. the ggtree (v2.0.1) and ggplot2 (v3.2.1) packages in r were used to generate tree visualizations.sample demographics including age and biological sex are shown in table 1 . at time of analysis, thirty-two sars-cov-2 samples from local cases of covid-19 were made available, however seven samples did not pass quality control (insufficient viral load or low sequencing coverage) and were excluded from further analysis. for the remaining twenty-five samples, an average of 1.3 million mapped reads per sample was generated, with an average of 8,175 mean read depth and 96.06% uniform coverage (supplementary table 1 ). twenty-one samples have 100% coverage of the genome and four samples have greater than 99.4% coverage. samples 19 and 21 had the lowest uniformity in coverage which resulted in several gaps in the consensus sequence, so these two sequences were removed from phylogenetic analysis. most viral genomes contained between six to eight variants when compared with the nc_045512.2 reference genome with greater number of variants reported in sample 41 (10 variants) and sample 36 (12 variants). the most common nucleotide substitution is from cysteine to thymine (25/45 variants), followed by guanine to thymine (7/45 variants) and adenine to guanine (4/45). all the shared variants are homozygous variants except for heterozygous snp in the orf1ab gene of samples 11 and 30 (c9994a). we see an additional four heterozygous variants in three samples that are unique to that sample (supplementary table 2 ). finally, we observe one shared missense variant (g25217t) and three unique synonymous variants (c24382t, t24982c, c25357t) in the gene encoding the s protein.clustering of the 25 viral sequences within the maximum likelihood tree (fig 1a) is driven by variants that are shared between samples ( fig 1b) and branch length is driven by unique variants carried by each sample (supplementary table 2 ). the samples formed two large clades including two samples that carry two mutations that correspond to the s-clade (c8782t and t28144c) and twenty-three samples that carry four mutations reported in the g-clade (c241t, c3037t, c14408t, and a23403g). within the g-clade we see smaller clusters that correspond to cluster 2 (samples 17, 18, 24, 25, 26, 37, 38, 39, and 42), cluster 5 (samples 1, 10 and 12), and cluster 9 (samples 2, 4, 11, 16, 29, 30, 34, 35, 36, and 41) reported by korber et al. 16 .phylogenetic analysis using local patient sars-cov-2 genomes were matched with blast+ to reference sequences published in the gisaid database. this resulted in 13 ancestral genomes relevant to retracing the origins and spread of local covid-19 cases (fig 2) . sample 23 belongs to the s-clade of sars-cov-2 and is derived from the ancestral genome shared by reference 1. samples sharing this genome are almost exclusively from north america and predominately from the usa (supplementary table 3 ). samples 1, 10, and 12 belong to the gclade cluster 1. this clade contains ancestral reference genomes (16, 39, 46, 68, 69, and 70) reported all over the world, but over-represented in europe, especially the uk and spain. reported travel history supports european origin in these three samples ( table 2 ). the other nineteen samples in the g-clade cluster 2 are derived from several ancestral sequences (3, 14, 53, 57, 67, 72) which are predominantly from north american (usa) patients. reported travel history supports an american origin of infection for patients 34 and 41, who reported visiting the usa before being diagnosed with the virus ( table 2) . within the g-clade 2 samples, we observed four clusters of two or more samples with the same viral genome indicating a common source of infection (fig 2; table 2 ).we analyzed twenty-five sars-cov-2 genomes from cases of covid-19 within the eastern region of the province of ontario, canada. these samples included most of the first cases in the region and therefore infection was assumed to have occurred during international travel or while in proximity to an individual who had recently travelled. genome variation among these samples has important implications for the pathology and epidemiology of this disease, as discussed below.a major concern with novel viruses is mutation rates and how novel mutations will affect virulence, vaccine development, and reinfection [15] [16] [17] 25, 26 . of primary significance are mutations in the s protein because the spike protein defines viral host range and is often the target of neutralizing antibodies 27, 28 . this project identified three novel unique mutations in the coding region of the s protein, however all three are predicted to be synonymous and likely will not affect viral virulence or epitopes. a fourth polymorphic site at c25217t occurs in four samples (2, 4, 34 , and 16) is a missense variant resulting in a glycine to cysteine substitution at the 1219 th residue of the s protein. in silico modeling or functional validation studies may describe the impact of this mutation on the function of the transmembrane domain. this project identified five heterozygous variants c360t, c9729a, g10818t, g17325t, c18136t. four of these heterozygous variants were unique to one sample and had alternate allele frequencies ranging from 25-39% suggesting an emerging viral mutation that occurred since infection of the host. however, one heterozygous variant, c9729a, was shared between two samples (samples 11 and 30) and had an alternate allele frequency of 0.58 and 0.59 indicating that these two individuals likely have superinfection of two sars-cov-2 strains 29 .clustering of shared mutations identified two samples (21 and 23) that belong to the sclade of virus and characterized by two polymorphic sites at c8782t and c28144t 13 . the presence of three additional polymorphic sites at c17747t, a17858g, and c18060t exclusively present in north america 26 support a north american origin for these two samples. furthermore, phylogenetic analysis identified potential ancestral samples for sample 23 that were predominately isolated in the usa. the other twenty-three samples share four shared polymorphic sites at c3037t, c14408t, a23404g, and a23403g and belong to the g-clade of viruses 13 . within the g-clade we observe two distinct clusters, g-clade 1 which appears european in origin and g-clade 2 which appears to originate in the usa. reported travel history supports our phylogenetics analysis for european origin for the g-clade 1 as sample 1 reported recent travel to portugal, sample 10 travelled to ireland, and sample 12 to spain. similarly, reported travel history supports north american origin for the g-clade 2 as sample 34 reported recent travel to florida, usa and sample 41 reported recent travel to arizona, usa. these correlations between phylogenetic origin and reported travel history indicates how viral genome sequencing can successfully trace the origin of sars-cov-2 infections into canada. interestingly, we observed several clusters of samples that shared the same viral sequence indicating that these samples either had a shared source of infection or a result of community transfer. chart review demonstrated that samples 24, 25, and 26 did not travel outside of canada, they are contacts of each other, and share the same sars-cov-2 strain, demonstrating community transfer in eastern ontario was likely even during the early stages of infection. similarly, samples 17, 38, 39 and 42 all share the same viral strain but the connection between these individuals is unknown. identification of the common thread among these patients (or other clusters of cases) could help to identify major sources/pathways of infection. infection in sample 34 is likely attributed to their travel to the usa (table 2) ; however, samples 4 and 34 share the same viral strain and sample 4 tested positive for covid-19 five days earlier than sample 34. a connection between sample 4 and 34 is unknown, as are the travel details of sample 34, but these observations raise the possibility that infection in sample 34 may not be related to their travel to the usa. these results demonstrate how sample clustering and phylogenetic analysis based on viral genome sequencing may assist and prioritize case and contact tracing to further monitor and contain the spread of the virus.there were several limitations in using genomics to trace viral origin and path of transmission of sars-cov-2. first, in the early stages of the pandemic, most countries were only screening and testing international travelers who displayed symptoms. this allowed asymptomatic carriers to go undetected masking potential sources of infection. as a result, gaps exist in the databases reporting sars-cov-2 genomes masking the true sources of infection. however, the rapid publication of genome sequences from around the world can help to offset this limitation, by identifying geographical clusters and specific genomic variants that are shared across regions. the relatively high mutation rate helps to distinguish primary and secondary infections in the span of one to two weeks. a second limitation is a lack of detailed travel and interaction histories for patients due to differences in reporting and data collection among collection sites and agencies. rigorous adherence to standardized data collection protocols, like who's guidance for contact tracing in the context of covid-19 coupled with genomics data as described here, may facilitate effective contact tracing that is required to break the chains of viral transmission. a final limitation is that sequencing sars-cov-2 in covid-19 cases with low viral load was problematic due to lack of rna input for library construction as seen by the number of excluded samples and those with low coverage uniformity (samples 19 and 21). however, this will become less limiting over time as high-throughput sequencing devices continue to improve in sensitivity and throughput.in summary, this is the first description of sars-cov-2 genomes in covid-19 positive cases in eastern ontario. these are many of the first detected cases in eastern ontario and infection was believed to be foreign in origin and the result of international travel or proximity to an individual who had travelled. this analysis illustrates that many of the infections originated from our geographical neighbour, the usa, but other sources of infection include several countries in europe. we also observed community transfer in cases that did not travel out of the country. these results demonstrate how molecular epidemiology and evolutionary phylogenetics can help local health units to track origins and vectors of spread for emerging diseases like sars-cov-2. earlier detection and screening and alternative modes for contact tracing may improve the effectiveness of regional public health interventions to prevent future pandemics. table 2 . summary of viral origin of first covid-19 cases into the eastern region of the province of ontario, canada. phylogenetic analysis determined viral origin based on ancestral sequences in the gisaid database and correlated with patient's reported travel history. samples with identical viral genome sequences are grouped into a single cluster and may represent shared origin or community transfer. a n outbreak of atypical pneumonia, referred to as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), was identified in the guangdong province of people's republic of china at the end of 2002 and spread to other asian countries and canada (1, 2) from february through march 2003. individual cases (all in persons infected in asia) were diagnosed in europe during the same period (3) . a novel human coronavirus (sars-associated coronavirus [sars-cov]) has been isolated from the oropharyngeal specimens of patients with sars (4, 5) . experimental infection of macaques has confirmed that the sars-cov is the cause of sars (6, 7) .coronaviruses are enveloped, positive-stranded rna viruses associated with enteric and respiratory diseases in animals and humans; they are currently classified into three antigenic groups: group 1 and 2 include mammalian coronaviruses, and group 3 encompasses avian coronaviruses. human coronaviruses are associated with com-mon cold-like diseases and are included in both group 1 (cov-229e) and 2 (cov-oc43) (8) . sequence analysis of the complete genome of sars-cov has shown an rna molecule of about 29,750 bases in length, with a genome organization similar to that of other coronaviruses (9) (10) (11) . in spite of this similar organization, the sars-cov rna sequence is only distantly related to that of previously characterized coronaviruses (9) . consequently, whether the sars-cov has "jumped" from a nonhuman host reservoir to humans and the molecular basis of such a jump remain unanswered questions (12) . some biologic features of the sars-cov described in vivo and in vitro differ from those of other coronaviruses previously identified. among these features are the peculiar tropism of the virus for vero cells (a continuous cell line established from monkey kidney epithelial cells), its capacity for growth at 37°c (while other respiratory coronaviruses grow at lower temperatures), and its ability to infect lower respiratory tract tissues (13) . these aspects render the molecular and biologic characterization of sars-cov important not only for understanding the determinants of its pathogenic potential but also for planning rational strategies of antiviral therapy and vaccination.we have recently obtained a sars-cov isolate from a frozen sputum sample collected from an italian patient affected by a respiratory disease of unknown cause; onset of illness began during the patient's travel to vietnam in march 2003. the viral strain has been designated as sars-cov hsr1. to gain insight into sars-cov biopathology, we analyzed the relevant features of sars-cov hsr1 growth in vitro, including the ultrastructural analysis of the consequences of virus replication in vero cells. we have optimized both a reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) taqman assay for quantifying the number of viral genomes and a plaque assay for performing titration of the virus infectivity. in addition, we have completely sequenced the viral genome of the sars-cov hsr1 and compared it to other sars-cov strains recently isolated in disease-epidemic areas.in march 2003, an italian man who recently traveled from vietnam to italy was affected by a respiratory disease of unknown cause; he was hospitalized in a clinical unit for acute infectious diseases in a public hospital in milan, italy. a sputum sample was collected at the peak of illness and stored at -80°c. isolation of sars-cov was performed with vero cells maintained in dulbecco's modified eagle medium (d-mem, biowhittaker, verviers, belgium) and supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (fcs, hyclone, perbio science erembodegem-aalst, belgium), penicillin/streptomycin (biowhittaker), and 2.5 µg/ml fungizone (invitrogen ltd, life technologies, paisley, uk) (complete medium). in detail, an aliquot (0.5 ml) of the sputum sample was mixed with 2 x 10 6 vero cell suspension in 2 ml of complete medium. after incubation for 1 h at 37°c, 5% co 2 , 4 ml of complete medium was added, and the cell suspension was transferred into a 25-cm 2 tissue culture flask (falcon, becton dickinson labware, lincoln park, nj). twenty-four hours after inoculation, the cell cultures were examined with an optical microscope for evidence of cytopathic effects (cpe). an aliquot of culture supernatant was collected and stored at -80°c for rt-pcr evaluation. after an additional 24 hours, both the culture supernatant and the cells were collected after 2 cycles of freeze thawing, followed by clarification of the thawed contents by centrifugation at 1,000 x g and dispensation of the supernatant into aliquots stored at -80°c (primary viral stock). for generation of the secondary and tertiary viral stocks, adherent vero cells flasks were seeded in a 25 cm 2 tissue culture and injected with 0.5 ml of stored supernatant filtered with 0.45 µm filters. three days after infection, the cells and supernatant were subjected to 2 cycles of freeze thawing, and the supernatant was collected after centrifugation followed by filtration as described above (secondary viral stock). finally, vero cells seeded in 2 flasks of 75 cm 2 were injected with 1.5 ml of the second passage virus stock in a total volume of 25 ml to generate a third-passage viral stock.direct sars-cov rna amplification was performed starting from the sputum sample treated with an equal volume of phosphate-buffered solution (pbs). rna was purified from 750 µl of the resulting homogenate by using the qiagen viral rna mini kit (qiagen, inc., santa clarita, ca) (elution volume 50 µl), according to manufacturer's instructions. viral rna was extracted from 0.5 ml of culture supernatant with the same kit (elution volume 50 µl). cdna synthesis and subsequent amplification were performed by using either nested rt-pcr or real-time rt-pcr approach, as described elsewhere, with minor modifications (3). in brief, 5 µl of extracted rna was reversetranscribed for 30 min at 42°c by using mo-mulv rt, a mixture of random hexamers, and an oligo-(dt) primer. two microliters of the synthesized cdna was subsequently amplified by using the following primers pairs: outer primers: bni-outs2, 5′-atg aat tac caa gtc aat ggt tac-3′; bni-outas, 5′-cat aac cag tcg gta cag cta c-3′; inner primers: bni-ins, 5′-gaa gct att cgt cac gtt cg-3′; bniinas, 5′-ctg tag aaa atc cta gct gga g-3′. a sequence of the sars-cov rna encompassing the target region was used as positive control, and a sputum sample from a sars-negative healthy donor and a feline coronavirus rna extract were used as negative controls. the amplified pcr product was separated by agarose gel electrophoresis visualized by ethidium bromide staining and sequenced directly on an abi prism 3100 genetic analyzer with abi prism bigdye terminator v3.0 sequencing kit (applied biosystems, foster city, ca). sars-cov was then identified by searching for homologies between the amplified fragment and previously deposited sequences using blast. finally, the quantitation of the viral rna was performed in a taqman assay after generation of cdna. the primer pair and probe bnitmsars1, 5′-ttatcacc-cgcgaagaagct-3′; bnitmsaras2, 5′-ctc-tagttgcatgacagccctc-3′, bni-tmsarp 6-carboxifluorescein-tcg tgc gtg gat tgg ctt tga tgt-6 carboxy-tetramethylrhodamin (3) were added to the universal pcr master mix (applied biosystems) at 200 and 120 nm, respectively, in a final volume of 25 µl. the standard was obtained by cloning the 77-bp fragment into the pcr2.1 plasmid by using the ta cloning kit (invitrogen corp., san diego, ca). a linear distribution (r = 0.99) was obtained between 10 1 to 10 8 copies.to have the most effective quantitative assay of virus infectivity and to compare the infectious titer with quantitative molecular assays, we optimized a plaque assay (determining the pfu/ml). confluent vero cells in 6 well plates (falcon) were incubated in duplicate with 1 ml of pbs containing 100 µl of sars-cov hsr1 viral stock in 10-fold serial dilutions from -10e2 (1/100) to -10e8 (1/100,000,000). after 1 hour of incubation, the viral inoculum was removed and 1 ml of 1% carboxymethylcellulose (sigma chemical corp., st. louis, mo) overlay with dmem supplemented with 1% fetal calf serum was added to each well. after 6 days of incubation, the cells were stained with 1% crystal violet (sigma) in 70% methanol. the plaques were counted after being examined with a stereoscopic microscope (smz-1500, nikon). the virus titer was calculated in pfu per milliliter.adherent vero cells were infected with 5 x 10 4 pfu/ml of sars-cov hsr1 at the third passage in a t-75 flask. twenty-four hours after infection, vero cells were detached from the tissue culture flask with a cell scraper, and the cell suspension was centrifuged at 173 x g for 4 min. the pellet was resuspended in pbs without ca ++ and mg ++ , and the suspension was spun at 173 x g for an additional 4 min. the cell pellet was resuspended and fixed in 4% formaldehyde and 2.5% glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. the sample was then centrifuged at 13,414 x g for 5 min; the pellet was fixed with 2% oso 4 in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer for 60 min. the pellet was dehydrated in graded ethanol, washed in propylene oxide and infiltrated for 12 hours in a 1:1 mixture of propylene oxide and epoxidic resin (epon). cells were then embedded in epon and polymerized for 24 hours at 60°c. slides were cut with ultramicrotome (ultracut uct, leica, deerfield, il), stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and metaled. the ultrathin sections of infected vero cells were observed through transmission electron microscopy (hitachi h7000).sequencing of the complete sars-cov hsr1 genome was performed by using 68 partially overlapping primers encompassing the whole viral genome. a 5′ rapid amplification of pcr ends (race) technique was performed to capture the 5′-untranslated region of the genome (10). each 750-bp fragment was gel-isolated by means of a qiaquick gel extraction kit (qiagen) and directly sequenced from both directions inward and outward. seqscape version 2.0 (applied biosystems) software was used for base calling, editing, and assembly of the fragments. manual check of the differences between the electropherograms and the reference sequence (urbani isolate) was performed and eventually led to reamplification or resequencing of some fragments. the complete sequence of sars-cov hsr1 strain was aligned with all the previously sequenced full-length genomes available from the genbank database by using clustalw and editing with bioedit version 5.0.9 for manual corrections. sequences were trimmed to equivalent length and phylogenetic relationships were estimated with paup* (maximum-parsimony and maximum-likelihood methods by using the p-distance model) and mega version 2.1. trees were edited by using treeview.both nested rt-pcr and the real-time rt-pcr assays performed on the sputum sample from a person with sars tested positive for sars-cov rna. the viral load in the sample was estimated to be 5.6 x 10 4 sars-cov rna copies/ml. twenty-four hours after injection of vero cells with the sputum sample, a strong cpe was observed, as indicated in figure 1b . the cpe was diffused with cell rounding with refractive appearance, and the cell monolayer was destroyed as compared to control uninfected vero cells ( figure 1a) . the viral load in the culture supernatant 24 hours after injection with the clinical sample was 1.3 x 10 5 copies/ml as determined by quantitative real-time rt-pcr. serial passage of the virus on vero cells to obtain a tertiary viral stock yielded 9.1 x 10 8 copies/ml. a plaque assay was optimized to determine the in vitro infectivity of sars-cov. the tertiary viral stock tested 2.5 x 10 6 pfu/ml in the plaque assay, suggesting that about 360 genomes were required to generate a single plaque in tissue cultures, at least under the conditions described here. we also used the plaque assay for testing the potential inhibitory effect on virus infectivity of a single concentration of heparin, the prototypic compound of a class of inhibitors of virus entry for enveloped viruses including hiv type 1 (hiv-1) (14) and herpes simplex virus 1 and 2 (hsv-1 and 2) (15). heparin indeed reduced the formation of plaques by 50% when added 30 min before infection of vero cells with 100 pfu/ml of the sars-cov (figure 2 ).thin-section electron microscopy showed the typical features of intracellular cov particles. cells were engulfed with viral particles localized in cytoplasmic vesicles ( figure 3a ). this feature is typical of all coronaviridae viruses that bud intracellularly at membranes of the intermediate compartment between the endoplasmic reticulum and the golgi complex, whereas newly assembled virions reach the cell surface by vesicular transport (16) . after the extracellular release, virus particles were found in large clusters adjacent to the plasma membrane, as evidenced in figure 3b . overall, the ultrastructural analysis documented that sars-cov cultivated in vero cells behaved like a typical coronavirus, characterized by intracellular budding (figure 3, panels c and d) .the sequence of sars-cov strain hsr1 genomic rna was 29,751 bases in length, with a polya tail. we identified the major open reading frames (orfs), coding for the 4 major structural proteins, namely: spike (s), envelope (e) matrix (m), nucleocapsid (n) gene products, and at least other 10 proteins, including a few of unknown function. the complete sequence of sars-cov strain hsr1 has been deposited in the genbank database (genbank accession no. ay323977). this sequence was aligned with those of the other 21 sars-cov isolates to facilitate phylogenetic analysis. overall, the mean difference in nucleotide composition between all the isolates was 18 ± 1 nt variations within the whole genomes, thus confirming the genetic conservation observed previously (9) . on the whole, 149 sites were variable among the 22 aligned isolates, and 24 loci in the viral genome varied in more than one isolate, including in the sars-cov hsr1 genome (recurrent mutations). eleven of 24 recurrent mutations were silent, whereas 3 of 13 mutations generating amino acid substitutions were observed within the nterminal domain of the spike glycoprotein gene (positions 21,722, 22,223, and 22,423, determining a g to d, an i to t, and a g to r amino acid change, respectively). six mutations were detected in the replicase gene (positions 8,572, 9,404, 9,479, 9,854, 17,564, and 19 ,084, determining a v to l, a v to a, a v to a, an a to v, a d to e, and a t to i amino acid change, respectively), and 1 mutation was found in the matrix protein (position 26,600, determining an a to v amino acid change). the phylogenetic analysis was also performed by using the maximum parsimony method, considering only sequence variants that recurred in more than one strain in order to reduce the mutational noise caused by pcr or sequencing mistakes. figure 4 shows the phylogenetic tree obtained with the maximum likelihood method. the maximum parsimony trees produced the same structure with minor changes in the subtrees' branch patterns (data not shown). in these analyses, sars-cov hsr1 appears to be strongly related to strains isolated from patients who had traveled from hong kong to different geographic areas (singapore, canada, vietnam) and spread the infection to their home countries in a few cases. the isolation of a novel cov in persons with sars and proof of its etiologic role in this disease underscore the importance of identifying the pathogenic determinants of sars-cov. this information may be central to plan specific therapeutic and preventive strategies against sars. major areas of research include the following: 1) analyzing growth characteristics of sars-cov in vitro; 2) evaluating virus-host relationships at the molecular level; 3) understanding both sars-cov genome organization and the role of nonstructural proteins of unknown function; 4) studying the evolutionary relationships of different coronaviruses of animal and human origin; and 5) identifying targets for anti-cov chemotherapy and vaccination. in our study, we characterized a novel isolate of sars-cov (designated hsr1 strain). the analysis of the complete sequence of sars-cov hsr1 genome showed the same organization in orfs previously described in this novel human virus (10) and confirmed the relative genetic stability among the different isolates (9) . however, for other sars-covs isolates, amino acid changes were observed in this hsr1 strain at the level of the n-terminal domain of the spike glycoprotein, the viral replicase, and the matrix protein. despite this relative stability, phylogenetic analysis of the hsr1 isolate ( figure 4 ) has shown that the virus is more related to the strains isolated in patients who had traveled from hong kong to different geographic areas, such as singapore, canada, and vietnam, than to the beijing isolates. in addition, we have observed that other biomolecular features shared by most coronaviridae coexist in sars-cov hsr1 with particular characteristics that seem to be unique of the novel virus. in particular, sars-cov is able to replicate in vero cells with a rapid production of high virus titers and fast cpe. by using quantitative molecular and biologic assays, we could estimate that, under our experimental conditions, 360 genomes are approximately required to form a plaque of infectivity in vitro. sars-cov seems unlike most of the other respiratory coronaviruses infecting humans, which fail to grow efficiently in tissue cultures and are easily detectable by using pcr amplification methods only (17) . infection in vero cells showed most of the usual characteristics of the cov replication (16) , including intracellular budding of virions, as demonstrated by electron microscopy.to investigate whether sars-cov could be inhibited by polyanions, we tested the effects of the prototypic sulfated polysaccharide heparin ( figure 2 ) on in vitro infection. incubation of vero cells with heparin (100 µg/ml) 30 min before sars-cov injection curtailed infection by 50%. polyanions have demonstrated antiviral activity (18) against enveloped viruses such as hiv and hsv through specific interaction with cells and after inhibition of virus attachment and entry (14) . heparin, a prototypic polyanion, inhibits attachment and entry of virus particles into cell by impeding the interaction of the v3 region of gp120 with hiv specific chemokine coreceptor (19 . phylogenetic tree obtained by applying paup* (maximum-likelihood methods using the p-distance model) applied to complete genome sequences of the severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (sars-cov) hsr1 strain and the of hsv, heparin inhibits the interaction of some hsv envelope glycoprotein to the heparan sulfate that mediates viral attachment to the target cell surface (20, 21) . the partial inhibition of sars-cov hsr1 by heparin suggests that the envelope proteins coating the sars-cov virions might be endowed with positively charged amino acids that could interact with negatively charged sulfate groups present on heparan sulfate proteoglycans expressed on the surface of target cells. vero cells, the target of both hsv and dengue 4 (22) replication, replicate sars-cov more efficiently than several other cell lines.in conclusion, our study characterized a novel sars-cov isolate, which was to date the second isolate obtained in europe. the sequence analysis indicates that sars-cov hsr1 clusters together with the hong kong, singapore, and canada isolates. the coexistence of general coronavirus features with important biologic and molecular specificity of sars-cov, together with the evidence that sars-cov does not appear to be linked to any of the other three genetic groups of known coronaviruses, strongly suggests it represents a new, fourth genetic coronavirus group, with distinct genomic and biologic features. in light of this evidence, efforts to identify new types of animal coronaviruses as well as to better understand the peculiarities of sars-cov are important in addressing its possible animal origin and in understanding the biology of coronaviridae and their evolutionary features.the covid-19 pandemic has necessarily affected the operation of canada's parliament and, thus, the activities of members of parliament (mps) (malloy, 2020; rayment and vandenbeukel, 2020) . here, we explore how the pandemic has affected the representational activities of individual mps.in doing so, we rely on the representational connections framework (rcf) developed by koop, bastedo and blidook (2018) in their observational study of canadian mps. like fenno (2003) , we conceive of representation as a series of connections that mps develop and nurture between themselves and their constituents. the rcf shows how mps tailor representational styles through their relative emphasis on four types of such connections: policy, service, symbolic and party connections (koop et al., 2018: 19-23) . 1 mps have significant autonomy and agency to develop their own representational styles, and they do so in response to several influences.we view the covid-19 pandemic as a new influence that could shape the representational behaviours of mps. we conducted semistructured interviews with 11 mps during may 2020. questions were designed to probe mps' self-observed differences in their activities due to the covid-19 pandemic, with an emphasis on connections with their constituents and how they typically spend their workdays at home and in ottawa. 2 the broad themes we present were highly consistent across interviews, although findings may not be generalizable due the relatively small sample. 3 first, we discuss how the pandemic has shuffled mps' representational priorities, shifting mps away from some connection-building activities and toward behaviours that support service connections. second, we explore the particularities of service representation during the pandemic. the pandemic has affected mps' daily work through increased constituent demands for service in an abruptly changed operating environment. mps report increased volume of constituent inquiries and requests, a changed nature in these demands as constituents mostly seek assistance and information related to covid-19, and significant implications of a remote workstyle for mps' daily activities and those of their staff.we found that covid-19 has affected mps' connection-building representational activities. most importantly, the pandemic resulted in an increased emphasis on constituents' requests for service from mps, which limited the diversity of representational practices normally found among mps. while some mps already prioritize service connections, this became the case during the pandemic for all mps we interviewed, supplanting other types of connections. as mp francis scarpaleggia puts it: "we're in full service mode as opposed to, say, debate mode."while some mps indicated a decline in their usual policy work, others said there has been no decline, but that increased service demands have simply increased the hours of work overall and/or altered what gets prioritized. "i think the amount of legislative work we're doing has not really diminished," argues a government mp. "it's pretty much the same except we're also doing an influx of constituency work, a volume of constituency work that's increased quite dramatically."the physical distancing regulations and restrictions on public gathering necessitated by covid-19 make it difficult for mps to build and maintain symbolic ties with their constituents by attending events and being present in the community. as mp ken mcdonald notes, "i miss the face-to-face because i could be at a senior's dinner in carbonear and there could be 150 people there. so you get to mingle and speak to a lot of them face-to-face. most of it is a cordial greeting, or someone might have an issue that they want to talk to you about. so this doesn't get done face-to-face now.""politics is like many other human activities: it's a human-to-human interaction," mp kenny chiu expands. "i need to have coffee with, i need to talk to, i need to shake hands … [with] constituents, stakeholders, [and] colleagues." and mp alexandra mendès links the importance of face-to-face communication to characteristics of her constituency, arguing that "non-verbal communication is extremely important" for interacting with constituents in her highly diverse urban riding.in response, many mps have adopted new techniques to keep in touch and maintain linkages with constituents. mps talked about webinar town halls and other online forums as ways to continue communications. mp jenica atwin, for example, reports that 160 people had attended a recent local webinar.while some mps are eager for the pandemic to end so they can get back to their normal operations, others noted that some of the shifts in their representational approaches may outlast the pandemic. mp churence rogers, for example, suggests "… there's a lot of things about this covid pandemic that will maybe change the way that i do the job in the future." he expands, "… we also heard from some mps that they are developing new representational connections with various local populations. mp iqra khalid, for example, reports that the pandemic has resulted in requests for assistance from local businesses, which generally have not contacted the mp's office in the past.service representation during the pandemic the predominant shift in representational behaviours reported by the mps we interviewed is in their approach to building and maintaining service connections with their constituents. we observed three main ways the daily service work of mps has changed.first, mps' volume of casework increased dramatically. regardless of whether they typically prioritize service connections, all the mps we interviewed were experiencing surges in service needs, with many adding that their ottawa staff are currently assigned to constituency matters. as mp atwin explains, "our offices have never been busier … phone calls, emails, or messages through the various platforms, so there's lots of points of contact every day … the volume has certainly increased exponentially."second, the substance of the service work performed by mps and their staff has changed during the pandemic. typically, mps and their staff develop the knowledge and skills to help constituents with a fairly narrow set of concerns. covid-19 quickly spawned a host of government programs and regulations, generating new service concerns from constituents and increasing the immediacy with which offices need to respond. 4 as an ndp mp notes, my caseworkers have been inundated with casework. normally, the majority of casework that comes is around immigration.… [n]ow, the vast majority, on top of the immigration pieces that we've been helping people with, is actually covid-19-related questions. either people who are trying to access the benefits that are available through the federal government or a lot of people who are falling through the cracks of those programs.mp mike lake similarly adds that other service cases have often taken a backseat: "… [t]he priority from the government side is around covid and so the typical things that we've dealt with … are completely different in terms of timeframes. basically, a lot of the regular stuff is on hold." the urgency of covid-related service needs was emphasized by many of the mps we interviewed. "this has to get done now," said mp raquel dancho of these requests. "there is no putting this off. people are suffering, people are not being heard."finally, covid-19 has changed the way mps gather and act on concerns. normally, mps receive service requests via email, phone calls, walk-ins to constituency offices, and unplanned or chance meetings at events or on the street. staff or the mp then work with constituents to address these concerns. when covid-19 resulted in the closing of riding offices, in addition to adapting to the increased volume and novelty of service requests, mps and staff alike had to adjust.for the most part, adjusting has meant working remotely from home. this entails increased use of technology, more staff and caucus meetings, and sometimes working without a dedicated office space among the demands of family. while mps generally reported that operational practices transitioned well from constituency offices to remote settings, the loss of foot traffic deprived mps of in-person contact with constituents, which is a key element of some members' representational style.while mps' representational styles focus to varying degrees on policy, service, symbolic and party connections, the covid-19 pandemic has tended to shift mps' behaviours heavily toward service. across parties and jurisdictions, mps emphasized the need to provide service to aid and inform constituents on matters related to covid-19. in this way, covid-19 has affected the nature of representational work undertaken by mps during the crisis. the loss of opportunity to make significant strides in non-covid-related policy and symbolic connection building during the "crisis" portion of the pandemic was discussed most by those mps who prioritize those types of connections, and their frustration was often evident.there is preliminary evidence that the changes we observed in canada are also taking place in other democracies that employ single-member units of representation. in a larger study of representational practices currently underway, mps in australia and new zealand told us that similar restrictions to those implemented in canada caused a focusing of their time and energy toward direct service to constituents. also similarly, while many saw benefits to take forward from their experiences with new media, most mps expressed concern about a loss of in-person contact with constituents.once in office, mps engage in experiential learning about being a representative or learning through reflection on doing (koop et al., 2018: 24-25) . over time, such learning shapes mps' representational behaviours. the covid-19 pandemic constitutes a dramatic period of learning for canada's mps. this study illustrates how mps have been both flexible and responsive to the changes in representational demands posed by covid-19. it also provides an opportunity to revisit the views of mps from the first few months of the covid-19 pandemic once it is clearer what its long-term effects upon politics and society will be.notes 1 policy connections are connections built through mps listening to the policy concerns of constituents and communicating those to parliament. service connections are developed when mps work to learn about problems that their constituents have and then assist constituents by addressing those problems. mps often use the tools of constituency casework, notably staff focused on local issues working out of constituency offices, to develop service connections. symbolic connections are psychological linkages developed through time spent in the riding, attending events and functions, being seen and developing personal relationships. party connections refer to those built between the mp and party officials and colleagues both in the riding and in ottawa.2 we interviewed 11 of the 150 canadian mps invited. interviews were conducted via phone/online by the authors. the sample includes mps from four parties (liberal, cpc, ndp, green); from all regions except the north; women and men; from urban, rural and suburban ridings; and with a wide range of experience. please contact the authors for more information on the sample and interview questions.in addition to their barrie r function and participation in dige stive , absorptive , and se cretory proce sse s, small inte stinal e nte rocyte s were propose d to contribute to mucosal immune re actions by pre senting antige ns coming from the gut lume n (1, 2) . binding of fore ign prote ins to the apical brush borde r membrane (bbm) was reporte d to facilitate uptake and to in¯uence intrace llular proce ssing (3± 5). interactions of luminal molecules with the bbm also could re sult in signal transduction and cellular re sponse s (6, 7) .rats are a suitable mode l for studying deve lopm ental change s in bbm archite cture and enterocytic functions, because profound change s occur during post-natal maturation. at the time of weaning, the shift from milk-base d to carbohydrate -rich fee ding is accompanie d by change s of bbm, in e nzyme activitie s, prote in and lipid composition, glycosylation, and membrane¯uidity (6, 8 ± 10) . furthe rmore, the ne wborn rat mucosal barrie r appe ars to be more leaky, as indicate d by highe r rate s of endocytosis (11, 12) . enhance d inte raction of prote ins with bbm is suppose d to contribute to the increased uptake see n in ne wborn rats (10) .con¯icting results were obtaine d e arlie r in our laboratory using diffe rent approache s to study intestinal food prote in binding in vitro. in e xpe rime nts using whole gut sacs, we found a maturational increase in binding and uptake of b -lactoglobulin and bovine se rum albumin whe n comparing immature 18-day-old rats with mature adult rats (13) . in contrast, a maturational decrease in the binding capaci-ties of isolate d bbm ve sicles from ne wborn to adult age was de monstrate d for a -lactalbumin, b -lactoglobulin, bovine se rum albumin, and the gliadin pe ptide b3142 (14) . o ur aims, therefore , we re to clarify whether e nhance d bbm food prote in binding occurs before weaning and to characte rize membrane compone nts that inte ract with food prote ins. food prote ins of clinical importance (gliadin pe ptide s, cow's milk prote ins, ovalbumin) and le ctins (controls for spe ci® city of binding and for de te ction of de velopmental change s in membrane glycosylation) were use d. anim als. adult sprague-dawley rats, weighing 200 ± 300 g, and timed-pregnant rats were obtained from charles-river wiga (sulzfeld, ge rmany). they we re kept on a glute n-fre e and cow's milk protein-poor rat chow (diet no. c1078, altromin, lage, ge rmany). newborn rats were allowed to suckle fre ely and we re killed at the age of 24 hr. adult rats were fasted one day prior to the study.brush border mem bran e vesicles. for isolation of brush border membrane vesicles, whole small intestines of newborn rats and proximal halves of adult small intestines we re removed and washed with cold physiological saline. starting with homogenates of neonatal intestines or scrapings of adult intestinal mucosa, bbm ve sicles were obtained by a modi® ed ca 2 1 -precipitation technique as described before (16) . for e ach preparation, small intestines of several newborn rats or mucosa scrapings of two adult rats we re pooled. activities of the bbm enzymes lactase , sucrase, alkaline phosphatase , and total maltase activity we re dete rmined according to dahlqvist (17) and bowers and mccomb (18) .one unit was de® ned as 1 m mol substrate hydrolyzed per minute under the e xperimental conditions. speci® c e nzyme activities were expressed as units per milligram of protein.protein concentrations we re measured using bovine serum albumin as standard (19) .electron microscop y. bbm ve sicles we re ® xed in 2% (v/v) glutaraldehyde , 100 mm cacodylate buffe r, ph 7.4, for 1 hr at 4°c and collecte d by centrifugation (30 min at 30,000g). pe llets were washed three times with cacodylate buffe r, pellete d, and post® xe d in 1% (v/v) osmium te troxide in cacodylate buffe r for 1.5 hr at room tempe rature. afte r washing, the me mbranes we re dehydrate d ste pwise in e thanol and tre ate d with saturated uranyl acetate for contrast enhanceme nt. ultrathin sections were prepared from me mbrane vesicled e mbedded in araldite, stained with lead citrate, and analyze d with a z eiss em10 e lectron microscope.biotin ylation . food proteins were labeled with biotin, using biotinamidocaproate-n-hydroxysuccinimide ester for cow's milk proteins and biotinamidocaproate-n-hydroxysulfosuccinimide ester for gliadin peptides as described previously (15) .gel electrop horesis. sodium dodecyl sulfate ± polyacrylamide ge l electrophoresis (sds-page ) was performed using the mini-protean ii e lectrophoresis system (bio-rad, munich, germany) according to laemmli (20) under nonreducing conditions. western blot. electrophoretic transfe r of proteins from polyacrylamide ge ls to nitrocellulose shee ts was performed by tank blotting as described before (21) , using the mini trans-blot electrophoresis transfe r cell from bio-rad. to enhance transfe r, sds was adde d in a ® nal concentration of 0.05% (w/v) to the electrode buffer.ch em ilum in escence binding assay. intact bbm ve sicles or e lectrophoretically separate d membrane proteins were immobilized on nitrocellulose sheets by the dot blot (22) or we ste rn blot technique. free binding sites of nitrocellulose we re blocked with 2% (v/v) twe e n 20 in phosphatebuffe red saline (pbs), ph 7.4. to diminish nonspeci® c adhe rence, 0.05% (v/v) tween 20 in pbs was used in each washing or incubation step. afte r incubation with biotinylated proteins overnight at 4°c, bound probes we re detecte d using peroxidase-conjugated streptavidin and ecl blotting dete ction reage nts. chemilumine scence signals we re qua ntitate d d e nsitom e trica lly with the vide odensitomete r syste m biopro® l (ltf labortechnik, wasserburg, ge rmany), using the program bio-1d ve rsion 5.08 (v ilber lourmat biotechnology, marne la valleâ e, france). binding intensity was e xpressed as densitometric units per microgram bbm protein in relation to biotinylated standard proteins (bio-rad), which we re applied directly to nitrocellulose. saturation and inhibition of protein binding we re assessed as criteria for binding speci® city. inhibition of protein binding was measured by addition of nonlabeled proteins to solutions of biotinylated probes. change s in binding we re calculated in relation to binding of biotinylated proteins alone. maximal binding intensities were calculated from results of saturation e xperiments.statistical an alysis. all data are expressed as mean 6 standard deviation (sd). student's t te st was used for statistical analysis of diffe rences of bbm binding capacities betwe en newborns and adults.ch aracterization of bbm vesicles. bbm vesicle s were isolate d from rat small inte stines, forming close d vesicle s of varying size s. cytoske leton prote ins of the brush borde r appe are d as e le ctron-de nse mate rial inside the vesicle s ( figure 1 ). enrichm ent of bbm marke r enzyme s indicate d suf® cie nt purity of membrane preparations (table 1) maa binding was not saturate d in the concentration range te ste d ( figure 3 ). food prote in binding to adult bbm re ache d 18.6 to 27.4 de nsitom e tric units/m g bbm prote in e xce pt blg, which was signi® cantly less bound to bbm ( table 2) . adult bbm bound signi® cantly more pt-gli, cas, blg, ala, bsa, and o v a than ne wborn membrane s. lectin binding re¯ected known change s in membrane glycosylation during postnatal maturation. according to the shift from sialylation to fucosylation, ne wborn bbm bound more pna, maa, and sna, but less uea i ( table 2 ).in h ibition of bin din g. be sides saturation, spe ci® city of food prote in binding to bbm was studie d by inhibition e xpe riments. binding of pt-gli, cas, blg, and ala was inhibite d by a 10 3 -fold e xcess of nonlabe le d prote in. howe ver, the obse rved aggre gation of bsa and o va, de ® ne d as the ability of the biotinylate d prote in to bind to the immobilize d unmarke d counte rpart, was not compatible with this kind of e xpe rime nt (figure 4) . o nly in the case of weak binding due to low conce ntrations of biotinylate d prote ins was a 10 3 -fold exce ss of nonlabe le d prote in suf® cient to achie ve 100% inhibition (data not shown) . with concentrations above 0.01 m g/ml, assay sensitivity did not allow 100% inhibition of speci® c le ctin binding, too, using e ithe r nonlabe le d lectins or monosacchari des (figure 4 ). food protein bin din g to isolated mem bran e protein s. binding characte ristics of isolate d membrane prote ins were furthe r analyze d in weste rn blots to de ® ne maturational diffe rences. in accordance with results obtaine d with whole bbm in dot blots, isolate d membrane prote ins of adult rats showe d highe r binding capacitie s for pt-gli, ala, blg, and o v a and more binding sites than ne wborn rats ( figure 5 ). this maturational diffe rence was also se e n with bsa and cas (de nsitom etric pro® les not shown) . common or at least adjoining binding sites for food prote ins were de te cted on newborn membrane prote ins of 124 ± 131 kda, 117± 120 kda, and 66 kda. adult membrane prote ins of 128 ± 138 kda, 115± 120 kda, 103± 105 kda, 90 ± 92 kda, 85± 86 kda, 65± 67 kda, and 45± 46 kda share d food prote in binding abilitie s. to e xclude that the se maturational diffe rences were due to methodical errors, e g, failure to isolate ne wborn bbm prote ins, lectin binding was studie d in western blots, too. newborn membrane prote ins had more binding site s and e nhance d binding capacity for sna, pna, and maa than adults, whe re as uea i binding was lowe r in ne wborns compare d to adults (data not shown) .inhibition e xpe rime nts with unre late d prote ins indicate d common binding of food prote ins be cause cow' s milk prote ins, e spe cially cas, were able to re duce bbm binding of an unre late d prote in, whe reas o v a interfe red to a lower e xte nt with cow' s milk prote in and gliadin peptide binding (table 3) . it was not possible to discriminate whe the r inte rfere nce was due to prote in interactions in solution, to nonspe ci® c membrane binding, or to the pre sence of common binding site s. on the othe r hand, cow' s milk prote ins and o v a did not inte rfe re with le ctin± bbm interactions and did not disturb the che milumine scence reaction. addition of a 10 4 -fold e xce ss of nonlabe led food prote ins to solutions of biotinylate d lectins at a conce ntration of 0.1 m g/ml did not re sult in signi® cant change s of le ctin binding. due to its strong adhe rence to bbm, only cas was able to re duce le ctin binding by 19.4 ± 37.7% .diffe rent approache s have be en re porte d to study bbm± prote in interactions and to characte rize deve lopme ntal change s in bbm structure . be side histochemical studie s (23, 24) and utilization of isolate d enterocyte s (25) and of gut sacs (3, 13, 26, 27) , bbm vesicle s have bee n use d. as the smalle st unit for studying membrane structure and function (28) , bbm vesicle s allow description of e nte rocytic binding structure s in detail, at the same time reducing the complexity of the inve stigate d syste m. binding characte ristics of rat bbm ve sicle s for food prote ins and le ctins have bee n asse ssed in centrifugation and ® ltration binding assays (14, 16, 29 ± 33) . a conside rable drawback of the se methods was the ir low sensitivity in de tecting weak food prote in binding.to improve se nsitivity, we use d a chemilumine scence binding assay in this study. food prote in binding to bbm of ne wborn and adult rats was found to be spe ci® c with re gard to saturation and inhibition. ove rall food prote in binding capacity of bbm was comparable to le ctins, except for blg. saturation of food prote in binding was only re ached at 10-to 100fold highe r molar conce ntrations compare d to le ctins and cas. this differe nce betwe en food prote ins and le ctins is in accordance with former studie s (16, 33) . in contrast, the former centrifugation binding assay did not show any saturation and inhibition of food prote in binding to bbm vesicle s (13, 14, 16) . in our opinion, results of nonspe ci® c food prote in binding to bbm were obscure d by methodological dif® cultie s in the centrifugation binding assay, which did not allow washing of ligand± bbm comple xe s without concurrent loss of binding signals.while colye r et al (25) reporte d up to 50% inhibition of gliadin pe ptide binding to isolate d e nte rocyte s, farreâ castany et al (34) demonstrate d nonspe ci® c binding of a pe ptic± tryptic dige st of gliadin to the colon carcinom a e pithe lial cell line ht-29. the authors studie d bindin g prope rtie s of ovalbum inblocke d and glutaralde hyde -® xed ht-29 cells, which might be an e xplanation for the obse rve d concentration-de pe nde nt, but nonspe ci® c, gliadin binding. nevertheless, gliadin is able to associate with many prote ins, mainly by hydrophobic interactions (35) . to exclude weak hydrophobic inte ractions be twee n food prote ins and bbm, we studie d binding phe nomena in pre sence of the de te rge nt twee n 20.experiments with bbm vesicle s in dot blots gave a marke d incre ase in food prote in binding capacitie s from ne wborn to adult rats. this ® nding contradicts pre vious re sults of a maturational de crease of food prote in binding to rat bbm (14, 16) and might be due to the more sensitive and spe ci® c binding assay use d in this study. howe ver, our ® ndings are in accordance with data on increased binding and uptake of blg and bsa obtaine d in gut sacs of adult rats compare d to juve nile rats (13) .for measure ment of strong and highly speci® c le ctin binding to bbm, the binding assay system was not found as critical. the same maturational change s in bbm glycosylation were obse rve d using e ithe r the chemilumine scence binding assay in this study or othe r methods as de scribe d e lse where (29, 30, 32) . neve rthe le ss, minor differe nce s indicate d enhance d sensitivity of the chemilum inescence assay. binding of sna to adult bbm and of uea i to ne wborn membrane prote ins was measurable , in contrast to the earlie r re sults of taatje s and roth (24) and le noir et al (36) , which were base d on a diffe rent methodology.the maturational decrease in the lipid/prote in ratio of bbm (10, membrane prote in pro® les in figure 5 ) is accompanie d by an increase in food prote in binding to isolate d bbm prote ins. in western blots, membrane prote ins of adult rats had more binding site s and highe r binding capacitie s than bbm prote ins of ne wborn rats. although membrane prote ins are denature d during sds-page , the ir binding prope rtie s are not necessarily de stroye d, as has be en shown for seve ral re ceptor± ligand inte ractions in weste rn blots (37, 38) .o ur data of multiple binding site s do not support the hypothe sis of distinct re ceptors for food prote ins comparable to the e nzyme aminope ptidase n as a receptor for coronavirus (39) . moreover, prote in± oligosaccharide inte ractions le ading to membrane attachme nt could be e xclude d be cause food prote in binding patte rns did not show any similarity to le ctin patte rns in western blots. lectin-like binding characte ristics of bsa and ala binding to rat bbm vesicle s and of gliadin to model glycoprote ins were rule d out earlie r by othe r inve stigators (27, 40) . in our opinion, prote in± prote in inte ractions are responsible for food prote in attachme nt to bbm. this kind of interaction was obviously not in¯uence d by the diffe re nt composition and physicoche mical characte ristics of the investigate d cow's milk prote ins, gliadin pe ptide s, and ovalbumin. o n the contrary, common or at le ast adjoining binding site s e xist for the diffe re nt food prote ins, as indicate d by western blot ® ndings. inhibition by unre late d food prote ins supports this possibility. control e xpe riments could exclude artifacts cause d by biotinylation of food prote ins. v e sicle de struction leading to re le ase of brush borde r cytoske leton prote ins could possibly in¯uence binding characte ristics re corde d in we ste rn blots. for example , actin as a major compone nt of adult brush borde r might have caused the positive signals in the are a of 45 kda. there fore furthe r e xpe rime nts have to be conducte d to ide ntify structure s in membrane binding and their orientation towards the intestinal lume n in vivo.in conclusion, contrary to e arlie r re ports, bbm food prote in binding was found increased during ente rocytic maturation of rat small intestine. it has to be ke pt in mind that any experimental de sign using isolate d bbm vesicle s in vitro lacks important parts of the mucosal barrie r (41) . diffe rences in prote in re sistance to inte stinal hydrolysis (gliadin, blg in contrast to cas) (42) in¯ue nce the ir acce ss to small intestinal e pithe lial cells in vivo. for e valuation of conseque nces of change s in food prote in binding capacity cause d by alte rations in bbm composition, it should be inve stigate d whe the r proce sse s of uptake and intrace llular processing or signal transduction occur. it is well-known that endocytosis is stimulate d by prior membrane adsorption (43, 44) . moreover, diffe rence s of intrace llular proce ssing after uptake of membranebound prote ins or pinocytosis of¯uid-phase molecule s have bee n re porte d for small intestinal e pithelial cells (4, 5, 45) . o ur results clearly indicate that bbm composition in¯ue nces its capacity for speci® c food prote in binding. in this re gard, studie s of enterocytic membrane alte rations possibly involve d in the de velopm ent of food-se nsitive e nte ropathie s would be worthwhile .diabetes is a chronic metabolic syndrome caused by insulin deficiency and resistance. there are 200 million diabetic individuals in the world, with only approximately one-half being diagnosed, and these numbers are expected to double by 2030. the disease often results in long-term microvascular, neurological, and macrovascular complications, including retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy, and increased risk of cardiovascular disease. excessive activation of angiotensin ii (angii) is an important underlying mechanism for the development of diabetes, and ang (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) is hypothesized to counteract it. furthermore, the reninangiotensin system (ras) is significantly involved in the development of diabetes and its complications. the activation of ras causes pancreatic β cell dysfunction by suppressing pro-insulin biosynthesis, glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (gsis) and first phase insulin secretion (1) (2) , as well as by increasing islet fibrosis (3) and oxidative stress (4) . the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2)-angiotensin (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) [ang (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) ]-mas axis is suggested to have an antagonistic effect on the ras, while ang (1-7) is the main antagonist of angii. angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (acei) and angiotensin receptor antagonist (arb) can alleviate these pathological changes (3, (5) (6) (7) . also, several clinical experiments have demonstrated the effectiveness of ras blockade in reducing the onset of diabetes (8) (9) (10) (11) .in 2006, it was demonstrated that patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) were more inclined to exhibit higher blood glucose (12) , and this may be partly due to the fact that ace2 is a functional receptor for the sars coronavirus (13) . thus we hypothesized that the ace2-ang (1-7)-mas axis has a protective effect on pancreatic β cell function. our previous study demonstrated for the first time that loss of ace2 led to impaired glucose homeostasis in mice. in addition, ace2 knockout (ace2-/y) mice exhibit progressive impairments in glucose tolerance and reduced first-phase insulin secretion (14) . the present study aimed to investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms of these effects. accordingly, ace2 gene therapy improved glycemic control in diabetic mice via ang (1-7) (15). ang (1-7) is hypothesized to exhibit antioxidant effects in diabetic nephropathy, hypertension, cardiovascular diseases and in the brain (16) (17) (18) (19) . these data confirm the protective role of the ace2-ang (1-7)-mas axis in the pancreas and establish a novel target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus.oxidative stress is one of the most important factors in β cell loss (20) . however, little is known regarding the correlation between ang (1-7) and oxidative stress in the pancreas. in the present study, the protective effect of ang (1-7) on oxidative β cell damage was investigated. the protective effect was shown to occur by improving gsis, glucose stimulated calcium (gsca) responses and the mitochondrial membrane potential (mmp), which was demonstrated previously (21) , and reducing the production of reactive oxygen species (ros). the selective receptor antagonist a779 was used to confirm the protective role of ang (1-7).cell culture. ins-1 insulinoma cells were a gift from professor liu yong (shanghai institutes for biological science, chinese academy of sciences, shanghai, china), which were originally supplied by dr claes wollheim, university medical center (geneva, switzerland). the culture medium consisted of rpmi-1640 (hyclone, logan, ut, usa) with 11.1 mmol/l d-glucose supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (hyclone), 100 u/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin (both from invitrogen; thermo fisher technology, inc., waltham, ma, usa), 10 mmol/l hepes, 2 mmol/l l-glutamine, 1 mmol/l sodium pyruvate and 50 µmol/l mercaptoethanol, in 5% co 2 at 37˚c. to determine the effect of h 2 o 2 , ins-1 cells were grown for 48 h and subsequently incubated under basal conditions or in the presence of either 10 -8 mol/l ang (1-7) (sigma-aldrich), 10 -6 mol/l a779 (sigma-aldrich) or ang (1-7) and a779 together, for 2 h. h 2 o 2 at a final concentration of 250 µm was added in the final 15 min. untreated cells served as a control. the cell supernatant was rapidly removed and rinsed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (pbs; hyclone). insulin secretion was determined at 16.7 mm glucose krbb and insulin levels were measured using an insulin enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (emd millipore, billerica, ma, usa).intracellular ca 2+ measurement. ins-1 cells were loaded with 5 µmol/l fluo-3am (biotium, hayward, ca, usa) in a 40-min incubation at 37˚c in 3.3 mmol/l krbb following pretreatment with ang (1-7) or a779 for 2 h and then, in the last 15 min, h 2 o 2 was added at a 250-µm concentration. cellular ca 2+ signaling was determined with confocal microscopy (leica tcs sp5; leica microsystems gmbh, wetzlar, germany). images were collected using 488 nm excitation (em) and the emission (em) was determined at >505 nm.ros determination. ins-1 cells were grown in rpmi-1640 in 6-well plates for 48 h, followed by incubation with ang (1-7) or a779 for 2 h, then a concentration of 250 µm h 2 o 2 was added in the last 15 min. cells were loaded with 5 µmol/l dihydroethidium (dhe) ros (vigorous biotechnology co., ltd.; beijing, china) detection and suspended in pbs for 20 min at 37˚c in the dark. the cells were rinsed twice in pbs and collected with 0.05% trypsin (hyclone; ge healthcare life sciences, logan, ut, usa). following centrifugation at 140 x g for 5 min, pellets were resuspended in 500 µl pbs. ros was determined using intracellular ros capture dhe with flow cytometry (bd facscalibur; bd biosciences, franklin lakes, nj, usa). briefly, an ex wavelength of 480-535 nm was used to determine em >590-610 nm. cells were then divided into two subgroups: ros-negative cells, which exhibit a very low fluorescence intensity and ros-positive cells, which emit red fluorescence. ten-thousand events per sample were collected.mmp. mmp was assessed using jc-1 (beyotime institute of biotechnology) in ins-1 cells. cells grown in 6-well plates were incubated with 1 ml jc-1 (2 mg/ml) for 20 min at 37˚c. the cells were centrifuged at 1,000 x g for 5 min, while the pellets were resuspended in 500 µl pbs. carbonyl cyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone (cccp; beyotime institute of biotechnology), a mitochondrial electron transport chain inhibitor, served as a positive control. cccp (10 m) was added to the cells for 20 min. in total, 10,000 cells from each well were analyzed by flow cytometry (ex, 490 nm, em, 590 nm). color change from green to red indicated an increase in the mmp or the improvement of mitochondrial function.statistical analysis. statistical analyses were performed using graphpad prism 5 (http://www.graphpad.com/), and data are expressed as means ± standard error of the mean. one-way analysis of variance followed by tukey's or dunnett's tests were used to compare all groups or selected groups to the control and p<0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.insulin release. the quantity of insulin released from the ins-1 cells was significantly increased, as expected, when the glucose concentration in the incubation medium was increased from 3.3 to 16.7 mmol/l (fig. 1) .groups treated with h 2 o 2 exhibited significantly impaired insulin secretion (51.8%) compared with the control groups. pre-treatment with 10 -8 mol/l ang (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) prior to the addition of h 2 o 2 can restore insulin secretion significantly, although not to basal levels (26.1%; p<0.05), and its antagonist a779 can inhibit this restorative effect (p<0. 05; fig. 2 ).to determine the potential antioxidant role of ang (1-7) in pancreatic β cells, ins-1 cells were used to measure the level of ros. as shown in fig. 3 , adding 250 µmol/l h 2 o 2 for 15 min to the ins-1 cells clearly increased the production of ros compared with the control groups at 16.7 mm glucose. pre-treatment with 10 -8 mol/l ang (1-7) for 2 h prior to adding h 2 o 2 reduced the level of ros (p<0.05), while treatment with 10 -8 mol/l for 2 h a779 selectively inhibited this effect (fig. 3) .intracellular ca 2+ imaging of gsca. gsca responses are one of the most commonly used indexes of β cell f unction. t hey ca n provide real-time results of β cell function. as shown in fig. 4 , gsca signaling in ins-1 cells consists of three phases: phase 0, the initial dip below baseline due to calcium uptake by the endoplasmic reticulum; phase 1, the rapid rise to peak calcium level concomitant with the release of pre-docked insulin granules; and phase 2, the elevated plateau. addition of 250 µmol/l h 2 o 2 for 15 min to ins-1 cells decreased the fluorescence intensity compared with the control group. pre-treatment with a 10 -8 mol/l ang (1-7) for 2 h prior to adding h 2 o 2 upregulated calcium fluorescence by 25%, and a779 can selectively inhibited this effect. furthermore, pre-incubation with ang (1-7) restored the amplitude of calcium in phase 1 and a779 blocked this effect (fig. 4) .ang (1-7)-treated ins-1 cells (fig. 5a) , which was inhibited by treatment with a779. furthermore, the red fluorescence, which indicates greater mmp, increased significantly following the addition of ang (1-7), which was blocked by a779 treatment, as demonstrated by a significant increase in green fluorescence (fig. 5b ). as shown in fig. 5 , ins-1 cells treated with 250 µmol/l h 2 o 2 for 15 min exhibited a decrease in the level of mmp caused by cccp compared with that in the controls at 16.7 mm glucose. pre-treatment with a 10 -8 mol/l ang (1-7) for 2 h prior to adding h 2 o 2 increased the level of mmp significantly. treatment with 10 -8 mol/l a779 for 2 h inhibited this effect.the present study demonstrated that ang (1-7) can partially restore insulin secretion from ins-1 cells (which is reduced by oxidative stress injury) and reduce the level of intracellular ros. this protective effect was associated with the change in cellular calcium signaling and mitochondrial function. ang (1-7) can restore early phase calcium signaling and mitochondrial membrane potential, and has a protective effect on mitochondrial function; however, ang-(1-7) protective effects could be blockaded by its specific inhibitor, a779. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to confirm the antioxidant effect of ang (1-7) in ins-1 β cells.oxidative stress results in an increase in the production of ros and a reduction of the scavenging mechanisms. it has been well-documented that ros exhibits an important role in the development of diabetes. as the end products of oxidative stress, a certain level of ros is required for glucose homeostasis (22) . however, excess ros leads to β cell dysfunction by promoting β cell apoptosis and inactivating genes involved in insulin synthesis, such as v-maf avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog a and pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (23) . in addition, hyperactivity of ras leads to the development of β cell dysfunction by increasing oxidative stress and fibrosis (3) (4) . ang (1-7) is considered to be an important antagonist of angii and it has been shown to be able to reduce oxidative stress in the kidneys, cardiovascular system and neural system; however, the effects of ang (1-7) in pancreatic β cell remains unknown. we hypothesized that the effects of ang (1-7) occur via the same mechanisms in pancreatic β cells. as shown in the present study, ang (1-7) reduced the intracellular ros levels in ins-1 cells and had a protective effect on β cell function. bindom et al (15) found that ace2 overexpression in the pancreas of diabetic rats improves the function of β cells. furthermore, the protective effect can be blocked by its specific inhibitor a779, which suggested that this effect was mediated by ang (1-7) (15) and is consistent with the findings of the present study. in addition, chronic injection of ang (1-7) improves insulin sensitivity in rats with a high-fructose diet (24) , mas receptor knockout mice exhibited decreased insulin sensitivity, impaired glucose tolerance and glucose uptake (25) . these studies demonstrated the protective role of ang (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) in the development of diabetes and metabolic syndrome. in addition, a number of studies in other systems supported the idea that the protective role of ang (1-7) occurs by reducing oxidative stress. ace2 overexpression results in a reduction of ros formation in the brain (17) . furthermore, continuous intravenous infusion of ang (1-7) restores vasodilation and protects the myocardium via inhibition of oxidative stress (24) .in pancreatic β cells, the regulation of intracellular calcium is crucial to the processes of insulin secretion (26) ; thus, analyzing gsca responses can provide information regarding the viability and function of pancreatic β cells. gsca results can be obtained rapidly and at a lower cost than gsis (27) . in addition, the calcium curve directly reflects the changes in insulin secretion within the first 15 min following the addition of glucose. in the present study, it was observed that the intracellular calcium fluorescence intensity and the amplitude of insulin secretion in the first phase significantly decreased following treatment with h 2 o 2 . this result is consistent with the insulin secretion experiment, which suggests that the reduction of insulin secretion is correlated with a decrease in intracellular calcium. ang (1-7) can restore the calcium a b fluorescent intensity and the signaling peak of first phase insulin secretion. moreover, a779 can block this effect. this study confirmed that oxidative stress can cause a decline in intracellular calcium, which results in the reduction of first phase insulin secretion in pancreatic cells, and ang-(1-7) can restore this early β cell dysfunction associated with calcium levels. our previous study showed that ace2 knockout mice exhibited progressive impairments in glucose tolerance and reduced first-phase insulin secretion (14) ; thus, in vivo and in vitro experiments were consistent. these results demonstrated the importance of the ace2-ang (1-7)-mas axis in the early stages of diabetes and its protective role in the early treatment of diabetes, as well as the correlation with ang (1-7) and oxidative stress in ins-1 cells.islet β cells detect changes in blood glucose and maintain glucose homeostasis. the mitochondrial energy metabolism conditions in pancreatic β cells are crucial for the capacity of sensing blood glucose levels (28) . the importance of mitochondria in type 2 diabetes has been demonstrated by the identification of causal mutations in the mitochondrial dna in pancreatic β cells (29, 30) . excessive angii can increase mitochondrial ros production, and reduce the mitochondrial membrane potential and respiratory control ratio (21) . recent studies have shown that at1r blockers can protect the mitochondria in the kidney in a type 1 diabetes mouse model. in the present study, ang (1-7) restored the impaired mmp and exhibited protective effects on mitochondrial function. the protective effect on mitochondrial function is likely to be one of the mechanisms underlying the antioxidant effect of ang (1-7) in pancreatic β cells.in conclusion, to the best of our knowledge, the present study was the first to demonstrate the antioxidant effect of ang (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) in the ins-1 pancreatic cell line and the restorative effects of ang (1-7) on insulin secretion. this was associated with restoration of calcium signaling, reduction of ros generation and restoration of the impaired mitochondrial function in oxidative stress conditions. the effects observed following treatment with ang (1-7) were inhibited by its specific antagonist, a779. this study demonstrated that reducing ros production and restoring mitochondrial function are likely to be the mechanisms underlying the protective effects of ang (1-7) on pancreatic β cell function under oxidative stress. notably, this experiment confirms the importance of ang (1-7) in the early stages of diabetes. these findings may assist with the treatment of diabetes in future, potentially during the development of novel therapeutic strategies.since the earliest cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) were reported (1), our care delivery systems have been reorganized and challenged in unprecedented ways. patients with underlying cardiovascular conditions, including heart failure (hf), are at risk for severe infection and complications (2, 3) . special considerations are needed for patients with advanced hf, including those supported by durable left ventricular assist devices (lvads) and heart transplant (ht) recipients. this review aims to summarize emerging data regarding the development of hf secondary to covid-19, covid-19 infection in patients with advanced hf, and the implications of the pandemic on care delivery for non-infected patients with hf.covid-19 may cause or worsen hf through a variety of mechanisms including myocardial ischemia or infarction, increased oxygen demand, elevations in pulmonary pressures, pulmonary embolism, myocarditis, stress cardiomyopathy, and diffuse cytokine release (4) (figure 1) .these may concurrently lead to arrhythmias, cardiogenic shock, and sudden cardiac death (2, 5) .patients with covid-19 are at higher risk for thrombosis in the arterial and venous circulations due to endothelial dysfunction, inflammation, oxidative stress, and platelet activation (6) . acute coronary syndromes with plaque rupture leading to type i myocardial infarction may occur in this setting (6) . hypoxemic respiratory failure and increased myocardial oxygen demand may lead to oxygen supply-demand mismatch and precipitate type 2 myocardial infarction (4) . both may trigger decompensation of pre-existing hf or development of de novo acute hf. right ventricular failure can also develop secondary to elevated pulmonary pressures in the setting of ards and/or pulmonary embolism (7) .covid-19-associated myocarditis has been demonstrated by visualization of covid-19 viral particles on endomyocardial biopsy and detection of diffuse myocardial edema on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (mri) (8, 9) . attempted myocarditis treatment strategies have included lopinavir/ritonavir, hydroxychloroquine, systemic glucocorticoid therapy, and intravenous immunoglobulin (9, 10) .some data suggest that cardiomyopathy may not be uncommon in patients with covid-19. in a u.s. report of 21 patients with severe covid-19 disease, 7 (33%) developed cardiomyopathy, which was defined as newly decreased left ventricular systolic function with one of the following: 1) increased cardiac biomarkers, 2) decreased central venous oxygen saturation, or 3) clinical signs of shock (11) . in another cohort of patients with covid-19 from china, hf developed in 41/83 (49%) of those who died compared to 3/94 (3%) of those who recovered (12) . among those who developed hf, approximately 50% did not have a pre-existing history of hypertension or cardiovascular disease.the underlying mechanisms for these cardiomyopathies are difficult to elucidate given inpatient diagnostic testing limitations. for example, the true prevalence of myocarditis secondary to covid-19 may be hard to determine without the use of definitive endomyocardial biopsies and routine cardiac imaging in a wide cohort of infected patients. accordingly, the diagnosis of myocarditis is often made using elevations in biomarkers, echocardiography demonstrating reduction in systolic function, and/or worsening hemodynamics or arrhythmias.large registries like the american heart association (aha) covid-19 cvd registry (13) will help capture the prevalence of systolic dysfunction and incidence of myocardial recovery.ongoing studies will also explore the pathology of myocarditis and hf more broadly in sars-cov-2 infection (14) .patients with covid-19 can develop a cytokine release syndrome with hyperinflammation leading to progressive shock and multiorgan failure. in patients with cardiac involvement, important questions remain regarding the use and efficacy of mechanical circulatory support.device insertion and maintenance require significant equipment, blood products, and personnel; health systems may have limited resources to deploy these therapies, particularly in older patients with other co-morbidities.the extracorporeal life support organization has released guidance regarding the use of ecmo for patients with covid-19 who develop severe cardiopulmonary failure (15) . they suggest that in resource-limited settings, younger patients without comorbidities and/or health care workers should be the highest priority for support. ecmo should rarely be used in older patients with significant comorbidities and multiorgan failure (15) .angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (acei), angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs), and angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitors (arni) are principal components of guideline-directed medial therapy for patients with chronic systolic hf. the sars-cov-2 virus, the causative viral agent for covid-19, uses the ace2 receptor for cell entry (figure 2) , and concerns have been raised regarding this interaction with respect to disease virulence (16) . large retrospective studies have since suggested that acei/arb use are not associated with increased rates of covid-19 infection or risk of severe disease (17, 18) .a joint statement from the heart failure society of america (hfsa), american college of cardiology (acc) and aha recommends continuation of raas antagonists in patients who are prescribed these medications for hf or other cardiovascular indications (19) .raas inhibition may have potential therapeutic benefit. data from the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) epidemic demonstrated that injection of sars-cov-1 into mice worsened acute lung failure, which was attenuated by renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-system (raas) blockade (20) . in pre-clinical studies, sacubitril-valsartan has been shown to reduce levels of proinflammatory cytokines, increase lymphocyte counts (21) , and inhibit expression of proinflammatory genes including interleukin-6, a potential therapeutic target in covid-19 (22) .patients with hf have pre-existing risk factors for venous thromboembolism including possible stasis of blood in the legs, heart, and endothelial injury (23, 24) . similarly, patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy and atrial fibrillation are at risk for arterial thrombosis (23) . in women with hf, additional thrombotic risks include oral contraceptive use, hormone replacement therapy, and breast cancer (25) . in patients with durable lvad support who are already at increased risk for thrombosis, the effects of covid-19 infection on the risk for stroke or pump thrombosis are currently unknown.patients with hf on anticoagulation who require admission for covid-19 should be continued on such agents unless a strong contraindication exists. all hospitalized hf patients with covid-19 without a pre-existing indication should receive prophylactic doses of anticoagulation (26) .this and other therapeutic considerations are described in the central illustration.underlying pulmonary disease is common in patients with hf. approximately 30% of such patients have chronic obstructive lung disease which independently increases their risk for hospitalization and mortality (27) . these patients may have pulmonary hypertension as a consequence of parenchymal lung disease in addition to elevated left ventricular filling pressures (28) . in patients with covid-19, hypoxemic respiratory failure and ards can exacerbate pulmonary vasoconstriction and interstitial edema, worsening pulmonary hypertension even in patients without pre-existing lung disease (29) . in patients with pre-existing biventricular failure, further elevation in pulmonary pressures secondary to ards can worsen right ventricular function.patients with advanced hf including those on durable lvad support have severely reduced functional capacity (30, 31) , as measured by peak vo2, and impaired ability to augment cardiac output in response to physiologic stressors. these factors collectively decrease their cardiopulmonary reserve.despite preliminary reports suggesting that hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin may improve both agents have been associated with qt interval prolongation, increasing the risk for arrhythmias, including torsades de pointes, and sudden cardiac death (34, 35) . patients with hf often have structural and electrical abnormalities leading to delayed ventricular repolarization and qt prolongation on the surface electrocardiogram (ecg) (36) . prolonged qtc intervals are independent predictors of adverse outcomes in patients with hf (37) . many patients with hf may be prescribed qt-prolonging drugs as well as loop diuretics that can lead to electrolyte abnormalities and increase the risk of serious arrhythmias (38) . additional risk factors for qt interval prolongation in hospitalized patients include female sex, older age, sepsis, and a baseline qtc >450 milliseconds on admission (39) .systemic inflammation underlies both acute and chronic hf (40) . the hemodynamic stress of hf stimulates the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines including tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukin-6, and interleukin-1 beta (40) . furthermore, co-existing co-morbidities such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, and hypertension may perpetuate a persistent inflammatory state leading to multiorgan involvement and endothelial dysfunction (40) . inflammatory markers used to determine covid-19 severity such as c-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase, nt-probnp, and interleukin-6 may already be elevated in hf including patients on lvad support (40) (41) (42) .therefore, values obtained in the setting of covid-19 should be compared to prior values, if available.despite efforts to maintain social distancing, community spread of covid-19 is increasing.patients with hf who self-quarantine may still be at risk for acquiring covid-19 as they commonly have external nursing support. advanced care planning is critical for all hf patients including populations on lvad support and ht recipients, particularly for patients in areas with high covid-19 prevalence. ideally, clinicians should initiate these conversations with patients and their caregivers at the onset of their hf diagnosis, and not at the time of emergent hospitalization. for patients with hf who develop covid-19 and require hospital admission, care teams should involve their hf specialists in conversations regarding goals of care, including the deactivation of implantable cardioverter-defibrillators (icds) (43) . patients should be encouraged to have these discussions with their families even after admission, utilizing videoconferencing technology, as institutional visitor restrictions frequently limit the bedside presence of family members.patients on lvad support who contract covid-19 are at risk for severe viral infection due to older age, comorbidities, and immunosuppressed state. they suffer from compromised cellular immunity evidenced by aberrant t-cell activation, heightened susceptibility of cd4 t cells to spontaneous apoptosis, and cytokine imbalances (44) . this "functionally immunosuppressed state" increases susceptibility to complications from opportunistic infections (45) .cases of covid-19 have been reported in patients on destination therapy lvad support who developed ards and multiorgan failure with evidence of cytokine release syndrome (46, 47) .both cases highlighted the challenges of prone positioning in lvad patients given concerns regarding increased right ventricular pressures and right ventricular failure. while international society for heart and lung transplantation (ishlt) guidance suggests that lvad patients can be "proned" for the management of hypoxemic respiratory failure (48) , more data are needed.respiratory viruses have been shown to cause rapid progression to pneumonia, greater disease severity, and prolonged viral shedding in solid organ transplant recipients (49) . post-transplant patients are more likely to develop bacterial or fungal superinfection due to their immunocompromised state (49) . although the anti-inflammatory effects of immunosuppressants may mitigate disease severity through reduction in cytokine production (50, 51) , past experience with sars and mers showed that clinical presentations of transplant patients were similar to the general population (2) . notably, mtor inhibitors have been associated with increased susceptibility to viral infections (52, 53) .cases of covid-19 have been reported in ht recipients (54-56) ( table 1) . given their immunosuppressed states, presentations may be atypical, and high suspicion for covid-19illness should be maintained. in the largest report of 28 ht recipients with covid-19, 79%were hospitalized and 25% required mechanical ventilation (56) . mycophenolate mofetil was discontinued in 70% and calcineurin inhibitors were reduced in 26% of patients. seven patients (25%) died.for ht patients with covid-19 illness, transplant teams should consider dose reducing calcineurin inhibitors and reducing or holding antimetabolites. drug interactions between immunosuppressants and covid-19 therapeutics should be reviewed (57) . leukopenia is common in patients with covid-19, although it is typically manifest by lymphopenia rather than neutropenia (58) . this should be considered in newly transplanted patients on valganciclovir and mycophenolate, which can have similar myelosuppressive effects. in patients who develop allograft dysfunction, distinguishing rejection from viral myocardial involvement may be difficult, as availability of endomyocardial biopsies may be restricted (57) .the reorganization of healthcare structures spurred by the covid-19 pandemic has significantly affected patients with hf (figure 3) . to reduce sars-cov-2 transmission and maintain a healthy workforce, health systems have largely transitioned to non-contact care delivery methods for ambulatory care. in response to these challenges, the centers for medicare and medicaidresponse supplemental appropriations act in early march 2020. under the 1135 waiver, medicare will pay for telehealth services provided in inpatient, outpatient, and home settings by a range of providers.types of covered services include telehealth visits during which an audiovisual telecommunication system is used; virtual check-ins, which are brief check-ins between patient and provider via telephone or another device to decide whether additional services are needed; and e-visits, which are communications between patients and providers through an online portal (59) . commercial payers are also reimbursing for telehealth, however policies surrounding rates and payments are evolving. penalties against providers for violations of the health insurance portability and accountability act are also being waived, allowing the use of more commonly available telecommunications platforms.the feasibility and safety of telemedicine for patients with hf is well established, however its use has not yet been reliably associated with reduction in emergency department visits or therapeutic inertia in hf care is an ongoing risk during this period. close monitoring of electrolyte and renal function is critical to safe dose adjustment of guideline directed therapies for hf with reduced ejection fraction and diuretics (61) . however, the reduction in available laboratory services during the pandemic and patients' hesitancy to risk covid-19 exposure may limit up-titration of raas antagonists.in addition to providing standard hf care, clinicians should regularly inquire regarding dietary and lifestyle habits related to covid-19. due to physical and social isolation and other stresses, changes in nutritional status, food availability, alcohol intake, physical activity, and social support may occur and contribute to worsening hf. this reliance on remote care has the potential to exacerbate preexisting health inequities (62) .disadvantaged populations, some underrepresented racial and ethnic groups, and those with limited access to the internet and/or smart devices may not derive benefit from the expansion of these innovations. older adults, who comprise a significant portion of the u.s. population with hf, may have educational, visual, auditory, and cognitive impairments that hinder their participation in remote care. programs should incorporate social workers and case managers to maximize outreach to these at-risk populations. the option for in-person clinic visits should remain available for patients without access to telemedicine services, high-risk patients (e.g. patients on continuous inotropes) or those for whom physical examination is critical for clinical decision-making. aggressive risk reduction practices should be in place during these visits.programs may benefit from establishing triage principles for outpatient virtual versus in-person visits. virtual visits may be best utilized for medication titration and optimization for stable patients with acc/aha stage c hf. ht recipients on stable immunosuppression at low risk for allograft rejection and hemodynamically optimized lvad patients may be managed remotely.in-person visits should be considered for recently hospitalized patients, patients approaching stage d hf, on continuous inotropes, undergoing evaluation for advanced hf therapies, who are newly post-lvad implantation/ht, and those with new-onset hf. virtual and in-person ambulatory schedules should be constructed to accommodate both routine and urgent visits.given uncertainty surrounding the future course of covid-19, telemedicine is likely to endure as an important component of advanced hf disease management. monitoring the safety and efficacy of remote care for hf and establishing evidence-based best practices for virtual visits should become a priority for hf programs.additional information regarding existing platforms, workflows, and care models for telemedicine in hf is provided in a recently published statement from the hfsa (60).under cdc guidance, risk mitigation strategies have included the postponement and cancellation of elective diagnostic and therapeutic procedures (6, 63) . for stable patients with advanced hf, these procedures include echocardiograms, stress testing, cardiopulmonary exercise testing, right heart catheterizations, coronary angiography, and implantation or interrogation of cardiac electronic devices among others. individualized risk assessment is needed when classifying cases as elective. the rationale for delaying procedures should be reviewed with patients and documented in the medical record (64) .although delay of these procedures may not immediately affect clinical outcomes, there are important long-term and indirect implications for patients with hf (62) . patients undergoing lvad/ht evaluation may experience delays in listing and/or surgery leading to worsening nutritional, functional, or hemodynamic status. completion of the evaluation process can highlight opportunities for optimization of pulmonary vascular resistance, renal function, weight, and adherence.centers are encouraged to consider local covid-19 disease prevalence and resource availability when deliberating the timing of lvad implantation. limiting implantation to patients in intermacs (interagency registry for mechanically assisted circulatory support) profiles 1-3 is a reasonable approach at this time (48) . for ht patients > 3 months post-transplant, programs may defer routine surveillance endomyocardial biopsies in those with stable allograft function with low risk of rejection. for those in the more immediate post-transplant period or at higher rejection risk, the decision to perform surveillance biopsies should be weighed against the risk of covid-19 exposure to patient and staff (48) .the covid-19 pandemic has had far-reaching implications for donor selection, organ procurement organizations, wait-list candidates, and transplant programs (57) . given the limitations of current testing and risks for asymptomatic transmission and infection, the ht community must be careful to select uninfected donors. globally, opos in canada, italy, spain and others have performed universal screening for all deceased donors (65) , recognizing the false negative rates of these tests. in some cases, chest computed tomography may be performed as part of donor assessment to evaluate for radiographic evidence of covid-19 (48) . only negative covid-19 donors should be considered.according to ishlt guidance, decisions regarding transplantation should be made at the transplanting center based on covid-19 community prevalence and potential risks and benefits to the patient (48) . in institutions with a high burden of covid-19, transplants are being reserved for patients in highest urgency statuses whose waitlist mortality risk supersedes the risk of nosocomial infection (57) .beginning the week of march 15, transplant programs were able to inactivate waitlisted patients as a covid-19 precaution (66) . weekly national and regional data is available from the united network for organ sharing (66) . evaluation of changes in transplant volumes and outcomes over time will be necessary to understand the implications of the covid-19 pandemic on ht candidates and recipients.there remains much to learn about the pathophysiology of covid-19 in patients with hf.concurrently, we need robust health services research focused on elucidating the impacts of telemedicine, elective care deferral, and risk aversion behaviors being practiced by patients and providers during the pandemic. these research questions and others are described in table 2 .the economic upheaval caused by the covid-19 pandemic has wide-ranging health consequences, especially for those who already suffer from socioeconomic deprivation. the national burdens of incident, prevalent, and undertreated hf will likely grow as a result of new covid-19-related heart disease, delays in the recognition and treatment of ischemic heart disease, rising unemployment, and loss of income and health benefits for large segments of the population (62).in spite of this devastation, the covid-19 pandemic has given the hf community opportunities to explore alternative care delivery models, optimize ancillary support structures, and expand the infrastructure for home nursing, palliative care, and hospice services.the covid-19 pandemic has significantly impacted our patients with advanced hf, including the lvad/ht population, and our care delivery systems. over the coming months, anticipated and unforeseen challenges will arise as we manage the ramifications of this pandemic for our patients and the hf community. potential contributing factors and mechanisms of worsening heart failure in patients with covid-19 include increased oxygen demand, myocarditis, stress cardiomyopathy, ischemia or infarction, cytokine release syndrome, elevated pulmonary pressures, and venous thromboembolism.the spike proteins of the sars-cov-2 virus bind to the ace2 receptor, leading to viral entry, replication, and sars-cov-2 infection. adam17 facilitates shedding of ace2 from the membrane leading to the release of the soluble form of ace2. soluble ace2 may bind the virus and prevent binding to the membrane-anchored ace2 on cells, preventing cell entry.reorganization of care delivery has resulted in increased access to telemedicine, adaptations to physical exam and laboratory data, and changes in procedural volume. bp = blood pressure; crt = cardiac resynchronization therapy; gdmt = guideline-directed medical therapy; hipaa = health insurance portability and accountability act; jvd = jugular venous distensionconsiderations for patients with covid-19 who develop acute heart failure as well as patients with pre-existing heart failure are depicted. presented with typical symptoms, did not require icu admission, discharged on hospital day 12, repeat pcr testing negative *heart-kidney recipient ards = acute respiratory distress syndrome; hcq = hydroxychloroquine, icu = intensive care unit; mmf = mycophenolate mofetil, pcr = polymerase chain reaction starting from november 2002 till the end of may 2003, the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) had spread widely over the world. up to the end of may 2003 probable cases have been reported in 35 countries or regions, and the cumulative number of cases has reached 8202 by may 26, 2003 according to the report by the world health organization (who). sars in the year 2003 and avian influenza like h7n9 this year received or receive intensive attentions from all over the world due to its high case-fatality rate. people were particularly interested in finding the period of the time between infection and the onset of infectiousness, length of period that patients remain infectious, further infections that each patient produce, total number of infections during the epidemic, etc. a large number of publications have been reported for sars, many of which have been included in reference books [1, 2] and reviews [3, 4] . important achievements have been made for the transmission dynamics using various mathematical models [5] - [17] and reported data from hong kong or canada. donnelly et al [5] , riley et al [6] and lipsitch et al [7] make use of the available data for sars on latent, incubation and infectious periods and have successfully fitted their models to data describing the number of cases observed over time. the important conclusion is that if the sars is uncontrolled, then a majority of people would be infected. the potential effectiveness of different control measures has been studied in these references.though sars did not appear again since 2003, there may be other epidemic, such as h7n9 avian influenza occurring actually in china possibly, spreading in a similar way. hence the study of various models for the prediction of sars and other epidemic once it occurs is always important.as assessed by dye and gay [8] , the current mathematical models are complex, the data are poor, and some big questions such as accuracy of case reports and heterogeneity in transmission remain. dye and gay anticipated that the next generation of sars models would have to become more complex.it is now evident that sars and maybe avian influenza in a city can be controlled through multiscale measures such as medical interventions, public-service announcements, isolation of people having contact with infected, restriction of individual and social activities, etc. when the interventions to control a communicable epidemic are intensive and of multiple scales, it would be very diff · icult to find all those details of the epidemic needed by a more complex model. it is thus desired that, under intensive and multiscale interventions, the global behavior of sars or avian influenza spread, governed by a complex and multiscale system, could be roughly predicted without knowing the epidemic details.the dynamics of an epidemics is an important topic in biology, medicine, mathematics and physics and is usually modelled through differential equations [18] - [22] , among which is the famous sir (susceptible-infected-removed) model. the study on this topic is still very active ( [9] - [17] , [23] - [26] ,).most of the models for epidemics spread rely on differential equations for the susceptible, infected and removed numbers. different spread mechanisms are embedded into the various terms in the differential equations.in this paper we are interested in the number of hospitalized cases (cumulative number of cases minus the number of deaths and the number recovered) and attempt to consider a new approach to predict this number. in our approach all the mechanisms controlling the spread are factored into a single parameter. assuming the system controlling the spread of sars or similar epidemic is a thermodynamic one, we define an entropy and determine the only parameter by using the principle of extreme rate of entropy production. this allows us to relate the dynamics of the spread to the information at the inflexion point of the curve describing the time variation of the number of hospitalized cases. the inflexion point is the date at which the multiple controlling measures take effect.the model presented in this paper is based on a simple differential equation with the spread rate forced to satisfy four constraints (section 2.1). the model is closed by the use of maximum or minimal rate of entropy production as the system for spread is assumed to be a thermodynamical one (section 2.2). there is a critical point (date) at which the spread rate turns to decrease due to the overall role of interventions. the maximum number of infected individuals and the time at which this maximum occurs can be related to the number and time corresponding to the critical date (section 2.3). this model is validated against the sars data of the year 2003 (section 3) for which we are able to follow the history of the spread.model developmentlet f (t) be the number of hospitalized cases, defined as the cumulative number subtracted from the cumulative number of deaths and recovery ones since death and recovery are also parts of actions in the thermodynamical system. then the rate of increase (decrease) is proportional to the number at the previous day,with the roles of all the controlling mechanisms factored into the parameter α(t). knowing the exact expression of α(t) requires the knowledge of all the details of the epidemic and the coupling with other differential equations. the essential idea in our method to find α(t) is to ignore any details but to use a thermodynamic approach. it is to be remarked that this parameter must be subjected to the following four constraints:2) at the initial stage there is an exponential increase for regular spread to start (since at the initial stage the number is near zero), i.e., α(0) → ∞.3) with the strong and active interventions the rate must decrease at a given day t = l which will be called the inflexion point (date). mathematically this amounts to say thatthere must be a maximum for f (t), say at t = d, for which we have α(t) = 0. we assume that the virus causing an epidemic is constantly active (high temperature or intrinsic lifetime constraint would make the epidemic disappear suddenly, but this is not considered here) so that α(t) is assumed to be an analytical function. also nature would select laws as simple as possible. the only analytical function that meets the four constraints and that is simple enough is found to be given bywhere c is a parameter. inserting (2.2) into (2.1) leads to the following solution which is just the log-normal function,here k is a proportion constant, µ = ln d + σ 2 , and σ is to be determined in the following through the use of the principle of extreme rate of entropy production.the principle of extreme rate of entropy production can be found in [27] . this has been successfully used to obtain the distribution of droplet production during its impingement on solid walls [21] . certainly, the width of the curve f (t) ∝ t can be characterized by σ. the wider the curve is, the larger is the (shannon) entropy. the intrinsic spread mechanism of virus and the large mixing activity of the population tend to make the curve wider (so σ larger). however, the medical and social interventions to control the epidemic constitute a dissipation mechanism which would prohibit the curve to become infinitely wide (σ infinitely large). the width would cease to increase when the maximum dissipation rate is reached. maximum dissipation rate corresponds to extreme rate of entropy production, which again corresponds tohere s(σ,η) is the shannon entropy def · ined as= 0 yields the following relationship between d and lwith σ given by (2.5), we haveonce we know the inflexion date, it is crucial to determine when is the initial date for regular spreading of the epidemic. in other words, we must know the number l (cumulated days to reach the inflexion point counting from the initial date). this can be done by using the rate of 3 application and validation of the modelthe model is used as follows.step 1 (data recording). using the reported data we determine the number f at the inflexion date (the date that df (t) dt tends to decrease). also determine df (t) dt t=l by using the reported date.determine the proportion constant k in (2.3) by setting f l = f (l). then use (2.7) to determine l.step 2 (prediction). once l and f (l) are known, use (2.6) to predict d and f (d) and plot the curve f (t) ∼ t using eq (2.3) to predict the number f (t) for l < t.hence it is essential to determine the inflexion point. specifically, this is done as follows. we record the reported number f (t) for each day and draw the curve g(t) = g(t) − g(t − 1). once we observe that g(t) reaches a peak (denoted as g) at t = l, then l is considered as the inflexion point. however, special cautions must be made.(a) in the early period of the epidemic, it is possible to have report delay of cases so that a false peak would occur.(b) for a city or region where the cumulative number of cases remains always small, it is diff · icult to observe a clear peak. in this case this approach does not apply.(c) there is also a possibility to have multiple inflexion points due to new outbreaks, as is in the case of hong kong, singapore and canada.numerically, l is calculated aswhere f = (2f − g)/2 is the number of f averaged over two consecutive dates (at and before the inflexion date). still using the log-normal function, we can relate the maximum h = f (d) and the date d to f and g by h ≈ 2.12f and d ≈ l + 2f /g where none of the constants depends on the details of the epidemic. first consider beijing. using the reported date as shown in fig 1, we identify april 27 to be the critical date since df (t) dt experiences an evident decrease after that date (we also observe a decrease before april 25, but that decrease is due to the report delay). using the reported date the predicted curve f = f (t) follows well the curve, as can be seen in fig. ? ?.for hong kong, we observe three distinct inflexion points as can be seen in fig 3. the prediction using the information at the three inflexion points (ip1, ip2, ip3) show that the predicted curve using the first inflexion point is the closest to the reported data (fig. 4) . more details can be seen in table 1 . in table 1 , when there are multiple inflexion points, as is in the case for hong kong, singapore and canada, we use the information at the first inflexion point. in the case of singapore and canada, there are two maximums but we give information only for the first one.for hebei, the number of cases is not large. but the prediction still works very well (fig. 5,  fig. 6 ).for singapore we observe three distinct inflexion points and two maximums (fig. 7) . the prediction using the information at the first inflexion point fits well to the most part of the first peak (fig. 8) . for canada we observe two inflexion points (fig. 9 ) and when the information of the first inflexion point is used the prediction reproduces well the lower part of the observed curve but fails to predict the peak value (fig. 10) .in summary, when the number is small, the error is large, showing that the thermodynamic approach is more accurate when the system is larger. it is interesting to note that the best fit value of σ using the reported data is close to the theoretical one (σ = 0.408) ( table 2 ). in fitting σ, the date d (counting from the starting date) and the maximum value h are fixed to be the values given by the reported data (third and fourth columns) so that only σ is fitted. in the second column, the starting date is approximately the date when the first case was introduced into the region. the outbreak for the epidemic is assumed to take place within at most ten days so the best fit σ is obtained by using two epidemic starting days (date with the introduction of the first case and latest possible outbreak date). the range of best fit σ (fifth column) is very close to the theoretical value 0.408 for beijing and is not significantly different from the theoretical value for the other cities or regions. one would wonder if the use of a value σ far beyond the theoretical value does not alter the curve significantly. in order to see that, we display in fig. 11 the role of σ on the correct reproduction of the curve f = f (t). the log-normal curves using the thermodynamical value σ = 0.408 and the best fit value σ = 0.47 are all close to the reported data. however, when σ is significantly different from the thermodynamical value, then the log-normal curve has a great departure from the reported data, as can be seen from the curves using σ = 0.1 and σ = 0.9. this shows that the shape of the curve is quite sensitive to σ and the theoretical value of σ is indeed a rational one.we have built a closed model for which we just need some data for the early period to determine the inflexion point l, the number f (l) and the increase rate df (l)/dt. the model is applied to predict the number for t > l and especially d and f (d) for the 2003 sars and is hoped to work when the system for sars or similar epidemic spread involves multiscale interventions and constitutes a thermodynamical system. despite the possible uncertainty in the reported data for 0 < t < l and that the model does not require epidemic details such as latent, incubation and infectious periods, the comparison between model prediction and reported sars data is still good enough for the cities or regions where the epidemic is severe. the prediction for the case of beijing is remarkably well since the number of cases is very large. this shows that when the system is large enough, the thermodynamic approach is more accurate. the actual model has some difficulty to exactly handle the case of multiple inflexion points. the present model can be possibly used to predict epidemics other than sars once the communicable epidemics receive intensive interventions. the h7n9 avian influenza is actually of great concern [28, 29] and if unluckily this should spread rapidly, we expect the present model would be useful for predicting its spread.for avian influenza, the observed severe symptom mainly includes high fever and pneumonia [28, 29] . it is interesting to note that, according to traditional chinese meridian doctrine [30, 31] , giving a pressure down or performing an acupuncture on specific acupuncture points on the meridian in a correct way by experts could be helpful to relieve or cure the corresponding symptoms (see table 3 ). table 3 : the symptoms and the corresponding meridian acupuncture points (reproduced from reference [31] ). pain is felt on the meridian acupuncture points while a pressure is given on that points, if the corresponding symptom exists symptom acupuncture (meridian) figure  high beginning from late 2002 to mid 2003, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) spread over the world. up to the end of may 2003 probable cases have been reported in 35 countries or regions, and the cumulative number of cases reached 8202 by may 26, 2003 according to the report by the world health organization (who). sars in the year 2003 and avian influenza such as h7n9 in reported first in 2013 has been the focus of world attention because of the high casefatality rate. researchers were particularly interested in finding the period of the time between infection and the onset of infectiousness, length of period that patients remain infec-*corresponding author (email: ziniuwu@tsinghua.edu.cn) †recommended by she zhensu (associate editor) tious, further infections that each patient produce and the total number of infections during the epidemic. a large number of research groups have reported on sars elsewhere [1] [2] [3] [4] . important achievements have been made for the transmission dynamics using various mathematical models [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] and reported data from hong kong or canada. donnelly et al. [5] , riley et al. [6] and lipsitch et al. [7] made use of the available data for sars on latent, incubation and infectious periods and have successfully fitted mathematical models to data describing the number of cases observed over time. one logical conclusion was that if sars was unchecked, then a majority of people would be infected. the potential effectiveness of different control measures has been studied in these references.though sars did not appear again since 2003, there may be other epidemic, such as h7n9 avian influenza occurring actually in china possibly, spreading in a similar way. hence the study of various models for the prediction of sars and other epidemic once it has occurred is critical for intensive study of transmission modes and mathematical modelling.as assessed by dye and gay [8] , the current mathematical models are complex, the data are poor, and some big questions such as accuracy of case reports and heterogeneity in transmission remain. dye and gay anticipated that the next generation of sars models would become more complex.it is now evident that sars and maybe avian influenza in a city can be controlled through multiscale measures such as medical interventions, public-service announcements, isolation of people having contact with infected and restriction of individual and social activities. when the interventions to control a communicable epidemic are intensive and of multiple scales, it would be very difficult to find all those details of the epidemic needed by a more complex model. it is thus desired that, under intensive and multiscale interventions, the global behavior of sars or avian influenza spread, governed by a complex and multiscale system, could be approximated without having awareness of the epidemic details.the dynamics of an epidemics is an important topic in biology, medicine, mathematics and physics and is usually modelled through differential equations [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] , among which is the sir (susceptible-infected-removed) model. research in this topic has been multi-pronged and on-going [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] 25, 26] .most of the models for epidemics spread rely on differential equations for the susceptible, infected and removed numbers. different spread mechanisms are embedded into the various terms in the differential equations.herein we are interested in the number of hospitalized cases (cumulative number of cases minus the number of deaths and the number recovered) and attempt to consider a new approach to predict this number. in our approach all the mechanisms controlling the spread are factored into a single parameter. assuming the system controlling the spread of sars or similar epidemic is a thermodynamic one, we define an entropy and determine the only parameter by using the principle of extreme rate of entropy production. this allows us to relate the dynamics of the spread to the information at the inflexion point of the curve describing the time variation of the number of hospitalized cases. the inflexion point is the date at which the multiple controlling measures take effect.the model presented in this paper is based on a simple differential equation with the spread rate forced to satisfy four constraints. the model is closed by the use of maximum or minimal rate of entropy production as the system for spread is assumed to be thermodynamical. a critical point (date) at which the spread rate turns to decrease because of the overall role of interventions. the maximum number of infected individuals and the time at which this maximum occurs can be related to the number and time corresponding to the critical date. this entropy-based thermodynamic model is validated against the sars data of the year 2003 for which we are able to follow the history of the spread.let f (t) be the number of hospitalized cases, defined as the cumulative number subtracted from the cumulative number of deaths and recovery ones since death and recovery are also parts of actions in the thermodynamical system. the epidemic increase is generally complex and can not be represented by an explicit expression. thus, in the previous research, one can either use the master equation or mean-field to describe f (t). however, viewing the epidemic as a thermodynamic system and following the approach for the rate of vibration excitation and chemical reaction [26] , we may assume that the rate of increase (decrease) be proportional to the number at the previous day, that is,here α(t) is a time-dependent coefficient. the specific form for the coefficient α(t) depends on the balance between the spread mechanism of the epidemic and the the control mechanisms during the public intervention. for a deterministic method, one need the knowledge of all the details for the spreading and controlling of the epidemic, and a coupled system of differential equations should be used. here, we instead use a statistic approach, by first assuming that all the spread mechanism and controlling effect be incorporated into the time-dependent function α(t). though the details of epidemic are not need here, there are four obvious constraints that this function should meet:(2) at the initial stage there is an exponential increase for regular spread to start (since at the initial stage the number is near zero), that is, α(0) → ∞.(3) with the strong and active interventions the rate must decrease at a given day t = l which will be called the inflexion point (date). mathematically this amounts to say that(4) there must be a maximum for f (t), say at the date t = d, for which we have α(d) = 0.we assume that the virus causing an epidemic is constantly active (high temperature or intrinsic lifetime constraint would make the epidemic disappear suddenly, but this is not considered here) so that α(t) is further assumed to be an analytical function.the only analytical function that meets the four constraints and that is sufficiently simple is found to be given bywhere c = 1−ln(l/d) ln 2 (l/d) . inserting (2) into (1) leads to the following solution which is effectively the log-normal function:here k is a proportion constant that does not need to be known, μ = ln d + σ 2 , and σ is to be determined in the following through the use of the principle of extreme rate of entropy production.the approach will be validated against the sars data of the year 2003. the essentially new feature of the present model is the simplicity as there are no free parameters to be fitted. the only parameter σ, characterizing the width of the distribution function, in eq. (3) can be determined by a thermodynamic approach as described below.the principle of extreme rate of entropy production can be found elsewhere [27] . this has been successfully used to obtain the distribution of droplet production during its impingement on solid walls [20] . though the principle of maximum/minimum entropy production principle at least in some cases has been proved to be incorrect, it is still useful as a method to determine parameters in a model. certainly, the width of the curve f (t) ∝ t can be characterized by σ. the wider the curve is, the larger is the (shannon) entropy. the intrinsic spread mechanism of virus and the large mixing activity of the population tend to make the curve wider (so σ larger). however, the medical and social interventions to control the epidemic constitute a dissipation mechanism which would prohibit the curve to become infinitely wide (σ infinitely large). the width would cease to increase when the maximum dissipation rate is reached. the dissipation rate is proportional to the rate of the entropy production. maximum dissipation rate corresponds to extreme rate of entropy production, which again corresponds tohere s (σ, η) is the shannon entropy defined as:so that eq. (4) holds if and only ifat this value for σ, the intrinsic spread mechanism is balanced by the dissipation mechanism (controlling effect).inserting eq. (3) into the definition of inflexion point= 0 and considering μ = ln d + σ 2 , we obtain the following relationship between the two typical dates d (for maximum number of hospitalized cases) and l (inflexion point):using eq. (3) again, f (d) is found to be related to f (l) bywith σ given by eq. (5), we have two important relations:these important ratios can be applied to predict the maximal number of possible hospitalized cases and the day this maxima appears, once the inflexion point is identified through the data at the earlier stage of epidemic spreading. see below for more detailed explanation.once we know the inflexion date, it is crucial to determine when is the initial date for regular spreading of the epidemic.in other words, we must know the number l (cumulated days to reach the inflexion point counting from the initial date). this can be done by using the rate of increase d f (t) dt at t = l. a simple calculation using eq. (3) yields3 application and validation of the modelthe model is used as follows:step 1 (data recording). using the reported data we determine the number f = f (l) at the inflexion date (the date that step 2 (prediction). once l and f (l) are known, use eq. (6) to predict d and f (d) and plot the curve f (t) ∼ t using eq. (3) to predict the number f (t) for l < t.hence it is essential to determine the inflexion point. specifically, this is done as follows. we record the reported number f (t) for each day and draw the curve g(t) = f (t) − f (t − 1). once we observe that g(t) reaches a peak (denoted as g) at t = l, then l is considered as the inflexion point. however, special cautions must be made.(a) in the early period of the epidemic, it is possible to have report delay of cases so that a false peak would occur.(b) for a city or region where the cumulative number of cases remains always small, it is difficult to observe a clear peak. in this case this approach is not valid.(c) there is also a possibility to have multiple inflexion points due to new outbreaks, as is in the case of hong kong, singapore and canada for sars in the year 2003.numerically, l is calculated as:where f = (2f − g)/2 is the number of f averaged over two consecutive dates (at and before the inflexion date). still using the log-normal function, we can relate the maximum h = f (d) and the date d to f and g by h ≈ 2.12f and d ≈ l + 2f/g where none of the constants depend on the details of the epidemic.first let us consider beijing. using the reported date as shown in figure 1 , we identify april 27 to be the critical date since d f (t) dt experiences an evident decrease after that date (we also observe a decrease before april 25, but that decrease is due to the report delay). using the reported date we have figure 1 inflexion point for beijing. note that the first peak is not an inflexion point but is simply due to report delay in the early period. the predicted curve f = f (t) follows well the curve, as can be seen in figure 2 .for hong kong, we observe three distinct inflexion points as can be seen in figure 3 . the prediction using the information at the three inflexion points (ip1, ip2, ip3) show that the predicted curve using the first inflexion point is the closest to the reported data ( figure 4) .for hebei, the number of cases is not large, however, the prediction is in good agreement (figures 5 and 6 ). apart from china, sars also appeared in singapore and canada, though the numbers of hospitalized cases were low.for singapore we observe three distinct inflexion points and two maximums (figure 7) . the prediction using the information at the first inflexion point fits well to the most part of the first peak (figure 8 ).for canada we observe two inflexion points ( figure 9 ) and when the information of the first inflexion point is used the prediction reproduces well the lower part of the observed curve but fails to predict the peak value ( figure 10 ).in summary, when the number is small, the error may be large. this is because that the thermodynamic approach is more accurate when the system is larger. in contrast to a deterministic approach for which one can give the specific condition under which a model is valid, for a statistic model, as for the present model, it is usually difficult to give specific conditions for validity. for the present approach, if the epidemic is sufficiently large but governed by controlling efforts of multiple scales so that an entropy is associated with the system, then the model is expected to be useful for predicting the spread increase or decrease, based on some data for the initial period of the epidemic. this can be seen from the estimated error as displayed in table 1 for comparison of the model with sars data. in table 1 , when there are multiple inflexion points, as is in the case for hong kong, singapore and canada, we use the information at the first inflexion point. in the case of singapore and canada, there are two maximums but we give information only for the first one. we see that when the total number is in the order of a thousand or above, then the comparison is generally consistent, with an error within 15%.for hebei, singapore and canada, the total number is of the order of one hundred or less, with some comparison being entirely consistent. only the case for canada, we fails to predict the maximum value but correctly predicts the day the maximum appears.it is interesting to note that the best fit value of σ using the reported data is close to the theoretical one (σ = 0.408) ( table 2 ). in fitting σ, the date d (counting from the starting date) and the maximum value h are fixed to be the values given by the reported data (third and fourth columns) so that only σ is fitted. in the second column, the starting date is approximately the date when the first case was introduced into the region. the outbreak for the epidemic is assumed to take place within at most ten days so the best fit σ is obtained by using two epidemic starting days (date with the introduction of the first case and latest possible outbreak date). the range of best fit σ (fifth column) is in close approximation to the theoretical value 0.408 for beijing and is not significantly different from the theoretical value for the other cities or regions. it can be noted that if the use of a value σ far beyond the theoretical value, the curve will not significantly affected. herein we display in figure 11 the role of σ on the correct reproduction of the curve f = f (t). the log-normal curves using the thermodynamical value σ = 0.408 and the best fit value σ = 0.47 are all close to the reported data. however, when σ is significantly different from the thermodynamical value, then the log-normal curve has a great departure from the reported data, as can be seen from the curves using σ = 0.1 and σ = 0.9. this shows that the shape of the curve is quite sensitive to σ and the theoretical value of σ is indeed a rational one.for the spread rate of communicable epidemics with multiscale controlling effort, we have built an entropy-based thermodynamic model for which we just need some data for the early period of a communicable epidemic, that is, we just need to know the inflexion point l (the cumulative days before the inflexion point), the number f (l) of the hospitalized cases and the increase rate d f (l)/dt. then the number of hospitalized cases for t > l can be predicted through the model. notably, the maxima (t = d, f (d)) is shown to be related to the inflexion point by the following very simple relations:the ebt model is applied to predict the number for t > l and especially d and f (d) for the 2003 sars and is hoped it can be applied to other systems for sars or similar epidemic spread involves multiscale interventions and constitutes a thermodynamical system. despite the possible uncertainty in the reported data for 0 < t < l and that the model does not require epidemic details such as latent, incubation and infectious periods, the comparison between model prediction and reported sars data is sufficiently good for the cities or regions where the epidemic is severe. the prediction for the case of beijing is somewhat consistent since the number of cases is large. this shows that when the system is sufficiently large, the thermodynamic approach is more accurate. the actual model has some difficulties to precisely predict the case of multiple inflexion points.the model seems to work if the number of hospitalized cases is in the order of hundreds, though the epidemic of canada for sars in the year of 2003 contains less than one hundred hospitalized cases and the prediction is entirely consistent.the occur of the inflexion point depends on the strong public intervention to control the epidemic. the information about the inflexion point must be given according to the recorded data, without delay in reporting.according to eq. (9), the maximum number of hospitalized cases will appear at a day about t = 0.65l after the inflexion point t = l, and the maximum number is about two times of the number at the inflexion point.one may define the time t = m as the day that the epidemic disappears, if at this day the number of hospitalized cases reduces to 1% of the number at the inflexion point t = l, that is, the m is determined by, according to eq. (3) such thatusing eq. (9) to replace d we further obtain for sars in beijing, l = 24, the use of (10) predicts m = 150 for σ = 0.408. this compares quite consistently with the approximate disappearing date as can be seen from figure 2 .the present model can be possibly used to predict epidemics other than sars once the communicable epidemics receive intensive interventions. the h7n9 avian influenza is actually of great concern [28, 29] and if unfortunately this should spread rapidly, we expect the present model would be useful for predicting the spread.the advantage of the present approach is the simplicity of the model, which does not involve any free parameters nor epidemic details, though the process of the spread of epidemics is complex. the complexity of the problem is resolved here through the use of an entropy approach. she [30] recently suggested a framework for treating complex system. according to this framework, it is usually possible to define simple models for complex systems. the disadvantage of the present approach is that it is a statistical one so that it is difficult to give specific conditions under which the model remains valid. though the use of sars data, this supports the validity of the approach, even when the number of hospitalized cases is small for cities or countries such as hebei province or canada. more comparisons needs to be done to further assess the validity. this can be considered in future studies. this manuscript is updated from an unpublished manuscript originally written by wu z.n. during the sars epidemic in 2003, some previous students, notably gan epidemics and outbreaks caused by emerging infectious diseases continue to challenge medical and public health authorities. outbreak and epidemic control requires swift action, but real-time identification and characterization of epidemics remains difficult [1] . methods are needed to inform real-time decision making through rapid characterization of disease epidemiology, prediction of shortterm disease trends, and evaluation of the projected impacts of different intervention measures. real-time mathematical modeling and epidemiological analysis are important tools for such endeavors, but the limited public availability of information on outbreak epidemiology (particularly when the outbreak creates a crisis environment), and on the characteristics of any novel pathogen, present obstacles to the creation of reliable and credible models during a public health emergency. one needs to look no further than the 2003 sars outbreak, or ongoing concerns related to highly pathogenic avian influenza (h5n1) or bioterrorism to be reminded of the need for and difficulty of real-time modeling.the emergence of a novel pandemic strain of influenza a (h1n1) (ph1n1) in spring 2009 highlighted these difficulties. early models of 2009 ph1n1 transmission were subject to substantial uncertainties regarding all aspects of this outbreak, resulting in uncertainty in judging the pandemic potential of the virus and the implementation of reactive public health responses in individual countries (fraser et al. [2] ). multiple introductions of a novel virus into the community early in the outbreak could further distort disease epidemiology by creating fluctuations in incidence that are misattributed to the behavior of a single chain of transmission.we sought to address three critical issues in real time disease modeling for newly emerged 2009 ph1n1: (i) to estimate the basic reproduction number; (ii) to identify the main turning points in the epidemic curve that distinguish different phases or waves of disease; and (iii) to predict the future course of events, including the final size of the outbreak in the absence of intervention. we make use of a simple mathematical model, namely the richards model, to illustrate the usefulness of near realtime modeling in extracting valuable information regarding the outbreak directly from publicly available epidemic curves. we also provide caveats regarding inherent limitations to modeling with incomplete epidemiological data.the accuracy of any modeling is highly dependent on the epidemiological characteristics of the outbreak considered, and most epidemic curves exhibit multiple turning points (peaks and valleys) during the early stage of an outbreak. while these may be due to stochastic ("random") variations in disease spread, and changes in either surveillance methods or case definitions, turning points may also represent time points where epidemics transition from exponential growth processes to processes that have declining rates of growth, and thus may identify effects of disease control programs, peaks of seasonal waves of infection, or natural slowing of growth due to infection of a critical fraction of susceptible individuals. for every epidemic, there is a suitable time point after which a given phase of an outbreak can be suitably modeled, and beyond which subsequent phases may be anticipated. detection of such "turning points" and identification of different phases or waves of an outbreak is of critical importance in designing and evaluating different intervention strategies.richards [3] proposed the following model to study the growth of biological populations, where c(t) is the cumulative number of cases reported at time t (in weeks):here the prime "′" denotes the rate of change with respect to time. the model parameter k is the maximum case number (or final outbreak size) over a single phase of outbreak, r is the per capita growth rate of the infected population, and a is the exponent of deviation. the solution of the richards model can be explicitly given in terms of model parameters as using the richard model, we are able to directly fit empirical data from a cumulative epidemic curve to obtain estimates of epidemiological meaningful parameters, including the growth rate r. in such a model formulation, the basic reproduction number r 0 is given by the formula r 0 = exp(rt) where t is the disease generation time defined as the average time interval from infection of an individual to infection of his or her contacts. it has been shown mathematically [4] that, given the growth rate r, the equation r 0 = exp(rt) provides the upper bound of the basic reproduction number regardless of the distribution of the generation interval used, assuming there is little pre-existing immunity to the pathogen under consideration. additional technical details regarding the richards model can be found in [5] [6] [7] .unlike the better-known deterministic compartmental models used to describe disease transmission dynamics, the richards model considers only the cumulative infected population size. this population size is assumed to have saturation in growth as the outbreak progresses, and this saturation can be caused by immunity, by implementation of control measures or other factors such as environmental or social changes (e.g., children departing from schools for summer holiday). the basic premise of the richards model is that the incidence curve of a single phase of a given epidemic consists of a single peak of high incidence, resulting in an s-shaped cumulative epidemic curve with a single turning point for the outbreak. the turning point or inflection point, defined as the time when the rate of case accumulation changes from increasing to decreasing (or vice versa) can be easily pinpointed as the point where the rate of change transitions from positive to negative; i.e., the moment at which the trajectory begins to decline. this time point has obvious epidemiologic importance, indicating either the beginning of a new epidemic phase or the peak of the current epidemic phase.for epidemics with two or more phases, a variation of the s-shaped richards model has been proposed [6] . this multi-staged richards model distinguishes between two types of turning points: the initial s curve which signifies the first turning point that ends initial exponential growth; and a second type of turning point in the epidemic curve where the growth rate of the number of cumulative cases begins to increase again, signifying the beginning of the next epidemic phase. this variant of richards model provides a systematic method of determining whether an outbreak is single-or multi-phase in nature, and can be used to distinguish true turning points from peaks and valleys resulting from random variability in case counts. more details on application of the multi-staged richards model to sars can be found in [6, 7] . readers are also referred to [8, 9] for its applications to dengue.we fit both the single-and multi-phase richards models to canadian cumulative 2009 ph1n1 cumulative case data, using publicly available disease onset dates obtained from the public health agency of canada (phac) website [10, 11] . phac data represent a central repository for influenza case reports provided by each of canada's provinces and territories. onset dates represent best local estimates, and may be obtained differently in different jurisdictions. for example, the province of ontario, which comprises approximately 1/3 of the population of canada, and where most spring influenza activity was concentrated, replaces onset dates using a hierarchical schema, whereby missing onset dates may be replaced with dates of specimen collection (if known) or date of specimen receipt by the provincial laboratory system, if both dates of onset and specimen collection are missing.data were accessed at different time points during the course of the "spring wave (or herald wave)" of the epidemic in may-july of 2009, whenever a new dataset is made available online by the phac. by sequentially considering successive s-shaped segments of the epidemic curve, we estimate the maximum case number (k) and locate turning points, thus generating estimates for cumulative case numbers during each phase of the outbreak. the phac cumulative case data is then fitted to the cumulative case function c(t) in the richards model with the initial time t 0 = 0 being the date when the first laboratory confirmed case was reported and the initial case number c 0 = c(0) = 1, (the case number with onset of symptoms on that day). there were some differences between sequential epidemic curves in assigned case dates. for example, data posted by phac on may 20 indicated an initial case date of april 13, but in the june 3 data this had been changed to april 12, perhaps due to revision of the case date as a result of additional information.model parameter estimates based on the explicit solution given earlier can be obtained easily and efficiently using any standard software with a least-squares approximation tool, such as sas or matlab.daily incidence data by onset date were posted by phac until june 26, after which date only the daily number of laboratory-confirmed hospitalized cases in canada was posted. for the purpose of comparison, we also fit the hospitalization data to the richards model in order to evaluate temporal changes in the number of severe (hospitalized) cases, which are assumed to be approximately proportional to the total cases number. the case and hospitalization data used in this work are provided online as additional file 1.we fit the model to the daily datasets, acquired in real time, throughout the period under study. the leastsquared approximation of the model parameter estimation could converge for either the single-phased or the 2-phase richards models. for the sake of brevity, only four of these model fits are presented in table 1 to demonstrate the difference in modeling results over time. the resulting parameter estimates with 95% confidence intervals (ci) (for turning point (t i ), growth rate (r), and maximum case number (k)), time period included in the model, and time period when the data set in question were accessed, is presented in table 1 . note that all dates in the tables are given by month/day. we also note that the ci's for r 0 reflect the uncertainty in t as well as in the estimates for r, and does not reflect the error due to the model itself, which is always difficult to measure.in order to compare the 1-phase and 2-phase models, we also calculate the akaike information criterion (aic) [12] for the first, third, and fourth sets of data in table  1 , where there is a model fit for the 2-phase model. the results, given in table 2 , indicates that whenever there is a model fit for the 2-phase model, its aic value is always lower than that of the 1-phase model and hence compares favorably to the 1-phase model.parameter estimates fluctuate in early datasets, and the least-squared parameter estimations diverge within and between 1-phase and 2-phase models in a manner that seems likely to reflect artifact. in particular, for the earliest model fits, using data from april 13 to may 15, the estimated reproductive number for the second phase is far larger than that obtained in the first phase, and that obtained using a single-phase model, and illustrating the pitfalls of model estimation using the limited data available early in an epidemic. estimates stabilize as the outbreak progresses, as can be seen with the final data sets (april 11 to june 5 and april 12 to june 19). for comparison, we plot the respective theoretical epidemic curves based on the richards model with the estimated parameters described in the table above in figure 1 .as noted above, model can be used to estimate turning points (t i ) and basic reproductive numbers (r 0 .), if the generation time t is know. we used t = 1.91 days (95% ci: 1.30-2.71), as obtained in [2] by fitting an age stratified mathematical model to the first recognized 2009 influenza a (h1n1) outbreak in la gloria, mexico. estimates are presented in table 1 . we also conducted sensitivity analyses with r 0 # calculated based on longer generation times (t = 3.6 (2.9, 4.3)) for seasonal influenza in [13] (see last column in table 1 ). excluding implausibly high estimates of r 0 generated using initial outbreak data (april 13 to may 15), we obtain the estimates of r 0 for the 2-phase model that range between 1.31 and 1.96. inasmuch as richards model analyzes the general trends of an epidemic (e.g., turning point, reproductive number, etc.), it can be used to fit any epidemiological time series for a given disease process, as long as the rate of change in the recorded outcome is proportional to changes in the true number of cases. as such, for comparison, we fit our model using the time series for 2009 ph1n1 hospitalizations in canada posted by phac on july 15 [11] (that last date these data were made available) ( table 3) . this time series was easily fit to a one-phase model ( figure 2) . further examples of using hospitalization or mortality data to fit the richards model can be found in [14] .we used the richards model, which permits estimation of key epidemiological parameters based on cumulative case counts, to study the initial wave of 2009 influenza a (h1n1) cases in canada. in most model fits, april 28-29 and may 4-7 were identified as early turning points for the outbreak, with a third and final turning point around june 3-5 in models based on longer time series. although this modeling approach was not able to detect turning points using some earlier data sets (e.g., those limited to the period from april 12 to may 27), in general the turning points identified were consistent across multiple models and time series. perhaps the most important divergence between models occurred with the detection of an april 29 turning point in the case report time series, but not in the time series based on hospitalized cases. we believe this may be attributable to the small number of hospitalizations, relative to cases, that had occurred by that date, as well as the fact that hospitalization data only became available on april 18.the turning point can correspond to the point at which disease control activities take effect (such that the rate of change in epidemic growth begins to decline) or can represent the point at which an epidemic begins to wane naturally (for example, due to seasonal shifts or due to the epidemic having "exhausted" the supply of susceptibles such that the reproductive number of the epidemic declines below 1). this quantity has direct policy relevance; for example, in the autumn 2009 ph1n1 wave in canada, vaccination for ph1n1 was initiated at or after the turning point of the autumn wave due to the time taken to produce vaccine; as the epidemic was in natural decline at that point, the impact of vaccination has subsequently been called into question. although the richards model is able to capture the temporal changes in epidemic dynamics over the course of an outbreak, it does not define their biological or epidemiological basis. as such, determining the nature of these turning points requires knowledge of "events on the ground" for correlation. we suspect that the last note that all dates in the tables are given by month/day. dates of posting are listed in parentheses. model duration indicates whether they fit a 1-phase or 2phase model. note that the maximum case number is rounded off to the nearest integer. r 0 # is obtained using the generation interval of t = 3.6 (2.9, 4.3) for seasonal influenza [13] . table 2 comparison of akaike information criterion (aic) values between 1-phase and 2-phase models for time periods with 2-phase model fit in table 1 time table 1 , last line) and a 1-phase model using hospitalization data (june 11), this lag in turning points would actually be expected, due to the time from initial onset of symptoms until hospitalization, which was reported to have an interquartile range of 2-7 days in a recent study from canada [15] . timelines for the 2-phase model for case data of 4/12-6/19 and the 1-phase model for hospitalization data are presented graphically in figure 3 . in addition to identifying turning points, the richards model is useful for estimation of the basic reproductive number (r 0 ) for an epidemic process, and our estimates derived using a richards model were consistent with estimates derived using other methods. for example, our r 0 agrees almost perfectly with that of tuite et al., derived using a markov chain monte carlo simulation parameterized with individual-level data from ontario's public health surveillance system [16] . our estimates of r 0 is smaller than that derived by fraser et al. [2] using mexican data, but such differences could relate in part to the different age distributions of these two countries [17] , and may also reflect the fact that our estimate is obtained canadian data at a national level, while empirical mexican estimates were based on data from the town of la gloria with only 1575 residents.most epidemic curves in the early stage of a novel disease outbreak have multiple phases or waves due to simple stochastic ("random") variation, mechanisms of disease importing, initial transmission networks and individual/community behavior changes, improvements in the performance of surveillance systems, or changes in case definitions as the outbreak response evolves. however, changes in phase (signified by the presence of turning points identified using the richards model) may also pinpoint the timing of important changes in disease dynamics, such as effective control of the epidemic via vaccination or other control measures, depletion of disease-susceptible individuals (such that the effective reproductive number for the disease decreases to < 1), or the peak of a "seasonal" wave of infection, as occurs with [4, 18, 19] , some competing methods require more extensive and detailed data than are required to build a richards model, which requires only cumulative case data from an epidemic curve. as we also demonstrate here, the richards model produces fairly stable and credible estimates of reproductive numbers early in the outbreak, allowing these estimates to inform evolving disease table 1 , derived using early case data accessed on may 20, closely approximate our final estimates (table 1, last row) . thus, while early estimation with the richards model failed to correctly detect turning points or accurately estimate the final outbreak size, it was nonetheless useful for rapid estimation of r 0 within a month of first case occurrence in canada.as with any mathematical modeling technique, the approach presented here is subject to limitations, which include data quality associated with real-time modeling (as data are often subject to ongoing cleaning, correction, and reclassification of onset dates as further data become available), reporting delays, and problems related to missing data (which may be non-random). in our current study, the hierarchical approach used by canada's most populous province (ontario) for replacement of missing data could have had distorting effects on measured disease epidemiology: the replacement of missing onset dates with dates of specimen collection could have resulted in the artifactual appearance of early turning points identified by our model, due to limitations in weekend staffing early in the outbreak. if, as we believe to be the case, public health laboratories did not have sufficient emergency staffing to keep up with testing on weekends such that weekend specimen log-ins declined sharply, this would have created the appearance of epidemic "fade out" on weekends. other factors that might distort the apparent epidemiology of disease include changes in guidelines for laboratory testing of suspected cases, improved surveillance and public health alerts at later stages of the outbreak leading to increased case ascertainment or over-reporting of cases [20] . however, the quality of the time series will tend to improve with the duration of the epidemic, both because stochastic variation is "smoothed out", and also because small variations become less important as the cumulative series becomes longer. we note that a further application of the richards model in the context of influenza would relate to comparison of the epidemiology of the 2009 influenza a h1n1 epidemic to past canadian epidemics, though such an endeavor is beyond the scope of the present study.in summary, we believe that the richards model provides an important tool for rapid epidemic modeling in the face of a public health crisis. however, predictions based on the richards model (and all other mathematical models) should be interpreted with caution early in an epidemic, when one need to balance urgency with sound modeling. at their worst, hasty predictions are not only unhelpful, but can mislead public health officials, adversely influence public sentiments and responses, undermine the perceived credibility of future (more accurate) models, and become a hindrance to intervention and control efforts in general.additional file 1: electronic supplementary material. 2009 canada novel influenza a(h1n1) daily laboratory-confirmed pandemic h1n1 case and hospitalization data.some strains of venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis virus (veev) are reported to decrease central nervous system (cns) catecholamine metabolism [bonilla et al, 1975; levine et al, 1981; lima et al, 19831 , brain choline acetyltransferase activity [bonilla et al, 19821, brain gaba content and glutamate decarboxylase activity [bonilla et al, 19801 , and 3h-spiroperidol binding in the brain [bonilla et al, 19841 . however, other cns enzymes were unaffected, such as gaba-transaminase, glutamate dehydrogenase, and lactate dehydrogenase [bonilla et al, 19801 . herpes simplex virus and several 0 1987 alan r. liss, inc.other viruses affect the turnover rate of brain monoamines [lycke et al, 1969 [lycke et al, , 1970 lycke and ross, 19721 . some of these reports show differences among the various brain areas analyzed, suggesting selectivity of the virus [levine et al, 1981; lima et al, 1983; bonilla et al, 19841 . moreover, certain brain viral infections could produce neurological and psychiatric disorders related to monoamine disfunction [miyasalu et al, 1977; koehler and guth, 1979; rhodes et al, 19841. recently several reports focused on the preference of various cns viral infections for localized brain areas, such as the limbic system [delsedime et al, 1984; damasio and vanhoese, 1985; delamonte, 19851 , basal ganglia [fishman et al, 19851, locus coeruleus [maurizi, 1985a1 , and raphe area [maurizi, 1985b1 . the mechanism of the viral-neuron interaction needs to be clarified. the purpose of this study is to analyze in a systematic manner the potential differential effect of a strain of veev of moderate virulence on the central serotonergic system (neurons and terminals). for this reason we investigated the serotonin (5ht) turnover rate in infected mice using three pharmacological agents, namely, pargyline, p-chlorophenylalanine (pcpa), and probenecid.male nmriavic mice (20-15 g), 24 days old, from our animal facility were used in all the experiments.the animals were kept in groups of 5 per cage and inspected daily in order to follow the course of the disease as described by lima et al, 1983 . at 24 days of age, the mice remain susceptible to infection by pixuna strain of veev, but have a greater survival rate than younger mice [walder and bradish, 19791 . a dose of 300 suckling mice ic ld50 of pixuna strain was inoculated ic using solutions of bovine albumin as diluent. controls were inoculated with the same vehicle. animals were sacrificed by decapitation at 4, 7, 15, 21, 30, and 60 days after inoculation. the brain was quickly removed and washed in a solution of 0.5 mm of sodium metabisulfite in 0.5 n perchloric acid (pca) and kept in the dark until dissection. raphe area and cortex were dissected according to the procedure of aghajanian and coworkers [1973] . a simple examination of these regions was done in sections stained with hematoxiline-eosine. the raphe and cortex were homogenized in 0.5 ml and 1 ml of 0.5 mm sodium metabisulfite in 0.5 n pca, respectively. a manual homogenizer was used and an aliquot was reserved for protein determination. in normal and infected mice the protein content of raphe was 4.60 + 0.18 mg/ml, and of cortex 14.97 + 1.91 mg/ml (n = 15). after centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 10 rnin the supernatant was removed and kept at -80 "c for 1 to 5 days before the determination of 5ht and 5hiaa. recovery against time was established by the addition of internal standards. a decay curve done over a period of 3 weeks showed recoveries of 89, 80, and 70% for 5ht, and 95, 90, and 85% for 5hiaa after the first, second, and third week, respectively. protein content was calculated by the procedure of lowry and coworkers [ 19511.5ht and 5hiaa were determined by reversed phase hplc with electrochemical detection. the liquid chromatograph and detection systems consisted of a lkb 2150 pump; a lkb 2154 manual sample injector; an altex ultrasphere-ods column (25 cm x 4.6 mm id, 5 pm average particle) placed at 37°c in a lkb 2155 column oven. the amperometric detector was composed of lkb 2 143 electrochemical detector, glassy carbon working and auxiliary electrodes, and the reference elec-brain, viruses and serotonin 429 trode formed by ag/agcl coated with chlorine ions present in the mobile phase. the potential of the working electrode was set at +0.70v versus the reference electrode. the mobile phase was modified from anderson and coworkers [1981] and consists of 90% 0.01 m sodium acetate, 10 mm edta, and 10 mm sodium chloride, adjusted to ph 4.25 with glacial acetic acid, and 10% methanol. standards were prepared in 0.5 mm sodium metabisulfite in 0.5 n pca and kept at -20°c. dilution of standards were made up daily. the flow rate used was 1 ml/min. retention times were 9 and 14 min for 5ht and shiaa, respectively. the amount of 5ht and 5hiaa present in tissues was calculated from the area under the curve using the lkb 2220 recording integrator of actual samples and samples plus external standards.time course accumulation of 5ht and disappearance of 5hiaa were determined (in min) in the brain of mice injected with pargyline (sigma), an inhibitor of monoamine oxidase (mao), given in doses of 100 mg/ kg intraperitoneal (ip) [tozer et al, 1966; king et al, 1985; whilton et al, 19851 . also, the decrease in 5ht contents was measured 24 hr after the administration of pcpa (sigma), an inhibitor of tryptophan hydroxylase, given in a dose of 300 mg/kg ip [neckers and meek, 19761 . finally, the accumulation of 5hiaa was determined in mice treated with probenecid (palenzona), an inhibitor of acid transport, given in doses of 200 mg/kg ip 2 hr before sacrifice [neff et al, 1967; neckers and meek, 19761. turnover rates represent estimates of the tractions of the indole pool (i.e., initial concentration metabolized per hr). these numbers were calculated from a linear curve plotted as indole concentrations against time after pargyline injection. linearity of regression and regres- (4) (4) (4) sion coefficients were calculated according to winer [1971] . a two-tailed t test for significant differences (p < 0.05) was used to determine variations between groups. 5ht/5hiaa ratio was also calculated, as an index of turnover rate. an increase in this ratio reflects reduction of turnover rate [karoum et al, 19841 . the turnover rate [5htio ratio was calculated as an index of the density of serotonergic innervation [meek and loftstrandh, 1976; neckers and meek, 19761 .mice inoculated with pixuna strain of veev did not develop signs of illness before day 6 postinoculation. between 6 and 8 days after inoculation, signs of encephalomyelitis were observed. these included hypokinesia, lethargy, and paralysis of posterior limbs. this was followed by death. mortality was about 50% and occurred between 6 and 9 days after inoculation. no mortality occurred in sham-inoculated mice. groups of animals were designated control (c), infected with no signs (ins), and infected with signs of illness (is).at 4 days after inoculation, the content of 5ht and 5hiaa in the raphe of infected mice did not change with respect to control group. also, significant variations were not observed in the 5ht/shiaa ratio (table i) . by day 7 after inoculation, the concentrations of 5ht in the ins group did not change with respect to control group; there was a 21 % decrease in the content of 5hiaa. in contrast, the is group showed decreases of 21 % in 5ht and 30% in 5hiaa content. by day 15, 21, 30, and 60 after inoculation, there were insignificant changes in both the sht/shiaa ratio and 5ht and 5hiaa contents.the concentration of 5ht and 5hiaa did not vary significantly in the cortex of infected animals when the values were compared to those of control groups. however, decreases of 20-30% in either 5ht or 5hiaa were observed in both ins and is groups. also in this brain area, the ratio was not significantly affected (table i) . this was expected, since 5ht and 5hiaa decreased simultaneously.after administration of pargyline, 5ht accumulated quickly in the nervous tissue of normal mice. under the described conditions, 5ht saturation was observed within 30 minutes after the injection of pargyline. raphe (fig. 1) . by day 4 after inoculation, linear increase of 5ht content was observed during the first 15 minutes after pargyline administration (fig. 1a) . the 5ht concentration (p < 0.05). however, in the ins group there was a linear increase of 5ht within 15 rnin after injection of pargyline. this increase was significantly different (p < 0.05) from the concentration of this monoamine in the raphe area of the control group (fig. 1a) . the slope of 5ht accumulation in this brain area and the turnover rate were smaller in the ins group compared to those of controls. by day 7 postinoculation, there was a significant accumulation of 5ht only in control mice, 15 min after pargyline administration ( fig.   1b ; p < 0.05). the content of 5ht in is mice 15 min after pargyline injection was statistically significantly smaller than in controls. accumulation of 5ht in ins and is animals was not statistically significant. infected mice, either ins or is, the administration of pcpa did not change significantly the content of 5ht in raphe or in cortex. probenecid was given to mice 7 days after the inoculation with the virus. this treatment increased 5ht and shiaa in raphe and cortex of control and infected mice (fig. 4a,b) . the increase of 5ht and 5hiaa in ins and is groups was not statistically significant, perhaps because of the greater variations observed within the infected groups.the turnover rates/[5htio ratio in raphe and cortex are shown in table 111 . no variation of this ratio is observed between raphe and cortex of control mice under our experimental conditions. the only statistical significant modification observed within these groups was in the raphe of is mice, in which there is a decrease of the ratio with respect to control groups (table 111, histopathology. brain of animals 7 days post-inoculation showed various abnormalities. the raphe revealed: 1) in ins mice, edema, moderate gliosis, and mild signs of necrosis in the reticular formation around the raphe; 2) in is mice, there was disorganization of the tissue in the area, gliosis, and focal necrosis. the cortex showed necrosis in some areas. p < 0.001).the effect of viral infection of the cns on the metabolism of neurotransmitters has been documented in several reports [lycke et al, 1972; lima et al, 1983; bonilla et al, 19841. lyck and ross [1972] showed no change of 5ht levels in the brain of mice infected with herpes simplex virus; however, values of shiaa were 10 times greater than those of control mice. based on these results, the authors suggested that there was an increase in the turnover rate of 5ht in the infected mice.studies done in some brain regions of animals infected with various encephalytic viruses have shown high selectivity for certain regions. for instance, levine and coworkers [1981] demonstrated that the activity of tyrosine hydroxylase decreases in striatum, mesencephalum, and hypthalamus of rats surviving an infection of the guajira strain of veev. early changes in catecholamine turnover rates were demonstrated in 8 brain areas of mice infected with pixuna strain of veev [lima et al, 19831 . however, the levels of catecholamines in striatum, mesencephalum, hypothalamus, and olfactory bulbtuberculum did not return to normal by day 18 after inoculation [lima et al, 19831 . these areas correspond to the areas in which tyrosine hydroxylase is decreased [levine et al, 19811 . moreover, in the guajira strain, significant decrease in the density of 3h-spiroperidol binding sites has been reported to occur in striatum, midbrain, and frontal cortex [bonilla et al, 19841 . the observed decreases in the density of the binding sites do not suggest a generalized biochemical alteration. moreover, the activity of some brain enzymes, such as gaba transaminase, glutamate dehydrogenase, lactate dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase, and nad-malate de-the administration of pcpa showed differences in 5ht turnover in the cortex of infected mice (table 111) . this observation supports the fact that more than one method should be used for measuring turnover of monoamines [neckers and meek, 19761. however, probenecid treatment, known to be useful in the determination of monoamine turnover in the brain [tozer et al, 19661, presents some difficulties as shown by neckers and meek [i9761 and by the results of this study (fig. 4 ). it appears that the elimination of 5hiaa in infected mice presents a high degree of variation that does not allow comparison with controls despite the fact that an increase was observed in virus-inoculated groups (fig. 4) . in contrast, blocking m a 0 may be used to determine turnover rates. the latter is a good index of neuronal activity in different groups of animals. whereas other methods may be used to analyze all the steps of neurotransmitter turnover, the differences obtained with pargyline in infected mice may be due to a better regulation of synthesis, but not degradation or elimination of metabolities in the cortex (figs. 2, 3, table 11 ). further, the turnover rate/[5htio ratio could be used as an index of the density of serotonergic innervation [meek and lofstrandh, 19761 . this ratio has been reported to be greater in cell bodies than terminals, although there is disagreement in the magnitude of this difference (neckers and meek, 19761 . the decrease in the function of 5ht neurons in the ins group does not seem to occur because of a decrease in the innervation (table 111 ). the turnover rate/[5ht]o rate is smaller in the raphe of is mice and is significantly different from the control of ins groups (table 111, p < 0.001). these results suggest a decrease in the density of 5ht innervation in raphe of is and not in ins mice. this does not occur in the cortex of the same group (table 111) .the biological significance of the observed virusinduced changes in the turnover rate of 5ht is unknown. we recognize that 5ht is an important neurotransmitter that participates in several psychological and neurological functions. thus any alteration in the level or metabolism of 5ht may have a bearing on its physiological functions.hydrogenase did not differ significantly between control and guajira veev-infected mice [bonilla et al, 19801. however, the preference of various viruses such as herpes simplex for the limbic system [delsedime et al, 1984 ; damasio and vanhoese, 19851 , the coronavirus for basal ganglia [fishman et al, 19851 and certain viruses for locus coeruleus and raphe area [maurizi, 1985a,b] constitute focal lesions in which changes may be observed. also, strains, of veev of moderate or intermedian virulence were used to reduce the damage to the nervous tissue [lima et al, 19831 . in these studies, the course of the infection may be followed easily and the results are uniform throughout the experiment, especially when a defined dose of the virus is used [walder and bradish, 19791 . the advantage of this type of subclinical infection of the cns in neurochemical studies has been documented [lima et al, 19831. because of the multiple regulatory mechanisms of monoamine metabolism in the cns, the concentration of 5ht may not change even in neuronal disfunction. and even if changes occur, they may not accurately reflect neuronal activity [neff and tozer, 1968; king et al, 19851 . thus, measuring 5ht turnover rate is necessary and should be estimated by various pharmacological approaches. analysis of the accumulation of 5ht or the disappearance of 5hiaa after inhibition of m a 0 by pargyline has been widely reported [tozer et al, 1966; neckers and meek, 1976; king et al, 19851 . the accumulation of 5ht or the decline of 5hiaa need not correspond exactly (figs. 1a,3) . this is probably the result of the existance of multiple pools of 5ht [lane and aprison, 19781 . thus other methods such as the administration of inhibitors that do not completely block enzyme activity or administration of probenecid, which effect could differ in different brain regions, generate pharmacological and analytical difficulties [neckers and meek, 19761. in the present report we show that the content of 5ht and 5hiaa are not significantly modified by the infection of the cns. however, the disfunction is observed only when specific pharmacological agents are given as demonstrated by the decrease in the turnover rate of 5ht in the raphe (neurons) and to a smaller degree in the cortex (terminals) of infected mice. the fact that significant variations of turnover rate are observed in ins as well as is mice suggests that signs of the illness could be dissociated from the biochemical damage of the brain produced by the virus.by administering pargyline, a significant decrease in the turnover rate of 5ht in raphe at 4 and 7 days after inoculation was observed (fig. 1) . this decrease was not observed in the cortex by this method (fig. 1) . it is well known that receptors of 5ht in cell bodies terminals are different [baumgarten and schlossberger , 19841 . thus the neuron-virus interaction may be more effective in the cell than in their projections.the sars-cov-2 virus causes the disease covid-19, and has caused high morbidity and mortality 43 worldwide (who, 2020; wu et al., 2020) . covid-19 was first reported in canada on january 25, 2020 44 (covid-19 canada open data working group, 2020). this case, and many subsequent cases over the 45 following weeks, were linked to international travel (covid-19 canada open data working group, 46 2020). the who declared covid-19 as a pandemic on march 11, 2020-the same day that the case total 47 reported in canada exceeded 100 (government of canada, 2020). it might never be known precisely 48 when community transmission of the disease originally occurred in canada, but the first documented 49 case was reported on march 1, 2020 (covid-19 canada open data working group, 2020). however, it is 50 likely that community transmission had occurred at some point before this date. 51as of may 15 th , 2020, cumulative cases of covid-19 continue to climb in canada, with variations in the 52 trends of reported cases among provinces and territories (government of canada, 2020). there is a 53 need for mathematical models to provide projections of future incidence and cumulative cases in 54canada to assist with decision-making. during the early-to mid-stages of a novel epidemic or pandemic, 55 very little is known of the specific mechanisms of transmission of disease-this is a global issue for 56 covid-19. empirical models are useful tools to predict future trends of disease progression such as case 57 counts over the near-term. many empirical models are available for such projections, with varying 58 degrees of success in projecting cases in past outbreaks of infectious disease (e.g. chowell et al., 2016; 59 xiao et al., 2013) . reproduction number of the disease (r 0 ) and d, the latter of which is discount factor that can represent, 68 for example, interventions implemented to curb the spread of disease (fisman et al., 2014) . in part 69 because it does not require detailed mechanistic information on disease transmission, it has recently 70 been suggested for "quick and dirty" forecasting in the face of an infectious disease epidemic (tuite & 71 fisman, 2018 ). while the model has several limitations, it can provide a complement to mechanistic 72 approaches, with the advantage of being easily and rapidly applied by public health officials (tuite & 73 fisman, 2018) . 74the idea model is parameterized on the basis of the serial interval of the disease in question. given that the idea model is one tool used for producing near-term projections of cases of covid-19 87 (smith et al., submitted) , the goal of this study was to explore the impact of the assumed serial interval 88 for covid-19 on projection accuracy using a retrospective analysis. this was accomplished by producing 89 projections of cases seven days into the future at various stages of the pandemic in canada. where represents the incidence of disease in one generation of the disease (defined by the serial 97 interval), r 0 is the reproduction number, d is a discount factor that can represent the impact of public 98 health measures to limit the impact of the disease spread, and g represents the disease generation (the 99 original idea model classified this as t, but it is referred to as g herein to avoid confusion with 100 subsequent equations). while the idea model compares predicted cases versus reported cases 101 aggregated by serial interval (g has historically been an integer value), the approach was modified to 102 provide case projections on a daily basis. 103the generation of the disease, g, is defined as: 104(2) 105where t represents time in days, and serint represents the serial interval of the disease in days. this 106 parameterization allows for g to represent continuous rather than discrete values, dependent on serint. 107 i(g) is calculated at each day, t, and returns the number of cases occurring between t -serint and t. 108cumulative cases at time t is then determined by summing each i(g) calculated every corresponding 109 serial interval from t = 0 through t: 110where − represents the first determination of since the beginning of the pandemic, and 112represents the most recent determination of to date. finally, daily incidence was calculated as: 113in what follows, we defined the m-idea model to be the collection of equations (1) -(4). the m-idea 115 model is a re-parameterization of the idea model and uses an approach that allows for calculation of 116 precise daily estimates. for example, if one assumes a serial interval of seven days for a given disease, 117 the original idea model returns estimates of incidence for each week-long period. so, the idea model 118 calculates the total cases aggregated by disease generation, that is, total cases occurring between days 119 0-6, 7-13, 14-20, etc. as a result, it is impossible to determine the precise number of cases predicted for 120 a single day. the modified approach allows for g to comprise intra-generational values, and precise daily 121 estimates are determined through equations (3) and (4). 122the m-idea model was used to project daily case incidence using a range of serial intervals given the 123 lack of knowledge on the true serial interval of covid-19 at this time. it is unknown precisely when the 124 first community-acquired case of covid-19 occurred in canada. it was assumed for this analysis that 125 community transmission was occurring on or before march 11, 2020 simply (and subjectively) because it 126 was the day when reported cumulative cases in canada exceeded 100. a simple back-calculation from 127 this date, assuming an a priori r 0 of 2, was conducted to anchor the model so that march 11, 2020 128 corresponded to generation 6 of the disease in canada. the assumed occurrence of the first case of 129 community-acquired covid-19 in canada was therefore dependent on the serial interval used. 130the m-idea model was implemented in microsoft excel with the add-ins @risk version 8.0 and evolver 131 version 8.0 (palisade corporation, new york, usa) to allow for monte carlo simulation using latin 132hypercube sampling and optimization of model parameters. optimization of r 0 and d parameters was 133 accomplished through minimizing the sum-of-square differences between predicted and observed daily 134 incidence case counts. this least-squares fitting method was performed using the past twenty days of 135 observed data, aside from the first three projection days, which only used 5, 10, and 15 days worth of 136 data, respectively, since that was all that was available from march 11 onwards. near-term projections 137 using the m-idea model were made every five days using data from projection day (pd) 0 (march 11, 138 2020) through to pd 55 (may 4, 2020). the first projection occurred on pd 5, and considers data 139 reported from march 11, 2020 through march 15, 2020, whereas the last projection is referred to as pd 140 55 and considered data reported from april 15, 2020 through may 4, 2020. case data were downloaded 141 from www.canada.ca on may 11, 2020. on may 3, 2020, the quebec government announced that new 142 case totals reported that day included 1,317 previously unreported cases from april. therefore, 143 incidence on may 3, 2020 was reduced by 1,317 cases to account for this reporting error. model 144 parameter solutions were derived for a range of discrete integer serial interval values on each pd using 145 the optquest optimization function in evolver such that optimization results remained stable, defined as 146 within 0.01% for 20,000 consecutive trials. the optquest engine uses methods of tabu search, scatter 147 search, integer programming, and neural networks in a novel algorithm. 148to provide a comparative visual of projections produced by both the original idea model and the m-149 idea, fitting was performed as described above, except it was performed on all data reported from 150march 11, , 2020 through may 10, 2020, arbitrarily assuming a five day serial interval. the entire dataset 151 was used because limiting data to only the past 20 days of reporting resulted in too few data points to fit 152 the idea model. 153following analysis of the deterministic serial interval values, a stochastic approach was considered 154fitting was generally performed using the same procedure as for deterministic serial intervals. however, 155 the serial interval used on each pd was allowed to range uniformly from either 1 to 4 days or 5 to 9 156 days, given the results of the deterministic approach. to derive 90% prediction intervals and minimum 157 and maximum estimates, a poisson error structure in the reported data was assumed. monte carlo 158 simulations with latin hypercube sampling were performed for 1,000 iterations to consider both the 159 impact of total uncertainty of the serial interval of covid-19 as well as the reported case data; for 160 computational practicality the parameter values were considered stable if they remained within 0.01% 161 for 500 trials (rather than the 20,000 trials used for deterministic simulations). 162for each pd, daily incident cases projected for seven days in the future were compared with actual case 163 counts reported since the date of projection (e.g., pd 5 projections made using data up to march 15, 164 2020 were compared with cases reported on march 16 through march 22, 2020) using the root mean 165 square error (rmse): 166where ( is the reported value at time t, ( & is the model projection at time t, and n is the number of 168 observations. 169a plot of predicted incidence produced by the original idea and m-idea models using a five day serial 171 interval and reported incidence through may 10, 2020 is provided in figure 1 table 1 , and model performance in figure 3 . estimated r 0 179 parameters tended to increase with serial interval; however, in most cases, the control parameter, d, 180 also increased with serial interval (table 1) . generally, the serial intervals that provided the best fits 181 were variable throughout the first two weeks of the projection period. once a full 20 days of data had 182 accumulated for fitting, lower serial intervals (1 to 4 days) provided better predictive capability through 183 pd 30. however, from pd 35 onward, in most cases higher serial intervals (5 to 9 days) were associated 184 with better projection performance (figure 3) , and serial intervals ranging from 1 to 4 days considerably 185 under-predicted future incidence in the near-term. 186 results from the stochastic approach to incorporate uncertainty in the serial interval used in the m-idea 190 are provided in figure 4 . serial intervals were allowed to range uniformly from 1 through 4 days for pds 191 5 through 30, and 5 through 9 days for pds 35 through 55, because these ranges generally included the 192 best fit discrete serial intervals in figure 3 . this approach provides large prediction intervals and ranges 193 between minimum and maximum values due to the incorporation of a range of serial intervals. in most 194 cases, this approach captures the majority of future reported incidence data, with some notable 195 exceptions on pd 10, 15, and 35. the performance of the m-idea for projection cases in the near-term was improved using shorter serial 226 intervals (1-4 days) at early stages of the pandemic, and longer serial intervals at mid to late-stages (5-9 227 days). correspondingly, studies examining pooled data from multiple countries reported median serial 228 intervals ranging from 4 to 4.6 days between december 12, 2019 and february 5, 2020, and 6. best-fit projections at later pds considered herein were associated with greater control parameter (d) 241values (but also greater r 0 values compared to shorter serial intervals). 242the best-fit parameters for the m-idea model were dependent on the serial interval used. generally, 243 the estimated r 0 and d parameters both increased with serial interval (table 1) . projections made in 244 mid-april (pd 35) were associated with the highest r 0 values across the projection period when using 245 serial intervals ranging from three to eight days. on its own, this could mistakenly be interpreted as an 246 indication of increased disease transmission-which is contrary to expectations given that these 247 projections were made approximately one month following implementation of public health measures 248 across canada. however, in most cases, d values were also greater compared to earlier pds. this 249 emphasizes that the m-idea is not a tool intended to produce r 0 values in a vacuum, and r 0 must be 250 presented and considered hand-in-hand alongside its associated d value. 251given a lack of knowledge of the actual pandemic start date in canada, march 11, 2020 was chosen as 252 an anchoring point for covid-19 community transmission in canada for the m-idea model, 253 corresponding to generation 6 of the disease. there is considerable uncertainty around the start date of 254 community transmission in canada. with this approach, the calculated start date varied with serial 255 interval (i.e., a serial interval of 1 day corresponded with start date of march 5, 2020, whereas a serial 256 interval of 9 days corresponded with a start date of jan 17, 2020), as well as the assumed r 0 of the 257 disease (a r 0 of 2 was assumed a priori for this analysis). the impact of the assumed start date of the 258 pandemic can have an influence on m-idea model projections: when march 11, 2020 was instead 259 anchored to lower or higher generations relative to generation 6, resulting near-term projections for pd 260 55 (the only pd for which this was explored) were also lower and higher, respectively (results not 261 shown). it is also likely that best fit serial intervals for each pd would vary with differing generation 262 numbers anchored to march 11, 2020. future work could explore these impacts more thoroughly. 263implementations of the idea model for ebola were better able to predict the epidemic peak in west 264africa compared to producing accurate short-term projections (tuite & fisman, 2018) . the m-idea was 265 unable to produce accurate short-term projections at early stages for the pandemic in canada, which is 266 unsurprising given the rapidly changing landscape of public health intervention and testing strategies 267 during these early stages, as well as the lack of time-series data for fitting at early stages. the best fits 268 serial intervals appeared to stabilize somewhat from pd 25 onwards. a comparison of three 269 phenomenological models (the generalized richard's model, logistic, and stochastic m-idea models), 270showed that none of the models provided reasonable accurate projections in early march of 2020 271 (smith et al., submitted) . 272the stochastic approach used can account for the uncertainty around the serial interval of covid-19, 273 and is preferred for the m-idea during a dynamic situation such as in the midst of a major pandemic. 274various distributions of serial intervals coupled with a poisson error structure in reported case data 275 were implemented, and resultant distributions of case incidence were projected. this approach used 276 inherently accounts for correlation between m-idea parameters r 0 and d. through iterative fitting 277 procedures, the incidence curves represent the 90% prediction intervals (and minimum and maximum) 278for each data point of each projection associated with specific solutions of r 0 and d. this is more realistic 279 than simply calculating the 5 th and 95 th percentiles of r 0 and d across simulations and deriving prediction 280 intervals, which would result in highly unlikely to impossible combinations of parameters. 281it was shown here that the serial interval associated with the best fit of the m-idea model changes 282 throughout the course of the covid-19 pandemic in canada. it is proposed that the serial interval used 283 in the m-idea model be frequently updated through retrospective analysis of model performance, and 284 modified where necessary for future projections. for example, here it was shown that lower and higher 285 serial intervals produced more accurate projections at earlier and later stages, respectively, of the 286 covid-19 pandemic in canada. low serial intervals (1 to 4 days) projected considerably lower incidence 287 than reported for future cases at the later stages of this study period. although the idea model was not 288 developed as a tool to predict the actual serial interval of a disease, the use of the m-idea provides 289 evidence that the serial interval of covid-19 at the national level in canada has increased over the 290 course of the pandemic. while the rmse was used to assess model performance, it is possible that 291 results could vary when using alternate error metrics. caution is advised before adopting these same 292 serial intervals for application of phenomenological models to other datasets, at the regional (e.g. 293 provinces and territories) or international scale. a similar analysis should be conducted in other areas to 294 determine the serial interval(s) that provides the best fit to date in a recurring, iterative manner. 295it has been previously proposed that the idea model could implement "multiple time-specific control 296 parameters" to improve forecasting (tuite & fisman, 2018) . until then, incorporating uncertainty 297 through a stochastic approach to parameterize the serial interval is preferred, as it has been shown that 298 the serial interval associated with the more accurate near-term projections varied throughout the study 299 period. although this is somewhat akin to trying to "hit a moving target", it is nevertheless preferable 300 and more biologically plausible compared to assuming an identical, discrete value serial interval 301 throughout the pandemic. see text for full details on the fitting procedure. projections were made every five days using data reported since march 11, 2020. all incidence data up to and including the vertical red line were used to fit the model. incidence data reported since the projections are plotted to the right of the vertical red line. a) projection day (pd) 5; b) pd 10; c) pd 15; d) pd 20; e) pd 25; f) pd 30; g) pd 35; h) pd 40; i) pd 45; j) pd 50; k) pd 55. plots for pds 5 through 30 (a-f) were derived with a uniformly distributed serial interval ranging from one to four days, and assuming a poisson error structure in reported data. plots for pds 35 through 55 reflect a serial interval ranging from five through nine days, also assuming a poisson error structure in reported data. 90% prediction intervals and minimum and maximum predicted values are indicated in shaded red and pink, respectively.introduction to bank bailouts, bail-ins and related topics covered in the book bank bailouts occur when governments, central banks, or other public national or international organizations supported by governmentsdsuch as the international monetary fund (imf), the european commission, and the european stability mechanism (esm)dprovide assistance to banks during times of financial distress beyond the support given in normal circumstances. the assistance may be broadly distributed during financial crises or narrowly focused during other times to banks that are in significant financial distress or in danger of failing. as discussed in more detail below, these bailouts may take many different forms. bank bail-ins differ from bailouts in that private-sector agents, such as shareholders, creditors, or other banking organizations, provide the aid. the agents providing this bail-in aid mostly agree to give support in advance, whereas bailouts are more often arranged on an ad hoc basis shortly before the support is provided.many of the bailouts and bail-ins, including the troubled asset relief program (tarp) prominently featured in this book, are primarily of the bhcs that own banks, rather than the banks themselves. for expositional convenience, we generally use the term "bank" to mean either a bank or a bhc, except in circumstances for which this would create confusion or misrepresent the facts. importantly, this book is only about bailouts, bail-ins, and other resolutions of banks, and not the rescue methods of other financial institutions and markets that took place during recent financial crises, such as the global financial crisis and the european sovereign debt crisis.there are many different types of bank bailouts and bail-ins. for the purposes of this book, we take the broadest possible view of what constitutes a bailout or bail-in in order to ensure that we leave no stone unturned. bailouts may take the form of capital injections as in the tarp case, as well as liquidity provisions, guarantees of bank liabilities, government takeovers of banks or other institutions that are interconnected to banks, asset relief programs such as purchases of securities for which banks have large inventories, and public certifications of the safety of the banks. as shown below, all of these types of bank bailouts occurred in the united states (us) in response to the global financial crisis of the late 2000s that started in the us and its aftermath. many of these types of bailouts also took place in europe and other places around the world in response to the spread of the global financial crisis from the united states to other countries, as well as the european sovereign debt crisis that followed.bank bail-ins often take the form of converting one or more different debt instruments to equity. these instruments include, but are not limited to subordinated debt, senior unsecured debt, contingent convertible bonds (cocos), and uninsured deposits. other forms of bail-ins include requiring equity holders to provide extra capital (e.g., double liability), whole or partial sale of a distressed or about-to-fail bank to another institution to provide capital, and capital provision by other nongovernment organizations. bail-ins may also include good bankebad bank separations. these can involve the formation of a bridge institution that holds the "good" or relatively safe assets of a distressed organization temporarily until sale to recover value, while "bad" or relatively risky assets are isolated or transferred to an asset management vehicle for orderly winding down.many of these types of bank bail-ins were implemented in the us and europe during and after the financial crises of the late 2000s and early 2010s. two very broad bail-in mechanisms deserve special attention. in the us, the orderly liquidation authority (ola) bail-in regime was put into effect for some large banking organizations in the us by the doddefrank act of 2010. ola converts subordinated debt and possibly some other uninsured credits into equity in the event of distress and impending failure of one or more of these organizations. in the european union (eu), the bank recovery and resolution directive (brrd) and the single resolution mechanism (srm) were introduced in 2014 and formally implemented in 2016. under the brrd, equity holders and a number of uninsured creditors must suffer losses and contribute to the recapitalization of the bank similar to ola. a number of other resolution tools, such as sale of business tool, are also put into place to deal with the resolution of failing institutions. 1 after the full brrd implementation, the 1 under brrd article 2(1) (57), bail-in is defined as "the mechanism for effecting the exercise by a resolution authority of the write-down and conversion powers in relation to liabilities of an institution under resolution." first resolution carried out was banco popular in june 2017, which entailed the write-down of the institution's own funds, bail-in of subordinated debtholders, as well as the sale of the institution to banco santander. 2 however, a number of bail-in cases occured in eu prior to the full implementation of the brrd bail-in provisions, including the resolution of two cypriot large banks in 2013, resolution of four greek banks in 2014, and the resolution of four small italian banks in 2015. please see box 1.5 below for brief summaries of these cases.all of these types of bailouts and bail-ins are discussed in this book, and real-world examples of them are provided. bank bailouts and bail-ins usually, but not always, occur in response to financial crises, or are undertaken to prevent idiosyncratic events from evolving into such crises. bailouts and bail-ins in response to financial crises are designed to temporarily stabilize the financial system and mitigate the real economic consequences of these systemic problems, including recessions that may stem from widespread bank distress and failures. in some cases, bailouts and bail-ins are also used in nonfinancial crisis times for individual distressed banks that are considered too-big-to-fail (tbtf) or too-interconnected-to-fail (titf), or groups of banks in similar conditions that are considered too-many-to-fail (tmtf). the goals of these latter sets of bailouts and bail-ins are to prevent the emergence of financial crises and their consequences and/or to avoid the large economic losses associated with the failures of these banks.prior to and during the global financial crisis and european sovereign debt crisis, bank bailouts were the most frequent responses by governments to financial crises, as well as to tbtf, titf, or tmtf problems. boxes 1.1 and 1.2 provide lists of bank bailouts during these financial crises in the us and eu, respectively. we are unable to discuss the actions taken during the global coronavirus financial crisis, which was beginning as this book was going to press. as shown in box 1.1, there were many large programs to aid the banks in the us during and after the global financial crisis. many consider the capital purchase program (cpp) component of tarp as "the" bank bailout in the us. under the cpp, the us treasury department injected $204.9 billion of preferred equity into 709 banking organizations. another $40 billion was distributed to two large banking organizations through the targeted investment program (tip), and $0.57 billion was disbursed to 84 institutions under the community development capital initiative 2 in contrast to ola, bail-in provisions under brrd allow access to external financial support after writing down and conversion of shares and eligible liabilities up to a minimum of 8% of the bank's total liabilities. over $4 billion in 332 institutions sblf provided preferred capital injections to qualified community banks (assets < $10 billion) in order to encourage small business lending.u . s . f o r b a n k i n g o r g a n i z a t i o n s d u r i n g t h e g l o b a l f i n a n c i a l c r i s i s bailoutin effect before, during, and after the financial crisis. (cdci) of tarp. the original plan for tarp was to purchase "toxic" mortgage-backed securities (mbs), but this role later fell to federal reserve in its quantitative easing (qe) programs, as discussed below. also shown in box 1.1, the federal reserve greatly expanded its discount window program to provide funds with maturities beyond overnight, which we refer to as the term discount window (tdw) program. the federal reserve also created the term auction facilities (taf) to address the potential stigma associated with borrowing from the lender of last resort through the discount window, encourage bank participation, and provide additional liquidity to the banks. the federal deposit insurance corporation (fdic) enacted the temporary liquidity guarantee program (tlgp), which guaranteed some otherwise uninsured bank creditors through the transaction account guarantee program (tagp) and the debt guarantee program (dgp), preventing possible liquidity drains from the banks. the federal home loan bank (fhlb) system provided low-cost funding to local banks to support mortgage lending. the federal reserve additionally engaged in unconventional monetary policy, including massive purchases of mbs, well beyond the $700 billion originally planned for tarp, as well as trillions of dollars more of longterm treasuries under the qe programs. qe was implemented in four phases, qe1, qe2, qe3, and qe4, with pauses in between them. the us treasury and federal reserve also bailed out an insurance company, american international group (aig), using a combination of loans and capital injections. although aig is not a bank, we consider this as a type of bank bailout because the company owed significant amount of funds to a number of large banks and this helped avoid large losses for these banks.the reader needs not agree with our characterization of all of these us government, federal reserve, and other agency actions as bank bailouts to gain something from this book. whether the reader (1) thinks of tarp or cpp as "the" us bank bailout, (2) agrees that all of the actions described above are bailouts, or (3) lands somewhere in between, there should be plenty of information to inform the reader.bailouts in europe were originally initiated by individual country governments or small groups of governments as large banks in their countries were affected by the financial crises. for example, in august 2008, northern rock bank was bailed out by the bank of england and was later nationalized. shortly thereafter, fortis, and later dexia, both of which operated in multiple nations, were bailed out by the governments of belgium, luxembourg, and netherlands. the government of ireland announced its decision to guarantee all deposits and debts of six irish banks and all their subsidiaries abroad. many other banks in other eu countries were bailed out by their own governments or nationalized.as the financial crises became aggravated, an eu-level bailout approach was considered necessary to handle the situation, as shown in box 1.2. between 2008 and 2016, the european commission approved a total of about v5.0 trillion of state aid to be granted to 28 eu countries, of which about v1.9 trillion was effectively implemented. 3 the total implemented measures accounted for about 13.1% of 2016 eu gross domestic product (gdp), with considerable variation across countries. four different types of bailout support were used: guarantees on bank liabilities (61% of the total support), capital injections or recapitalizations (24% of the total support), asset relief interventions (10% of the total support), and bank liquidity support (5% of the total support) ( fig. 1.1  below) . in all, eu states made extensive use of various forms of government support to stabilize the banking sector. guarantees, rather than capital injections, were the most frequently used bailout instrument.bailouts are often very attractive to government officials because they can usually be put together relatively quickly and do not require the advance cooperation of private-sector agents that bail-ins often do. bailouts help avoid or mitigate short-term financial system problems, increase stability, reduce systemic risk, and reduce the likelihood and severity of recessions which are often the consequences of banks' financial distress and failures. as discussed in later chapters, bailouts are also generally found to increase credit supply and improve economicasset relief interventions 10%other liquidity measures 5% % of total aid conditions by increasing employment and reducing firm and consumer bankruptcies.however, bailouts also come with social costs. they may create longrun moral hazard incentives for banks to take on excessive risks because bailouts may raise expectations of future bailouts that may weaken market discipline. bailouts may also impose costs on taxpayers that may not be adequately compensated for the risks taken. bailouts of some banks and not others could create distortions in bank competition as well. bailouts may additionally distort funds allocation to the extent that they may be distributed partially according to the banks' political and regulatory connections. thus, bailouts have a multitude of effects, and as discussed further below, the theory does not provide a clear answer ex ante as to whether the net effect of bailouts are considered beneficial.the bank bailouts during the global financial crisis and european sovereign debt crisis were largely unpopular. fig. 1 .2, the chicago booth / kellogg school financial trust index survey, demonstrates some of this disapproval for us. it suggests that us respondents have the least trust in bailed-out banks over the period 2009-2015. similarly, a poll by gallup about confidence in banks for selected eu countries with bailouts, shows that confidence in these banks has been very slow to return to pre-crisis levels 4 . some major reasons behind this unpopularity are the perceived unfairness of bailing out wealthy banks and that bailouts are often quite expensive for governments and taxpayers, and sometimes led to sovereign debt problems (e.g., spain).in part as a result of the general dissatisfaction with the bailouts implemented during the global financial crisis and european sovereign debt crisis, governments established bail-in regimes, in which private stakeholders provide much of the capital, liquidity, guarantees, or other support. boxes 1.3 and 1.4 show the bail-in programs in the us and the eu, respectively, after these financial crises. currently, large banks in bothbecame effective after the implementation of the dodd frank act in 2010:q3.bail-in is applied to large systemically important institutions in default or danger of default whose failure would have adverse effects on the financial system and the real economy.became mandatory on jan. 1, 2016.bail-in applied to 8% of banks' liabilities and own funds before any state aid can be used for distressed institutions.the us and the eu are under bail-in regimes via the ola and the brrd, respectively. ola was established by the doddefrank act of 2010. an ola event is triggered when a very large bhc is in default or danger of default, and its failure would have serious adverse financial stability consequences. the fdic temporarily takes over the bhc and fires its management, while the banks and other holding company subsidiaries it owns continue to operate. existing shareholders are wiped out and subordinated debtholders and possibly other uninsured creditors have part of their debt claims turned into equity capital, so that the bhc becomes well capitalized. the bhc is then returned to private hands with new management.importantly, while no ola bail-in event has been triggered for any bhc as of this writing, this does not mean that ola has not had an impact on bhc behavior or the stability of the financial system. to the contrary, we review some research below that suggests that the incentives created by the ola regime have already had significant effects in terms of encouraging banks to hold higher capital ratios and respond to distress by increasing these ratios more quickly. of course, more evidence will be revealed about the effectiveness of ola if and when it is triggered in the future, possibly during forthcoming financial crises.in the eu, the brrd and the srm became effective in january 2016. the goal was to create a common framework for bank resolution across all eu member states to deal with resolving potential failure of large financial institutions. the brrd is the set of rules for bail-ins, while the srm is the organization that implements these rules. once an institution reaches the point of nonviability and is declared as "failing or likely to fail," a bail-in tool allows regulators to conduct a fast recapitalization of a troubled institution prior to default by either writing-off or converting liabilities to equity and requiring creditors to take losses on holdings according to a certain hierarchy. particularly, brrd establishes the hierarchy such that the bail-in will affect equity holders first, followed by subordinated debt holders, senior unsecured debt holders, and uninsured depositors. this is intended to minimize the costs for taxpayers and real economy. there is some experience with and research on these bail-in regimes as shown by the individual eu country bail-in examples in box 1.5. similar to ola, more evidence about the effectiveness of brrd will be revealed if and when the system is more thoroughly tested during future financial crises.as shown in box 1.6 and discussed below, bail-in regimes may have advantages over bailout regimes in terms of better safeguarding taxpayer funds and lessening unfair competitive advantages that bailouts may provide to the recipient banks. they may also induce more prudent bank management behavior in terms of holding preemptively adequate capital to avoid bail-ins. in addition, the market participants provision of increased market discipline from bail-ins may be nimbler than supervisory authorities exerting supervisory discipline in reducing longterm moral hazard incentives for banks to allow capital to fall too low or shift into riskier portfolios.there are also some potential disadvantages of bail-ins. these include possibly more delays and high financial costs in implementation compared to bailouts; credibility problems that the governments may bail box 1.5 panellinia bank was resolved by transferring selected assets and liabilities to piraeus bank, through a tender process. the common and preferred shares remained in the entity in liquidation and were bailed-in. cooperative bank of peloponnese was put in resolution, deposits were transferred to national bank of greece following a tender process, while all other assets and remaining liabilities, as well as shareholders, were bailed-in. two of the four main greek banks (national bank of greece and piraeus bank) were partially recapitalized but most bondholders and shareholders were bailed-in and did incur losses. four small italian banks (banca marche, banca popolare dell'etruria, cassa di risparmio di ferrara, and cassa di risparmio della provincia di chieti, with aggregate total assets of €47 billion) were bailed-in and all assets and liabilities were transferred to bridge banks, and senior bondholders were spared, but equity holders and subordinated debtholders incurred losses. banca popolare di vicenza (10th largest) and veneto banca (11th largest) are two banks that were declared by the european central bank (ecb) as "failing or likely to fail" and their good assets were sold to intesa sanpaolo, italy's 2nd largest bank by assets for €1, and their bad assets were put into a "bad bank". banca monte dei paschi di siena spa (bmps) -italy's 4th largest bank, faced a precautionary recapitalization with bail-in. the italian government received approval from the eu to bail out the bank, injecting €5.4 billion (giving it a 70% stake) into the bank, while bank's shareholders and junior creditors took losses first for an estimated €4.3 billion to minimize the bill for the government.continued 1.1 the focus of the book out the banks instead; difficulties in handling systemic events that may include distress of many large institutions at the same time; contagion and run-off by creditors; potentially transferring risks to private-sector agents that do not understand these risks; and transmitting financial problems to other parts of the financial system which may also be fragile at the same time as banks. last but not least, bail-ins may also lead to worse outcomes in credit supply and economic conditions for the connected borrowers of the bailed-in institutions compared to bailouts. we refer the reader to chapter 27 for a more in-depth analysis of the benefits and costs of bailouts, bail-ins, and other approaches for dealing with the financial distress of important financial institutions. as discussed below, some theoretical research finds similar social welfare values for bailouts and bail-ins, measured by the expected value of the recipient bank minus the expected external costs on society from its default. however, the research also shows a key advantage of bail-ins over bailouts in that bail-ins provide superior ex ante incentives for banks to rebuild capital preemptively during financial distress. this advantage is confirmed by empirical analysis. bail-ins may also be banco espirito santo (bes) was resolved via a bail-in. portuguese authorities used a bridge bank strategy to put the bank's good assets and liabilities, together with an equity injection from the portugal resolution fund. equity holders and subordinated debtholders were left in the legacy bank and faced severe losses. banco internacional do funchal (banif, 7th largest bank) was resolved using the same good bank/bad bank split, where the good assets were sold to santander with state aid help, while another entity was created to house some of the bad assets. equity holders and subordinated bondholders were left behind in the legacy bank, incurring losses.banco popular (6th largest bank) 2017 ecb declared the bank as "failing or likely to fail" and immediately after banco santander (spain's largest bank) announced that it would buy popular for a nominal €1 and carry out a capital increase of €7 billion to cover the capital and provisions required to boost banco popular's finances. the deal caused shareholders and some bondholders to be wiped out (including owners of contingent convertible debt which had their debt turned into equity).-cont'd an alternative response to financial crises and/or the distress of tbtf, titf, or tmtf banks is what we refer to as bankruptcy/failure. this is one case in which we must distinguish between banks and bhcs. by bankruptcy/failure, we mean that the bhc declares bankruptcy and bank or banks it owns are allowed to fail.this approach may have social advantages in terms of reduced longterm moral hazard incentives and improved market discipline. that is, reduced expectations of government interventions may encourage banks and bhcs to hold higher capital ratios to protect themselves against this outcome and may increase debtholders' incentives to monitor and react to risks to preserve the value of their claims. as discussed below, some theoretical research supports the notion that bankruptcy/failure would result in higher capital ratios.however, bankruptcy/failure may also pose very substantial shortterm risks to the financial system and real economy. the bankruptcy of the bhc results in its stock market value being wiped out and losses imposed on all of its creditor financial institutions, which may greatly harm the financial system. these creditor institutions may, in turn, become distressed, which further weakens the financial system and may result in reduced credit to the public, also harming the real economy. the failure of the bank itself results in a cutoff of credit to all of its borrowers, which may also have a first-order effect in damaging the real economy.these dangers to the financial system and the real economy may be exacerbated by two factors. first, these financial and economic problems may be exacerbated during a financial crisis, when many bhcs may become bankrupt and many banks may fail. second, the judicial system for handling the bankruptcy process may have difficulties in terms of the financial expertise and speed needed to resolve complex financial institutions, particularly during a financial crisis.the theoretical research discussed below suggests that at least under some assumptions, bankruptcy/failure is strictly dominated by bailouts and bail-ins in terms of both social welfare and the private welfare of shareholders. it is also dominated by bail-ins in terms of providing incentives for banks to recapitalize to avoid financial distress.during the global financial crisis, very few large financial institutions were allowed to fail. in the us, one large, very interconnected investment bank, lehman brothers, and two large, relatively unconnected thrift institutions, washington mutual and indymac bank, failed. there is virtual consensus that the lehman brothers failure caused significant harm to both the financial system and the real economy, although it is difficult to determine how much of the trillions of dollars of costs to the us economy of the crisis can be attributed to the effects of this one failure.strategies such as allowing significant numbers of failures during financial crises or letting tbtf, titf, or tmtf banks fail have not been widely implemented in developed economies since the great depression. bernanke (1983) suggests that the widespread bank failures during the great depression reduced lending, which made the economy much worse. friedman and schwartz (1963) find that the reduction of money supply caused by these bank failures also significantly harmed the economy.nonetheless, widespread implementation of bankruptcy/failure is important to address because it is a future possibility. it was advocated in the financial choice act, which passed the us house of representatives in 2017, although it was not enacted. the act would expand the role of bankruptcy for large banking organizations and allow failures of large banks by repealing ola and establishing a new section of the us bankruptcy code (chapter 14) to resolve failed complex financial institutions. resolutions would be conducted under the auspices of a bankruptcy court and would not include regulatory intervention.an alternative way to resolve the distress and impending failure of large, complex banking organizations is to reorganize them using living wills, or resolution plans that are designed ex ante by these organizations to restore financial strength and viability. in the us, section 165(d) of the doddefrank act requires banking organizations with total assets of $50 billion or more to report annually to the federal reserve and the fdic their plans for rapid and orderly resolution under the us bankruptcy code in the event of material distress or failure. the g20 countries have also requested living wills from the top 24 global banks and six insurance companies (claessens, herring, schoenmaker, and summe, 2010) . for example, under the living will, the banks may develop scenarios under which certain, less important, parts can be sold, or put into liquidation while the systemically important parts may then be rescued (e.g., avgouleas, goodhart, and schoenmaker, 2013) . chapter 4 gives more details about these resolution tools, provides excerpts from two actual living wills posted by large us bhcs, and discusses implications of these plans for complex domestic and international organizations.from a theoretical viewpoint, living wills are much like the bankruptcy/ failure option discussed above, except that they are designed to be more orderly and preserve more of the financially viable parts of the organization. it is also noteworthy that in the us, ola bail-in resolution method and living wills are both products of the doddefrank act, despite the fact that they appear to be substitute resolution approaches that may not be executed simultaneously on the same banking organization.another alternative response to bank financial distress, known as either "regulatory forbearance" or "capital forbearance," involves allowing banks with very low or negative capital ratios to continue operating without significant regulatory intervention or failure. this approach is sometimes used to save on closure costs, postpone dealing with problems until another regulator is in charge, or in the hope that the problems will be reversed on their own. however, it may create more losses in the long run.as discussed below in part iii of the book, allowing significant numbers of problematic financial institutions to go unresolved was applied widely in the 1980s to savings and loans (s&ls) and to a lesser extent to banks at that time. many s&ls suffered significant interest rate risk losses that devastated their equity capital as all of their mortgages were required to be fixed-rate, while short-term interest rates rose as a result of very restrictive monetary policy. they borrowed at high rates in the short-term and were locked in low rates on their loans in the long-term and as a consequence, they lost most or all of their market values.regulators largely let these "zombie thrifts" with low or negative capital stay open, and congress actually expanded their investment powers in the 1980 depository institutions deregulation and monetary control act (didmca) and 1982 garnest. germain act. in some cases, moral hazard incentives from the lack of capital resulted in additional credit risk and other problems. the results of these problems were massive losses to taxpayers in the long run until the situation was somewhat resolved by the passage of the financial institutions reform, recovery, and enforcement act (firrea) in 1989.chapter 2 discusses the conditions that typically result in bailouts, bailins, and other resolutions. these conditions are usually financial crises and/or the distress of tbtf, titf, or tmtf banks. we also discuss some research on what tends to bring about financial crises and bank distress. in particular, we focus on excessive lending booms and liquidity buildups as determinants of financial crises. we also review the literature on bank performance and failure to inform the reader about what brings about the distress and potential failure of tbtf, titf, and tmtf banks.1.2.2 descriptions of tarp and other bank bailouts, bail-ins, and other resolutions in the us and around the world chapter 3 describes bailouts and bail-ins around the world, as well as alternatives such as bankruptcy/failure, living wills, regulatory forbearance, and breaking up large complex banking organizations according to size or activities. we pay particular attention to tarp and the other bailouts during the global financial crisis and european sovereign debt crisis. we also focus on ola and brrd and other bail-in programs that were implemented following these crises.chapter 4 reviews the theories of bank bailouts, bail-ins, and other resolution approaches, including bankruptcy/failure, reorganization using living wills, and regulatory forbearance. in doing so, we discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the different resolution approaches.most of the chapter follows the theoretical pathways through which bailouts and bail-ins may or may not achieve their ultimate goals or outcomes of reducing systemic risk and improving the real economy. to succeed in these ultimate goals, bailouts and bail-ins must first achieve certain intermediate financial and economic outcomes by affecting the behavior of the banks, markets, and stakeholders. these intermediate outcomes may then affect the ultimate outcomes for systemic risk and the real economy. finally, the interactions between systemic risk and the real economy must be taken into account. thus, the effects of bailouts and bailins on systemic risk and the real economy are traced through the direct channels that affect the intermediate financial and economic outcomes to the effects on these ultimate outcomes and their interactions.the chapter also reviews further theoretical research covering bailouts, bail-ins, and other resolution approaches, and comparisons among these methods.part ii contains 11 chapters that review the empirical research on the determinants and effects of the tarp bailout, which took place in the us during the global financial crisis. tarp was mainly designed to reduce risks to the financial system due to the crisis and to improve the real economy relative to what its condition would otherwise be in the absence of the bailout.as indicated above, there is more research on tarp than on any bailout or bail-in program. notably, the empirical methods employed in most of the tarp studies are quite good because tarp may be considered a rare quasi-natural experiment in the research literature that is reasonably exogenous because it was largely unexpected. most of the studies use the difference-in-difference (did) methods with relatively clean instrumental variables for identification.there are several reasons for our extra emphasis on tarp. first, tarp was a key response to the biggest financial crisis in modern times. the costs to the us economy alone of the global financial crisis are estimated to be in the range of $12 trillione$22 trillion in terms of lost output and destruction of financial assets (e.g., atkinson, luttrell, and rosenblum, 2013 ; u.s. government accountability office report, 2013; garcia, 2015) .second, tarp was a very large and widespread bailout. the us treasury injected over $200 billion in preferred equity capital into over 700 banks and other depository financial institutions in a relatively short time period.third, tarp has by far had the most public and media attention, and it likely sparked many of the regulatory changes that followed the subprime crisis, including the doddefrank act that substantially increased bank regulation and created the ola bail-in regime discussed above. as noted above, it is often considered to be "the" bank bailout in the press, with much less recognition of the other bailouts or even disagreement that the liquidity injections, guarantees, and the other actions discussed above are bank bailouts. currently, there is much disagreement over the short-run and long-run effectiveness of tarp, with most of the initial advocates and opponents of the program sticking to their original positions in spite of the substantial research on tarp, discussed next.fourth, there is much more research on tarp than any other bank bailout or bail-in program. researchers have studied the determinants of which banks were bailed out and repaid the funds early; the effects of tarp on the market valuations of the bailed-out banks; its impacts on bank market discipline, leverage risk, competition, credit supply, and portfolio risk, as well as the bearing of the program on bank credit customers. importantly, there is also research conducted to determine whether tarp was effective in achieving its two main goals of boosting the real economy and reducing systemic risk.part ii of the book has chapters devoted to each of these topics. we acknowledge in part ii that these topics are highly interrelated, although the individual research papers do not necessarily draw out all of the implications of tarp. for example, the papers that focus on the direct impact of tarp on bank credit supply do not always discuss fully the indirect effects of this credit on bank portfolio risks, the welfare of credit customers, the real economy, and systemic risk. to the best of our abilities, we try to tie together the results of the papers on seemingly different tarp research topics. to keep things manageable and avoid repetition, we discuss each direct research result only in the chapter on that topic, leaving the indirect effects for later chapters.chapter 5 discusses the main empirical methodologies employed in the empirical tarp studies to help with the understanding of the research. the chapter describes difference-in-difference (did), instrumental variables (iv), propensity score matching (psm), heckman sample selection models, and placebo tests.chapter 6 discusses research on which banks received the tarp injections and the determinants of early exit from tarp. as discussed there, larger and healthier banks were more likely to receive the funds and to repay early. political and regulatory influence also played important roles for some of the banks' funds allocations. banks that were constrained by the executive pay restrictions tended to choose to exit early.chapter 7 explains the research on the effects of tarp on recipient banks' valuations. the research appears to suggest that tarp led to different effects on bank valuations depending on the events analyzed. bank valuations generally increased around tarp program announcements, but valuations around individual capital injections were mostly either insignificant or significantly negative, consistent with various concerns about program or bank condition. bank valuations around repayments were unanimously positive, consistent with the recognition of repaying tarp banks being healthy and viable, and other reasons including removal of compensation restrictions associated with the bailouts.chapter 8 discusses research findings on the effects of tarp on market discipline by bank shareholders, creditors other than depositors, and depositors. theoretically, bailouts such as tarp may either decrease or increase the extent to which these market participants act against banks that are taking more risks. for example, tarp could signal an increase in the likelihood of future bailouts for tarp banks, reducing market discipline. alternatively, tarp could signal bank weakness and increase market discipline. the empirical research on discipline by the different groups of market stakeholders is mixed.chapter 9 describes research findings on the impacts of tarp on leverage risk. as discussed above, the tarp capital injections were in the form of preferred equity, which counts toward capital ratios based on tier 1 capital. although it is found that tier 1 capital rose relative to assets for tarp banks, such ratios are mechanically affected by tarp, even if no further actions are taken by the tarp banks or market participants. there is no mechanical effect of tarp on standard accounting-based or marketbased leverage ratios, which are based on common equity, measured using either accounting or market data.as discussed in more detail in chapter 9, leverage risk measured using either accounting or market data may either be decreased or increased by tarp preferred equity injections. for example, common equity may be increased because of boosted confidence in the bank, which may make it easier to raise common equity or increase the market value of existing equity. in contrast, to the extent that tarp stigmatizes the bank, the opposite effects may occur.the relatively small amount of empirical research on this topic suggests that leverage risk is reduced. one paper finds that the common equity to assets accounting ratio is increased, implying a decrease in accounting-based leverage, and one paper finds that market leverage is also decreased.chapter 10 discusses research findings on the competitive effects of tarp. two empirical studies using the did methodology suggest that tarp banks very significantly increased both their market shares and market power relative to non-tarp banks and are able to identify some of the channels through which this occurs. a third empirical study of the competitive effects of tarp also finds competitive distortions for sound non-tarp peers that did not receive bailout funds.the results of the last study suggest that the competitive distortions implied by the first two studies may be understated. the did methodology of the first two studies only measures the effects of tarp on tarp banks relative to non-tarp banks, and the third study suggests that some of these non-tarp banks also achieved higher market power from tarp, so the competitive distortions created by the program may be very large. further research to clarify this is obviously needed.chapter 11 gives a summary of the research findings about the effects of the program on the credit supply of the recipient banks relative to others, generally using the did framework. most, but not all of the studies find increased credit supply at the extensive margindmore dollars of loans and loan commitmentsdfor tarp banks relative to non-tarp banks. there is also evidence of improved credit supply to large firms at the intensive margindlower interest rate spreads, larger amounts, longer maturities, less frequency of collateral, and less restrictive covenants.importantly, as discussed in chapter 11, this evidence is not fully conclusive on whether tarp increased total bank credit supply because the did framework measures only the change in credit supply of tarp banks relative to non-tarp banks. the total change in lending would include the effects of tarp on the lending by non-tarp banks, which may have also been affected by the program. as discussed in chapter 11, non-tarp banks may have either decreased or increased their credit supplies as results of tarp.chapter 12 reviews research on the effects of tarp on the individual recipient banks' portfolio risk. it is documented that tarp banks seem to have increased the portfolio risk of tarp banks in at least three waysd shifting into riskier assets, easing the terms of issued loans, and easing these terms relatively more for riskier borrowers. the results in chapter 11 suggesting that lending increased also contributes to additional portfolio risk.similar to the arguments above about lending, this evidence on increased portfolio risk is not conclusive on the effects of tarp on the risk of the financial system. the did framework measures only the change in the portfolio risk of tarp banks relative to non-tarp banks and excludes the effects of tarp on the risk of non-tarp banks. it also neglects other factors that affect systemic risk, including individual banks' size and capital or leverage risk, as well as interconnections among the banks.the research on the effects of tarp on bank competition in chapter 10 and bank credit supply in chapter 11 suggests that tarp affected bank borrowers as well. as discussed in chapter 13, the greater market power for tarp banks may help or hurt their credit customers, depending on whether these borrowers are primarily served using transactional versus relationship lending technologies, and which of different theories dominates. the greater credit supply of tarp banksdto the extent that it is not offset by any reduced lending of non-tarp banksdwould generally benefit borrowers.the additional research discussed in chapter 13 is about the measurement of the net effects. two studies of the effects of tarp on the market values of tarp banks' relationship corporate borrowers have opposing results, but a third study finds that corporate borrowers of tarp banks increased their supplies of trade credit, while non-tarp banks did not. thus, most of the limited evidence suggests that corporate borrowers were better off.we are not aware of any direct evidence for unlisted small business borrowers, but some evidence summarized in chapter 14 on the real economic effects of tarp is suggestive that small businesses may have been helped by tarp. that evidence suggests that tarp increased net job creation and net hiring establishments and decreased business and personal bankruptcies. given that most job creation, hiring establishments, and bankruptcies are related to small businesses, it seems likely that small businesses were positively affected.chapter 14 focuses on the research findings about the effects of tarp on the real economy. the findings of research in chapter 11 that tarp likely increased credit supply and in chapter 13 that corporate borrowers were likely better off are suggestive of benefits to the real economy.however, these findings are not fully conclusive because they do not take the final step of showing that the lending increases or borrower benefits had beneficial effects on the real economy. any increase in lending might not have resulted in increased spending (such as investment, hiring, or purchases of homes or other consumption goods) by borrowers that would boost the real economy. instead, the borrowed funds might have been saved or replaced other sources of funding. determination of the effects on the real economy requires study of the real effects.we are able to find only two such studies of real economic effects. the research study alluded to above shows significant positive real economic benefits of tarp in terms of increased net job creation, increased net hiring establishments and decreased business and personal bankruptcies in the states with more tarp recipients. the second study examines the negative impacts of bank failures on business formation and net job creation at the local level, and finds that tarp is effective in reducing these negative consequences. importantly, the benefits in these studies may be understated because they exclude the favorable effects of tarp of potentially saving the financial system from a bigger collapse. for the complete picture, we also need to know the effects of tarp on systemic risk. if tarp saved the financial system, even only partially, then the real economic effects may be much larger than the measured state-level effects. in other words, tarp may have helped both tarp and non-tarp banks, so the differences between them may understate the total effects on the real economy.chapter 15 completes the research on the empirical effects of tarp by examining the research findings on the direct measurement of the effects of tarp on systemic risk. the one research paper of which we are aware on this topic applies the did approach to the latest indicators of systemic risk contributions. the study finds that tarp banks contributed significantly less to systemic risk after receiving tarp funds than non-tarp banks. this seems to happen almost exclusively by increasing the common equity values of tarp banks through share price increases, reducing the market leverage measure, lvg. as indicated above, this is not a mechanical effect, given that the common equity values are distinctly different from the preferred equity that was injected by the us treasury under tarp.analogous to the arguments above, the did framework measures only reduced contributions to systemic risk of the tarp banks relative to non-tarp banks. this may understate the overall reduction in systemic risk because the non-tarp banks were almost surely made safer as well.importantly, reducing contributions to systemic risk undoubtedly have strong, but difficult to measure, positive effects on the real economy by keeping business and consumer confidence and bank credit higher than it otherwise would be. historically, financial crises imperil the real economy as financing for real investments and hiring are withdrawn and recessions often result. thus, had tarp not reduced contributions to systemic risk, the global financial crisis would likely been worse, and an even greater recession would likely have ensued.part iii of the book has three chapters on empirical research. one is on bank bailouts other than tarp, some of which are summarized in box 1.1, the second discusses bail-ins, some of which are summarized in boxes 1.3e1.5, and the third covers the other resolution approaches of bankruptcy/failure, reorganization using living wills, regulatory forbearance, and breakups of large complex financial institutions either into smaller institutions that are less systemically important or into institutions with different activities, which are summarized in box 1.7 below.chapter 16 focuses on bailouts other than tarp, primarily those in the us and europe during and after the global financial crisis and european sovereign debt crisis. as noted earlier and shown in box 1.1 above, bailouts other than tarp in the us during the global financial crisis include other actions by the federal reserve, fdic, treasury, and federal home loan bank (fhlb) system discussed above.european bailouts include some country-level and several countries' collective responses in the early times of the global financial crisis. these include the bailouts of fortis and dexia by the benelux nations, belgium, the netherlands, and luxembourg; the bailouts of six large banks in ireland; the bailout of northern rock by the uk government, and among many others.later on, it was agreed that the economic situation was rather dire, so the european commission executed a coordinated response at the eu level by authorizing national governments to provide state aid and guarantees to financial institutions in several forms ranging from guarantees on bank liabilities to capital injections, and from asset relief interventions to bank liquidity support, summarized in box 1.2 above. a number of eu countries, including greece, portugal, ireland, spain, and cyprus, increased their government debt to significant ratios, which in turn led to the sovereign crisis that would require assistance from the other eu countries, ecb, and the imf. more details on the crises in europe are given in chapter 2, and additional information on the aid measures is covered in chapter 3.the bailout research in nations other than us covered in chapter 16 discusses political determinants, as well as effects of these bailouts on competition, credit supply, bank risk, real economy, and systemic risk.while a large number of research papers are summarized in chapter 16, the empirical research regarding non-tarp bailouts in this chapter is much less comprehensive than the empirical research on tarp discussed in the 11 chapters of part ii. the research on these other bailouts have a number of results in common with the tarp research, including that box 1.71allowing institutions to fail under a u.s. bankruptcy code for bhcs and/or be closed by a federal or state banking regulatory agency for commercial banks 2resolution plans that are designed ex ante by the organizations to restore financial strength and viability in cases of material distress and failure.3allowing undercapitalized banks to continue operations without significant regulatory intervention or failure.4breaking up large institutions into smaller non-systemically important ones that can be easier to manage when they pose "grave" systemic threats.5breaking up different types of activities of banks or repealing the gramm-leach-bliley act of 1999 and going back to glass steagall act restrictions on combining commercial and investment banks.most of the bailouts appear to have increased bank lending, to have increased bank portfolio risks in response to moral hazard incentives, and to have distorted bank competition in favor of the bailed-out banks. some of the findings also suggest stigma effects on the recipient banks, and awarding of bailouts based on political connections. the findings with regard to the two ultimate goals of bailouts of improving the real economy and reducing systemic risk are considerably less favorable than the tarp research results. for the non-tarp u.s. bailouts, there is little research on these issues and the systemic risk results are mixed. for the european bailouts, the long-run effects on the real economy and financial system may be negative according to some of the research. the increased lending in some cases was socially-unproductive negative net present value "zombie" credits. in some cases, the bank bailouts burdened the national governments and led to distressed sovereign debt.chapter 17 summarizes the empirical research findings on bail-ins, including ola in the us and brrd in europe. we also elaborate on research on contingent convertibles (cocos), a form of bail-in that is used in some european nations. the chapter also discusses briefly other historical bail-in-like tools or episodes such as the double liability on shareholders, used by the regulators prior to the great depression. this caused shareholders of failing institutions to lose their initial investments and required them to come up with additional equity to compensate depositors.we also briefly discuss one significant earlier episode of the us government dealing with a large, distressed financial institution. the case of the hedge fund long-term capital management (ltcm) in 1998 was a combination of a bailout and bail-in in which the federal reserve bank of new york helped arrange financing by a group of private-sector financial institutions.the bail-in research is significantly underdeveloped relative to the bailout literature because most of the bail-in programs, events, and instruments are relatively recent, yielding few observations to study. nonetheless, the research strongly suggests that bail-ins appear to promote market discipline by stakeholders including depositors, bondholders, stockholders, and cds holders. bail-in regimes may also provide much better incentives for banks to build capital than bailouts. the research yields no strong conclusions about the efficacy of bail-ins on individual institution risk or systemic risk, and the findings are quite limited on the effects of bail-ins on the real economy.chapter 18 reviews empirical research findings on several resolution approaches other than bailouts and bail-ins. these are: 1) bankruptcy/ failure (the bhc goes bankrupt and the systemically important bank fails); 2) reorganization using living wills as directed by the dodd-frank act; 3) regulatory forbearance (keeping the banks operating with little or no capital); 4) breakups of large complex financial organizations in small institutions; and 5) breakups of bank activities into specialized commercial banks and investment banks.the research reviewed in chapter 18 does not provide significant support for any of these alternatives to bailouts and bail-ins. the findings often suggest that bankruptcy/failure, regulatory forbearance, and breaking up large institutions may more often cause more harm than good. bankruptcy/failure may drag down other financial institutions and exacerbate systemic risk. regulatory forbearance may exacerbate moral hazard incentives for banks to take on excess risk. breaking up large banks into smaller institutions can create bank inefficiencies that increase financial distress and failures in future crises. separating investment banks from commercial banks may create institutions that cannot easily survive severe liquidity crises. the existing findings are more favorable for living wills, but the research is too thin to draw strong conclusions.part iv contains eight chapters on "first lines of defense," tools that governments use to help reduce the likelihood of banks' financial distress that might otherwise result in bailouts, bail-ins, or other resolution methods. chapter 19 explains the three mechanisms through which the first lines of defense may operatedthe prudential, certification, and subsidy mechanisms. chapters 20 to 26 describe the seven individual first lines of defense, capital requirements (chapter 20), liquidity requirements (chapter 21), stress tests (chapter 22), regulatory activity restrictions (chapter 23), prudential supervision (chapter 24), deposit insurance (chapter 25), and government ownership of banks (chapter 26). each of these chapters also gives details on which of the three mechanisms through which the respective first line of defense operates, how that first line is implemented in different countries, and discusses empirical research on how well it works through the mechanisms. box 1.8 shows each of the seven first lines of defense. as discussed in these chapters, the theory often provides conflicting predictions about whether the first lines 1.5 first lines of defense to help avoid bailouts box 1.81capital requirements prescribe the amount of capital a bank or other financial institution has to hold as required by its financial regulator. basel accord minimum capital requirements are key regulatory tools for ensuring resilience of banks in many nations.2liquidity requirements were introduced as part of basel iii and are designed to ensure banks maintain an adequate level of highquality liquid assets to meet their liquidity needs. liquidity coverage ratio (lcr) is designed to improve the short-term resilience of banks against liquidity shocks, while net stable funding ratio (nsfr) requires banks to fund illiquid assets with a minimum amount of stable liabilities over a horizon of one year.3stress tests applied to banking organizations estimate the degree to which they would be able to lend and perform other normal banking functions in simulated adverse scenarios that emulate possible future financial crises or difficult periods. stress tests are essentially forward-looking capital requirements that require large banks to hold sufficient capital during hypothetical future adverse scenarios.4regulatory activity restrictions include limits on how much banks may engage in some activities, such as lending limits on credit exposures to a single counterparty and the 2010 dodd-frank act's volcker rule limits on bhc investments in private equity and hedge funds, outright bans on some activities considered to be too risky for banks such as proprietary trading under the volcker rule, and prohibitions on investment banking and nonfinancial activities in commercial banks.1. introduction to bank bailouts, bail-ins of defense are effective through the three mechanisms, but the empirical research is often clearer on their efficacy.as discussed in chapter 19, the prudential mechanism prudential mechanism involves mitigating risks that are primarily under the bank's control, such as leverage risk, credit risk, or liquidity risk. as a result, banks are less likely to experience financial distress. an example of a line of defense that may operate through the prudential mechanism is capital requirements, which directly decrease leverage risk and may also reduce other types of risk by mitigating moral hazard incentives to take on excessive risks. as discussed in chapter 20, while some theories yield opposing predictions, the empirical research is strongly consistent with the prudential mechanism for capital requirements.the certification mechanism assures the public about the safety of their investments in the banks. this reduces banks' risks from runs by depositors or other liability holders that might create liquidity problems or first line of defense description 5prudential regulation measures are designed to keep banks safe and sound, and include supervisory examinations to identify bank risks and management problems, and the informal and formal actions that come about as results of these examinations that try to tamp down some of these risks and management problems before they result in financial distress.6government-backed deposit insurance provides protections for the claims of a subset of depositors against bank failure and pays them if the bank is unable to do so.7direct government ownership can be regarded as the ultimate deposit insurance as bank losses may be backstopped by the government's deep pockets.-cont'd 1.5 first lines of defense to help avoid bailouts make it difficult for banks to raise funds. the assurances of safety may also reduce the likelihood of rapid sales by shareholders or short sales by others that might reduce the market values of the banks and/or make it difficult for them to raise equity capital during distress. to illustrate, a line of defense that may operate through the certification mechanism is stress testsda passing grade on a stress test may raise the public's perception of the safety of the bank, although a failing grade may have the opposite effect.the subsidy mechanism involves providing banks with subsidies that may prop up the bank, increase its capital, and reduce its leverage risk to make it less likely to experience financial distress. one of the lines of defense that operates through the subsidy mechanism is deposit insurance, which enriches the banks by allowing them to borrow at close to the riskfree rate due to the government protection.chapter 20 discusses capital requirements, which are employed by regulators around the world to keep banks from falling into financial distress that might otherwise result in bank bailouts, bail-ins, or other resolutions. the chapter describes the concepts and theories behind these requirements, how these requirements may or may not function through the three mechanisms for avoiding bank financial distress. both international and us capital requirements are explained, and the empirical evidence on the mechanisms is reviewed. while the theory is equivocal about the prudential and certification mechanisms, the empirical evidence overwhelmingly suggests that capital requirements are effective through these mechanisms. the subsidy mechanism is not relevant for capital requirements. the chapter also reviews the evidence on the controversial issues regarding the effects of capital requirements on bank liquidity creation and profitability, suggesting mixed results for liquidity creation, but mostly positive effects on profitability.chapter 21 reviews liquidity requirements, a first line of defense to reduce liquidity risk to avoid bank distress and reduce the likelihoods of bailouts, bail-ins, or other bank resolutions. liquidity requirements are explained, and the mechanisms through which they may operate are analyzed. the chapter also describes international and country-specific liquidity requirements, and summarizes the empirical evidence on the mechanisms. the theory is mixed as to whether liquidity requirements work through the prudential and certification mechanisms. most of the empirical evidence supports that liquidity requirements generally operate through the prudential mechanism, albeit with some room for improvement. there is no empirical evidence to our knowledge on the certification mechanism for liquidity requirements. the subsidy mechanism is not applicable for this line of defense.we also discuss in chapter 21 the issue of whether it is appropriate to have liquidity requirements that guard against large aggregate liquidity shocks, when such shock may be alternatively dealt with by central banks' lender of last resort (lolr) function. research discussed in chapter 16 suggests that the expansion of the federal reserve's use of lolr was highly successful in boosting bank lending during the global financial crisis.chapter 22 discusses stress tests, which have been employed by regulators since the global financial crisis to make large banking organizations resistant to future crises and other problematic situations. they are essentially forward-looking capital requirements that mandate that these organizations hold sufficient capital so they would be able to continue to operate and lend during hypothetical future adverse scenarios like financial crises. as is the case for the other chapters in part iv, the theory, practice, and empirical research results are reviewed and analyzed. analogous to capital requirements, the theory is ambiguous about the prudential and certification mechanisms for stress tests, but the empirical evidence suggests that stress tests are operative through both of these mechanisms. the subsidy mechanism does not apply to stress tests. the chapter also discusses the potential downsides of stress tests. they may confer tbtf status to the stress-tested banks and appear to reduce their credit supplies to large and small businesses.1.5.5 using prudential regulatory activity restrictions as a first line of defense chapter 23 provides information and research findings for prudential regulatory activity restrictions. these are limits or outright bans on what are considered risky bank activities, and are imposed by regulators to reduce the incidence of financial distress and reduce the likelihood that bailouts, bail-ins, or other resolutions are needed. the chapter describes several important prudential regulatory activity restrictions that have been imposed in the us and eu. similar to the other first lines of defense that are explicitly designed to limit bank risk taking, the theory is ambiguous about whether these restrictions operate through the prudential and certification mechanisms. the empirical evidence is also unclear regarding these two mechanisms. the subsidy mechanism is not applicable for prudential regulatory activity restrictions.chapter 24 gives background information and reviews the theory as well as empirical research findings regarding prudential supervision. this first line of defense aims to contain and reduce risks at both the bank and system levels, referred to as microprudential and macroprudential supervision, respectively. prudential supervisors check if banks are in compliance with safety and soundness rules and regulations, monitor banks for excessive bank risk taking, and take actions against banks that do not follow the rules or regulations or are found to be excessively risky, preventing if possible, bailouts, bail-ins, or other resolutions. as is the case for the other policies to designed to reduce bank risk, the theory is ambiguous about whether prudential supervision makes banks safer versus riskier through the prudential and certification mechanisms. however, the empirical evidence is consistent with this supervision operating through these two mechanisms. the subsidy mechanism is reversed for prudential supervision, as supervisors impose costs on and collect funds from the banks, acting more as a tax than a subsidy.chapter 25 describes deposit insurance, discusses the theory and practice of this first line of defense around the world, and evaluates how well it operates or fails to operate through the three mechanisms to prevent and/or deter financial distress and avoid resolution. importantly, some deposit insurance schemes are explicit or de jure, some are implicit or de facto, and most countries have a combination of both. de facto insurance often protects depositors broadly during financial crises, and also covers banks that are tbtf, titf, or groups of banks that are considered tmtf at other times, and could be considered a form of preemptive bailout. the theory and empirical research both suggest that deposit insurance makes banks safer through the certification and subsidy mechanisms. the insurance deters runs by depositors and other liability holders (certification mechanism), and bolsters bank capital by allowing them to borrow at close to the risk-free rate because of the government protection (subsidy mechanism). the theory suggests that the moral hazard incentives engendered by deposit insurance make individual banks riskier rather than safer through the prudential mechanism. however, the continued lending and other services provided by these banks during recessions e which often coincide with financial crises e may support the real economy at these times and reduce risk at the system level. the empirical literature has mixed results for the prudential mechanism for deposit insurance.1.5.8 using direct government ownership as a first line of defense chapter 26 gives background information and reviews theory and empirical research findings for direct government ownership of banks. this is a common practice in many nations around the world, including some developed nations other than the us. there are several motivations for this ownership, including the safety of the financial system. the chapter investigates the extent to which this first line of defense accomplishes this goal through the three mechanisms. from a theoretical standpoint, the direct ownership of banks operates through these mechanisms in a very similar fashion to deposit insurance. the incentives generated by this ownership is predicted to make individual institutions behave relatively poorly in terms of efficiency and performance at virtually all times. however, their continued lending and support for the real economy during recessions e which often coincide with financial crises e may reduce systemic risk and improve financial stability at stressful times. the empirical literature finds split results for the prudential mechanism that essentially follow the theoretical predictions. the findings from the data suggest that direct government ownership may make the individual banks riskier, but the financial system safer. the empirical research also suggests that government ownership makes banks safer through the certification and subsidy mechanisms.the final part of the book, part v, looks to the future and contains three chapters on social costs and benefits, policy implications, and open research questions.chapter 27 weighs the net social costs and benefits of bailouts, bail-ins, other resolution methods, first lines of defense, and countercyclical policies. this chapter also reviews some additional research on tarp and countercyclical prudential and monetary policies that is relevant for drawing conclusions, but does not neatly fit the topics of the earlier chapters. any conclusions as to whether social benefits versus social costs dominate depend on the financial circumstances and the short-versus long-run orientation for evaluation. the chapter therefore discusses conclusions for different financial stability conditions (severe financial crises and tmtf versus other financial conditions) and effects for shortversus long-term orientations. table 19 .1 displays these conclusions for all 16 of the policies for addressing the financial distress and potential failure of financial institutions analyzed in the book under these different circumstances.chapter 28 offers logical implications of the research findings in the book for both bank policymakers and bank managers. the suggestions reflect both short-and long-term orientations and are tailored to the stability conditions of the financial system. we also tailor our suggestions for bank managers to the individual financial conditions of their banks. for a number of the policies, the implications of the research are quite clear. during difficult financial conditions of severe financial crises and tmtf circumstances, bailouts may be a better policy choice than bail-ins, at least in the short run because bail-ins risk bringing down other financial institutions at precisely the wrong time. however, under more tranquil financial conditions, bail-ins may be preferred over bailouts because of the superior incentives provided by bail-ins. some of the other resolutions, such as bankruptcy/failure and regulatory forbearance, are not supported by the research under any circumstances. other policies, such as prudential supervision, deposit insurance, and countercyclical prudential policy are found to be generally favored, while support for strict enforcement of other policies, such as capital requirements and stress tests, depend on financial conditions.chapter 29 concludes the book by identifying the important unresearched and underresearched questions that need the most attention, and suggesting how future researchers might address them. the chapter gives five general suggestions for future research to help keep the financial system and real economy safe. these include: 1) a focus on reducing the likelihood and severity of financial crises; 2) comparing multiple policy tools in the same study; 3) measuring the indirect effects of policies on non-treated banks; 4) comparing long-term and short-term program outcomes; and 5) investigating policy tools in developing as well as developed nations. the chapter also points researchers toward key unanswered questions regarding each of the policy approaches for dealing with the financial distress of the banking industry e bailouts, bailins, and other resolution approaches; first lines of defense; and countercyclical policies.all over the world, severe acute respiratory syndrome tum and sore throat [ 6 , 7 ] . in fact, however, many patients are 17 asymptomatic or have mild symptoms in early stages, and 18 so they do not realize being infected. since covid-19 is 19 highly contagious in early stages, such lack of recognition 20 can cause serious problems for the prevention of the spread 21 of covid-19. therefore, detection of covid-19 in early, 22 even asymptomatic, stages will help us reduce transmission. 23 recently, olfactory or gustatory dysfunction is often re- 24 ported as a symptom [ 8 , 9 ] . we need to pay more attention 25 because the symptom might be easily overlooked in clinical 26 field and so the diagnosis could be delayed. in this review, 27 we reviewed recent findings of the viral infection-related ol- 28 factory or gustatory dysfunctions to identify a correlation be- 29 tween the olfactory or gustatory symptoms and corona virus, 30 and the values of olfactory dysfunction as an early sign of 31 covid-19, even in asymptomatic patients. 32 33 we searched the articles using pubmed and embase. the 34 first keyword was viral infection, coronavirus, rhinovirus, in- 35 fluenza, covid, sars or mers. the second keyword was 36 anosmia, smell, or olfactory. the full search strategy has been 37 reported in table ( table 1 ) . 38 the articles that could not be obtained in the full text, finally, we could find 21 papers that directly described 50 covid-19 and olfactory symptoms; some of them also men-51 tioned gustatory dysfunction or ageusia. from these 21 pa-52 pers, 7 papers were clinical studies and others were com-53 mentary, letters, and editorial review ( fig. 1 ) . the details 54 of these 7 articles were demonstrated in table ( table 2 ) . a 55 study reported patients who initially complained of acute on-56 set anosmia (not covid-19 infection) but finally diagnosed 57 with covid-19 infection [10] . 58 there were no restrictions for gender, age and national-59 ity. the studies with inclusion criteria were checked inde-60 pendently by 2 reviewers. reviewers apply inclusion criteria 61 based on the title and abstracts. if the title and abstract were 62 adequate, the full text was checked by the same reviewers. 63 3. clinical presentation 64 the common symptoms in covid-19 patients were cough, 65 fever, myalgia, dyspnea, headache and loss of appetite. the 66 most common ent symptoms were facial pain and nasal con-67 gestion [9] . 68 however, it has been recently reported that 33.9% of 59 69 covid-19 patients in italy complained of olfactory and/or 70 gustatory dysfunction and 11% complained of both dysfunc-71 tions [11] . 47% of 114 covid-19 patients in france com-72 plained anosmia [12] . 31.65% and 35.44% of 79 covid-19 73 patients in spain complained olfactory and gustatory dysfunc-74 tions. these proportions were more prominent in covid-19 75 patients than influenza patients [13] . according to the paper 76 from usa reported that 68% and 71% of 59 patients had ol-77 factory and gustatory dysfunction, respectively [14] . 98% of 78 60 patients from iran were confirmed smell dysfunction by 79 university of pennsylvania smell identification test (upsit) 80 [15] . and few articles said that covid-19 patients without 81 severe symptoms complained these olfactory and/or gustatory 82 dysfunctions. according to the larger-scale research from eu-83 rope, 85.6% of the 417 mild-to-moderate covid-19 patients 84 had olfactory dysfunctions and 88.8% gustatory dysfunctions. 85 phantosmia and parosmia were 12.6% and 32.4%, respec-86 tively. among the patients who did not complain of nasal 87 stuffiness and rhinorrhea, the rates of anosmia and hyposmia 88 were 66.2% and 13.5% [9] . from the other italian article, 89 64.4% of 202 mild symptomatic covid-19 patients were 90 reported alternations in smell or taste. about 37% of them 91 complained severe alternations. 68.3% of covid-19 patients 92 with smell or taste alternations reported fatigue and 34.6% 93 reported nasal stuffiness [16] . 94 contrary to the above papers, only 5.1% of 214 patients 95 complained of hyposmia and 5.6% hypogeusia in china [8] . 96 considering the papers, the rate of olfactory or gustatory dys-97 function is supposed to be different between europe/usa and 98 china (or asia). 99 another issue is the onset of olfactory dysfunction, which 100 varied among many papers. the onset of olfactory or gusta-101 tory dysfunction in the clinical course of covid-19 might be 102 important. a multicenter study in europe showed that 85.6% 103 and 88% of total patients ( n = 417) reported olfactory and 104 gustatory dysfunctions, respectively, and 11.8% of covid-105 19 patients with olfactory dysfunction appeared before other 106 general symptoms, 65.4% after the general symptoms, and 107 22.8% at the same time [9] . in italy, 20.3% of covid-19 108 patients reported olfactory dysfunction before other general 109 symptoms and 13.5% during hospitalization [11] . from the 110 other study of italy, 11.9% of covid-19 patients ( n = 130) 111 complained of smell or taste alternations prior to other symp-112 for covid-19 infection; only 74% of the tested patients were 133 positive and most of the responders were young [10] . 134 from a case report, olfactory dysfunction was described as 135 'isolated sudden onset anosmia' because a patient with con-136 firmed covid-19 complained of sudden onset anosmia with-137 out any other symptoms [21] . according to the other study 138 from italy, 3% of covid-19 patients ( n = 130) reported smell 139 or taste alternations as the sole symptom [16] . however, there 140 is also an article reporting that ent symptoms can be accom-141 panied by anosmia [12] . 142 in korea, korean center for disease control (kcdc) re-143 cently (on 6 april 2020) announced in a press release that 144 proportion of asymptomatic case was 33.3% based on the 145 presence or absence of symptoms at the time of confirmation 146 of covid-19 (10,284 confirmed as positive among 466,804 147 tested, in republic of korea until 6, april 2020) [22] . 148 there is a study showing that most of gustatory dysfunc-149 tion appeared as an early symptom before hospitalization [11] . 150 besides, there might be close correlation between olfactory 151 and gustatory dysfunction ( p < 0.001) [9] . considering above, 152 6 y.j. kang barr viruses and some other coronavirus can be explained. 180 however, in some cases, even if the acoustic rhinometry re-181 sult was normal, the olfactory function did not recover [28] . the validated tests which could quickly and accurately 210 diagnose the olfactory dysfunction in the highly suspicious 211 covid-19 patients are needed. the short version of the ques-212 tionnaire of olfactory disorders negative statements (sqod-213 ns) can be used to assess the quality of life of the covid-19 214 patients with anosmia or hyposmia [9] . the score was sig-215 nificantly lower in patients with anosmia than hyposmia or 216 normosmia. 217 besides subjective questionnaires, commonly used olfac-218 tory tests are as follows: upsit, cross-cultural smell identi-219 fication test (cc-sit; sensonic, inc, haddon heights, nj), 220 t&t olfactometry test (daiichi yakuhin sangyo, tokyo, 221 japan), and other olfactory threshold tests [36] . recently, few 222 cases of covid-19 patients with olfactory dysfunction were 223 confirmed by upsit. there was no correlation between up-224 sit result and awareness of olfactory dysfunction in covid-225 19 patients [15] . 226 also, acoustic rhinometry, rhinomanometry, ct, or mri 227 could identify the mechanism of olfactory dysfunction mainly 228 due to conductive problems and identify other causes. how-229 ever, the usage of nasal endoscopy is not recommended in the 230 highly suspicious covid-19 patients because it may provide 231 other people unnecessary virus exposure [37] . 232 6. treatments 233 in general, spontaneous recovery rates have been reported 234 higher in post-viral patients than post-traumatic patients, and 235 there are no definite treatment guidelines in the post-viral 236 patients presenting with olfactory or gustatory dysfunction, 237 including covid-19. there are 2 issues on anosmia treatment 238 in covid-19 patients. 239 the first issue is that early anomia treatment in covid-19 240 patients can change clinical course of covid-19. but due to 241 lack of information, this issue is hard to be answered but early 242 detection appears more likely to be meaningful rather than 243 early treatment for covid-19. the second one is whether 244 empirical oral steroid treatment for acute anosmia can do 245 harm to covid-19 patients without any other symptom or 246 22.5% only gustatory dysfunction and 23.6% both remaining 320 olfactory and gustatory dysfunctions [9] . 321 the time to decide the recovery of olfactory function was 322 suggested to be 2 weeks, because the viral loading signifi-323 cantly reduces in about 14 days [ 9 , 44 ] . but the further study 324 requires to decide the time to recovery and follow up long 325 term later. 326 considering from the other viral infections, the partial or 327 complete recovery of olfactory function could take several 328 months [45] . and in case of anosmia after sars, the patient 329 was reported to suffer from anosmia continuously more than 330 2 years [18] . 331the ongoing covid-19 epidemic is still rapidly spreading 333 all over the world. so it is very important to notice the early 334 sign of covid-19 and get the information about progression 335 as soon as possible. most of covid-19 patients complain 336 of no symptoms or mild symptoms in early stages though 337 coughing, fever and difficulty breathing are main symptoms. 338 up to date, the number of the covid-19 patients with ol-339 factory and/or gustatory symptoms is rapidly increasing and, 340 though the onset of olfactory and/or gustatory symptoms in 341 the covid-19 patients was reported varied, in general, most 342 of these 2 symptoms might precede or be accompanied by 343 other main mild general symptoms or no other symptoms 344 [16] . moreover, many cases (18.2%) have been reported for 345 the covid-19 patients to complain of these 2 symptoms sud-346 denly without any other otolaryngologic symptoms, like rhi-347 norrhea or nasal obstructions [9] . 348 based on the previous paper, the rates of asymptomatic 349 cases out of all sars-cov positive cases were reported 13% 350 among singaporean health care workers [46] . furthermore, 351 according to who report for mers-cov, 21% of the 2228 352 cases from all over the world were reported to have no or 353 mild symptoms [47] . 354 asymptomatic case proportion of covid-19 was 33.3% 355 based on the presence or absence of symptoms at the time of 356 confirmation, which was higher than sars-cov and mers-357 cov, according to kcdc report (on 6 april 2020) [22] . 358 therefore, we should pay more attention to olfactory 359 and/or gustatory symptoms in the suspicious covid-19 pa-360 tients with or without the main covid-19 symptoms because 361 asymptomatic covid-19 infection (and/or transmission) is a 362 major public health issue at present. however, the exact rate 363 of asymptomatic covid-19 all over the world has not known 364 and further analysis should be done. 365 even though the pathophysiologic mechanism of olfactory 366 or gustatory dysfunctions in covid-19 patients has not been 367 clearly identified yet, it is also very interesting that the clini-368 cal manifestations of olfactory or gustatory dysfunctions were 369 different according to gender or races. 370 moreover, it is necessary to follow the clinical course and 371 the long-term results of olfactory and/or gustatory dysfunc-372 tions in the cured covid-19 patients. einer ausgebildeten industriearbeiterschaft. das überragende interesse der usa an einer stabilen weltwirtschaftsordnung mit offenen märkten war also durchaus auch eigennützig: nur stabile märkte mit klaren handelsregeln waren aufnahmebereit für us-waren.mit wechselnden motiven unterstützten die usa in den folgenden dekaden die weiterentwicklung der internationalen handelsordnung bis hin zum abschluss der uruguay-runde 1994, in der die welthandelsorganisation (wto) aus der taufe gehoben wurde. wesentliche beweggründe waren die idee, die ehemaligen staatshandelsländer und etwas später auch das sich öffnende china in eine welthandelsordnung zu integrieren, die von der marktöffnung als leitmotiv bestimmt war. mit sicherheit schwang dabei die absicht mit, diese märkte für anbieter aus den usa besser zu öffnen und umgekehrt die usa selbst mit günstigen zwischen-und konsumprodukten zu versorgen. diese strategie verfolgten die usa ungeachtet des umstands, dass das verarbeitende gewerbe der usa zu diesem zeitpunkt im außenhandel nur noch zeitgespräch hänge: sie denken in ad-hoc-deals, sehen ein handelsbilanzdefi zit als monetären verlust und handelsbilanzüberschüsse als gewinn im betriebswirtschaftlichen sinn. sie beschränken sich auf die alleinige betrachtung der warenhandelsbilanz und blenden andere wichtige zusammenhänge (wie z. b. den handel mit dienstleistungen, primäreinkommen, intrafi rmenhandel) aus. die schiere größe des us-markts bewegt sie dazu, zölle bzw. generell politisches wohlverhalten wie ein "eintrittsgeld" in den us-markt zu nutzen und die gestiegene geopolitische unsicherheit bei kleineren partnern merkantilistisch auszubeuten. in ihrem betriebswirtschaftlichen, kurzfristigen kalkül gibt es sogar einen anreiz, unsicherheit zu schüren. das resultatorientierte verhalten führt zusammen mit einer betriebswirtschaftlichen auffassung von außenwirtschaft zu einem unsteten, um nicht zu sagen unzuverlässigen handelspolitischen verhalten der usa. welchen einfl uss diese entwicklung jedoch zugleich auf die haltung der usa zum freihandel ausüben konnte, war an der harten us-reaktion auf die japanischen exporterfolge in den 1980er jahren abzulesen. japanische anbieter sahen sich einem enormen druck ausgesetzt, der zu "freiwilligen" exportbeschränkungen und mehr oder weniger erzwungenen japanischen direktinvestitionen in den usa führte.die schwankungen in der us-haltung zu einer multilateralen handelsordnung haben sich nach 1994 sowohl durch interne wie durch externe faktoren noch verstärkt. zu den internen faktoren zählten z. b. das misstrauen gegenüber der wirksamkeit von regelsystemen im welthandel und einer beschränkung der eigenen souveränität. dieses misstrauen war zwar schon immer vorhanden. hinzu trat aber nun die verstärkte wahrnehmung eines gegensatzes zwischen regeln und resultaten. die regeln waren und sind aus us-sicht entweder zu vage formuliert, die sanktionsmechanismen zu langsam und unzureichend, sie sind für neue herausforderungen (china) ungeeignet oder sie greifen zu sehr in die souveränitätsrechte ein. traditionell reagieren die usa zudem besonders empfi ndlich auf konstruktionen, die dazu führen, dass internationale entscheidungen us-recht aushebeln können (felbermayr, 2018) . als externe faktoren kamen die auslagerung von amerikanischer produktion ins ausland (offshoring), das phänomen eines wachstums ohne mehr arbeitsplätze (jobless growth) und ein ausuferndes handelsbilanzdefi zit hinzu. über allem rangierten der mit immer mehr unbehagen wahrgenommene wirtschaftliche aufstieg chinas und das scheitern der integration russlands in die gruppe der marktwirtschaftlich und demokratisch verfassten länder.diese faktoren führten zu der hinwendung der usa zu einer an schnelllebigen, vorteilhaften resultaten orientierten handelspolitik. dies manifestiert sich nicht nur in klar defi nierten und inzwischen auch quantifi zierten marktzugangszielen der usa, wie schon beim von der obama-regierung formulierten ziel der verdopplung der us-exporte zu beobachten. vielmehr wuchs der merkantilismus mit dem amtsantritt der trump-administration in eine neue dimension hinein. einfl ussreiche teile der neuen us-regierung einschließlich des präsidenten selber missverstehen die wirtschaftspolitische aufgabe als betriebswirtschaftliches thema und verkürzen zusammen-insbesondere die betonte rolle der nationalen sicherheit für die handelspolitik und die explizit angekündigte aggressive durchsetzung von us-handelsrecht akzentuieren den veränderten ansatz. aber auch hinter dem ziel verbesserter handelsabkommen verbirgt sich handelspolitischer sprengstoff, denn spätestens seit dem abschluss der neuverhandlungen zum nordamerikanischen freihandelsabkommen (nafta), nunmehr us-mexico-canada agreement (usmca) genannt, ist klar, dass damit vor allem verschärfte ursprungsregeln und mehr "local content" gemeint ist, also bedingungen, die den globalen handel nicht fördern, sondern bremsen. von den nur drei jahre zuvor vom cea aufgelisteten argumenten ist kaum noch etwas übrig.mit diesem handelspolitischen ansatz können die usa die rolle des kompensierenden hegemons, die sie über dekaden im gatt und zunächst auch in der wto einnahmen, nicht mehr spielen. hegemon sind die usa, weil sie über jahrzehnte den mitgliedern des gatt/der wto nicht nur den zugang zum lukrativen us-markt zu stabilen bedingungen boten, sondern auch ihr politisches gewicht in die waagschale warfen, damit die regeln glaubwürdigkeit und gültigkeit behielten.allerdings hat die welthandelsordnung mit dem protektionistischen ansatz der usa nicht nur ihren hegemon verloren. man kann sie und die zugehörige welthandelsorganisation wto volkswirtschaftlich als klubgut charakterisieren. als klubgut werden güter bezeichnet, bei denen ausschließbarkeit von der nutzung möglich ist und keine oder eine nur geringe rivalität im konsum vorliegt. die mitgliedschaft in einem klub ist freiwillig. nicht-zahler können von der mitgliedschaft im klub/der nutzung des klubguts ausgeschlossen werden. diese defi nition trifft grundsätzlich auf die wto und ihre mitgliedschaft zu. allerdings funktioniert ein solches klubgut umso besser, je homogener die interessen der klubmitglieder sind, je homogener die leistungen ausfallen und je ausgewogener die lastenverteilung ist (langhammer, 2010) . die wto-mitglieder sind infolge der steigenden mitgliederzahl inzwischen in ihren interessen sehr heterogen. auch die homogenität der themen ist angesichts der ausweitung des themenspektrums in der wto nicht mehr gegeben. um ein extrembeispiel zu nehmen: aus zollverhandlungen im gatt sind zuletzt sogar diskussionen um handel und geschlechtergerechtigkeit in der wto geworden. gerade für große wto-mitglieder ist es deshalb sehr attraktiv geworden, eine homogenität des klubgutes "handelsordnung" wieder herzustellen, indem sie ihre interessen mit gleichgesinnten partnern außerhalb der wto verfolgenz. b. durch bilaterale und plurilaterale handelsabkommen.beschwerdeführer und in 155 fällen beschwerdegegner (wto, 2020; eigene berechnungen). damit entfi elen auf die usa 47 % aller fälle. zusätzlich beteiligten sich die usa in 158 fällen als drittpartei. folglich wird nur etwa ein viertel aller streitverfahren ohne us-beteiligung geführt. in fast der hälfte aller verfahren traten die usa aktiv entweder als beschwerdeführerin oder als drittpartei auf. besser lässt sich das rege interesse der usa an der wto-streitbeilegung kaum belegen.geradezu exemplarisch zeigt sich die -je nach politischer ausrichtung der regierung -stärker denn je schwankende us-haltung zur rolle des freihandels insgesamt bei einem vergleich der argumentation in der studie des council of economic advisers (cea) zu den wirtschaftlichen vorteilen des außenhandels von 2015 mit den aussagen in der vom us-handelsbeauftragten (ustr) damit gerät allerdings auch der originäre anspruch der welthandelsordnung ins wanken: die nicht-diskriminierung auf basis der gegenseitigkeit. sie besteht aus den beiden komponenten meistbegünstigung und inländerbehandlung und ist damit so angelegt, dass auch mitgliedsländer mit geringerer marktgröße gleichberechtigt partizipieren können. zusammen mit dem gesamtverpfl ichtungsansatz (single undertaking), der es erlaubt, marktöffnungen in unterschiedlichen sektoren gegeneinander aufzurechnen, war die handelsliberalisierung ursprünglich so strukturiert, dass alle mitgliedstaaten ausreichend spielräume für erfolge und zugeständnisse hatten. da zugleich ein hegemon vorhanden war, hatte das wto-regelwerk eine vergleichsweise hohe bindungskraft und erschien nicht-kooperatives verhalten lange zeit unattraktiv.in ihrer distanzierung von der bisherigen welthandelsordnung gehen die usa aber zuletzt konzeptionell auch noch deutlich über die eigenen wege anderer großer wto-mitglieder wie der eu, die in ihren regionalen abkommen durchaus eigene akzente gesetzt hat, hinaus. dies lässt sich gut am beispiel des sogenannten phase-i-abkommens zwischen den usa und china belegen, das im januar 2020 abgeschlossen wurde: zwar wurde mit dem abschluss dieses teilabkommens eine weitere eskalation des handelskonfl ikts zwischen den zwei größten volkswirtschaften der welt erst einmal abgewendet. gleichzeitig ist das abkommen mit seinen umfassenden kaufverpfl ichtungen für china aber ausdruck eines kleinteiligen "managed trade", der konzeptionell im scharfen widerspruch zu den grundsätzen des freien und regelbasierten handels im rahmen der wto steht und im zweifel zulasten von drittländern geht. anders als durch (teil-) substitution anderer importe dürfte china insbesondere die verpfl ichtungen im agrarsektor, aber auch im industriesektor, nicht erfüllen können.erschwerend kommt hinzu: je höher der anteil von staatsunternehmen bzw. das ausmaß staatlicher lenkung in einem sektor ist, desto leichter dürfte es china fallen, bestimmte quantitativ formulierte einkaufszusagen zu erfüllen. ein hoher staatseinfl uss ist in china beispielsweise im energie-, gesundheits-oder luftfahrtsektor anzunehmen. de facto stärkt der us-ansatz eines "managed trade" mit china damit -paradoxerweise -den staatshandelscharakter und die rolle staatsnaher bzw. staatseigener unternehmen in china.zu diesem geradezu planwirtschaftlichen ansatz in der us-handelspolitik tritt ein neues, kleinteiliges buchsta-länder -auch china -derzeit dazu neigen, den export von medizinischen schutzprodukten restriktiv zu handhaben und da ein halbes jahr mit zusatzzöllen ausgereicht haben dürfte, handelsumlenkungen auszulösen, die nicht so schnell umkehrbar sind. das generell gewachsene misstrauen gegenüber der sprunghaftigkeit der us-handelspolitik könnte ein weiterer retardierender faktor sein.dass diese erfahrungen ausreichen, damit die usa ihren eigenen handelspolitischen ansatz fundamental überdenken, erscheint im lichte des us-typischen pragmatismus möglich. anstöße der wichtigsten us-handelspartner zum richtigen zeitpunkt, also unmittelbar nachdem das schlimmste überwunden ist, könnten an der stelle hilfreich wirken.the discovery of the new coronavirus has its origin in huanan wholesale market for shellfish, fish and live animals, located in the chinese city of wuhan in the province of hubei. the first case reported was that of a market worker who was admitted to hospital on 26 december 2019 with severe pneumonia and respiratory failure. on 31 december the regional office in china of the world health organisation (who) was informed of several cases of pneumonia with an unknown origin in the city of wuhan. 1 on 12 january 2020 china shared the genetic sequence of a new coronavirus. it was denominated sars-cov-2 and the disease it causes was termed coronavirus disease 2019 . the first who report on 20 january confirmed 282 cases, the majority in hubei province, with 6 deaths and international expansion, with the first cases in thailand, japan and south korea. 2 at the close of this editorial (20 may 2020), the last report by the who on the situation of covid-19 reports 4,731,458 cases in the world, with 316,169 deaths. 3 .in spain, by 19 may 232,037 pcr-confirmed cases of covid-19 had been reported, together with 27,778 deaths. 4 it is the european country with the third largest number of cases and is fourth in terms of the number of deaths, with a lethality rate estimated to stand at 12% of confirmed cases (below the rates in france, belgium, the united kingdom, italy, the netherlands and sweden). at world level it is the fifth country in the ranking of the number of cases and deaths. the high number of infected medical workers stands out in spain (39,349). these amount to 22.3% of the cases of covid-19 reported to the national network of epidemiological monitoring (renave) with a clear predominance of women (76%). 5 reading the two previous paragraphs shows the vertiginous speed with which we experienced the rapid international spread of the virus, in which spain was one of the main countries to be affected. different parts of the country were affected to different degrees, and spain, like other countries, has required a social lockdown such as never been seen before in recent history. the healthcare system suffered an enormous impact due to the high demand for care due to patients with covid-19 and because of the initial lack of knowledge about this pathology, which meant that extraordinary measures had to be adopted to prevent the system from collapsing. although the pandemic curve has now been flattened, we are still immersed in a medical crisis that has led to a social and economic crisis, with an enormous impact on the population that may lead to a severe worldwide humanitarian crisis.due to the national and international situation with covid-19, at the beginning of april the editorial team of the revista española de medicina legal (reml) decided to make this edition a monograph on the medical and legal aspects of the pandemic. the aim is to offer readers a compendium of the most relevant information in our field, based on the huge amount of scientific production in national and international biomedical journals. this is not the first monograph to be published by the reml, as these have covered subjects such as gender-based violence, 6 suicide, 7 the new criterion for traffic accidents in 2015, 8 sudden death due to cardiac causes 9 or forensic psychiatry. 10 given the exceptional nature of this situation and the importance of making the contents available as soon as possible, it was decided that the editorial team would review the manuscripts rather than external reviewers. we would like to sincerely thank the authors for their generous collaboration in this monograph, and we hope that it will be both useful and interesting for reml readers.we also decided that the monograph would cover medical-legal problems as well as strictly medical-forensic questions. this is why it covers such a broad range of subjects. bañón et al. 11 analyse autopsies of covid-19 cases in a paper that brings the subject right up-to-date in comparison with publications up to now. gonzález-fernández et al. cover the management of corpses during a pandemic. 12 the region which suffered the highest rate of infections in spain was the community of madrid. donat et al. describe the specific response of the legal medicine and forensic sciences institute (instituto de medicina legal y ciencias forenses) of the community of madrid, which had commenced working just before the pandemic struck. 13 certification of death during the covid-19 pandemic has been one of the central themes, in who recommendations as well as the note prepared by the general board of official doctors' associations in spain (general de colegios oficiales de médicos de españa). 14 analysis of mortality is one of the cornerstones of epidemiology, and it has to be used as a guide that makes it possible to reach decisions and implement measures that are more effective means of controlling the current covid-19 pandemic. 15 the quality of information in the medical death certificate (mdc) is crucial in this respect and, as is the case in spain, the document has to meet who recommendations. 16 teijeira et al. describe the medical-legal, ethics and practical aspects of the certification of death, and they refer specifically to this certification during a pandemic. 17 they include one of the outstanding questions in our country: sending mdc to the civil registration offices (cro) by data transmission, which would speed up the transmission of information relating to causes of death, an especially important aspect during an epidemic. fernández et al. undertake an excellent review of the microbiological aspects of covid-19. the section on the post mortem detection of sars-cov-2 and its applicability is especially innovative. 18 the impact on the healthcare sector in spain has been tremendous. due to this, two papers examine this repercussion specifically. martin-fumadó et al. do so from a bioethical and professional ethics viewpoint. they examine the difficult clinical decisions that have to be made, within the context of an overwhelmed medical system and the rationing of resources, above all at the start of the crisis within the context of hospitals. 19 martí-amengual et al., in a context in which 65% of infected medical professionals had an epidemiological history of the risk of contact with patients who had a respiratory infection, while 69% had been in close contact with probable or confirmed covid-19 cases 5 , argue that the legal consideration of this infection should be as an occupational disease, with all of the resulting repercussions in terms of disability, sequelae and death. 20 lorente-acosta describes the problem of increasing gender-based violence associated with the lockdown and how it amplifies its components. there was a striking increase in this violence after lockdown. 21 other medical-legal subjects of interest that it was not possible to cover include the involuntary internment of covid-19 patients for public health reasons (based on law 3/1986 and processed by an administrative contentious court according to article 8.6 of law 29/1998), 22, 23 as well as the problem of medicalpsychological care for those sectioned with mental disease during the pandemic. 24 due to their association with medical-forensic work, we must also refer to two subjects that were of central importance during this crisis: performing autopsies and mortality data. on 5 march the technical document of the ministry of health was published "procedure for the management of covid-19 corpses" with subsequent modifications. 25 although it refers to clinical autopsies, this document set the tendency as it recommended not performing autopsies in positive cases for covid-19, so that the general form of action in our country was to avoid performing internal examinations. given that forensic autopsies are one of the essential services of the ministry of justice, the forensic medical board also recommended reducing the handling and transport of corpses subjected to judicial investigation to the indispensible minimum, although it recommended that the legal medicine and forensic sciences institutes (imlcf) set their own protocols. 26 all of this in the context of a crisis which reduced the number of medical-legal autopsies, above all those due to accidental causes, as is described in madrid. 13 likewise in milan (italy) a 70% fall in medical-legal autopsies was observed during the crisis. 27 the recommendation no to perform autopsies was controversial to a certain degree. the spanish society of pathology published a press release on 21 april explaining the arguments for the initial recommendation and also making it more flexible. 28 this was also because of the important role that autopsy may play in gaining knowledge of many aspects of the disease. 29 this question was also debated in italy. 30 the subject of mortality was also highly controversial. teijeira et al. refer to this in their final section. 17 there were delays in sending demographic information based on inscriptions in the cro, and one of the affected institutions was the national epidemiology centre of the carlos iii health institute. the national epidemiology centre maintains the daily mortality monitoring system (momo), which identifies deviations in daily mortality for all causes from what would be expected based on historical series. it obtains this data from the ministry of justice general registry of civil and notaries registries that receives computerised cro data through the inforeg platform. there are 3,929 cro, covering 93% of the spanish population. 31 momo estimates that there was an increase in mortality in the period from 17 march to 5 may 2020, with an excess of 30,604 deaths (a 55.7% increase), most especially of people over the age of 65 years old. although all of the autonomous communities showed an increase in mortality, the percentage of increase varied, as did the time period. although their reports take the delay in notification into account, the increase in deaths and the fall in the number of cro staff due to the crisis hindered the daily updating of this information. in response to this, the general board of judicial security and public trust of the ministry of justice gave instructions to speed up and increase the accuracy of data about the number of deaths and where they had occurred. these instructions were to send a list every day of the number of deaths recorded by the registry, the number of burial licences granted, and the place of death, specifying the locality and place (hospital, care home or usual domicile). 32 these measures refer to the number of deaths, but not to their causes. mdc are sent every month by the cro to the provincial offices of the national institute of statistics (ine). in turn this sends them every month to the mortality registries of the autonomous communities, which code the basic cause of death according to the norms of the tenth edition of the internal classification of diseases (cid-10) and then send the information to the ine. the ine then processes and assigns these data and generates annual statistical death files according to cause of death, which are published annually. the ine places the definitive file of deaths which have occurred in the territory each community at the disposal of the same, as well as those showing the deaths of residents in the other autonomous communities. additionally, the mortality registries draw up their own mortality reports. nevertheless, in an epidemic crisis it is necessary to establish a specific mortality monitoring system that makes it possible to know the causes of all deaths almost immediately. this was not implemented in a general way in our country, and this is a function in which forensic doctors and the imlcf could play a major role. there was a good initiative in the autonomous community of castile y león where, taking advantage of the function of forensic doctors in supervising mdc, they informed the general board of health of the regional government of castile y león of all of the deaths that had occurred (age, sex, causes and place of death). it should be remembered that, in the context of deaths with judicial intervention, the imlcf already cooperate satisfactorily with the ine in improving the quality of cause of death reporting by using an online platform, 33 given the beneficial impact of this cooperation. 34 the participation of forensic doctors and the imlcf in specific mortality monitoring circuits would be a highly interesting option for cooperation with the health ministry in a second wave of the virus in autumn or in new medical crises, and this would raise the social and medical profile of forensic medicine, emphasising its value. 35 to conclude, we hope that this monograph on covid-19, published by the revista española de medicina legal, will interest forensic doctors and doctors who specialise in legal medicine, as well as the scientific and medical community in general, given that the papers it contains are currently of great interest.t ransformation and tumorigenesis are frequently associated with the abnormal expression of growth factors and their receptors. many oncogenes have been shown to be homologues of normal cellular proteins, as in the case of the retroviral oncogene v-sis , which is homologous with the b chain of plateletderived growth factor (pdgf) (doolittle et al., 1983; waterfield et al., 1983) . expression of the v-sis protein activates cellular pdgf receptors, resulting in the stimulation of signal transduction pathways that ultimately leads to cellular transformation.autocrine transformation (sporn and todaro, 1980) oc-curs when the same cell expresses pdgf receptors as well as the v-sis protein. in this situation, there also exists the possibility of intracellular ligand/receptor interactions within the secretory pathway (betsholtz et al., 1986) . the secretory pathway consists of functionally distinct compartments, including the endoplasmic reticulum (er) and the entire golgi apparatus, consisting of the cis-golgi network, the cis-, medial-, and trans-golgi cisternae, as well as the trans-golgi network (tgn) t (macharner, 1993; pelham, 1991) . determination of the site of autocrine ligand/receptor interactions has distinct implications for the treatment of human cancers that exhibit autocrine activation of signal transduction pathways. if autocrine interactions only occur on the cell surface, then transformed cells should be responsive to treatment with exogenous substances that disrupt these interactions. however, if such interactions occur intracellularly, such as in the er or the golgi complex, then addition of such antagonism will not be sufficient to revert transformation. thus, it is of vital importance, both from a clinical and a molecular standpoint, to understand fully the mechanism and cellular location of autocrine interactions between ligands and receptors. there exists considerable controversy over the biological significance of intracellular interactions between v-sis and the pdgf-receptor. it has been demonstrated that mitogenesis can be blocked in some sis-transformed cells by treating them with antibodies against pdgf (huang et al., 1984) . while these results indicate that cell surface interactions between the v-sis protein and pdgf receptors are important in the transformation process, these same researchers demonstrated that some sis-transformed cells did not detectably secrete v-sis protein, and anti-pdgf antibody did not affect transformation. this implies that an intracellular mechanism of autocrine transformation may also exist. other researchers have reported that in normal cells, pdgf only activates receptors present on the cell surface, but that in sis-transformed cells, intracellular receptors are activated and undergo autophosphorylation in an autocrine fashion (keating and williams, 1988; bejcek et al., 1992) . there is also evidence that e5, the transforming protein of bovine papillomavirus, can interact with immature, intracellular forms of pdgf receptors, stimulating their autophosphorylation activity (goldstein et al., 1992; petti and dimaio, 1992; cohen et al., 1993) .since receptor autophosphorylation represents a key event in activating pdgf-mediated signaling pathways (williams, 1989) , these intracellular forms of the receptors may be able to transmit signals that lead to autocrine transformation of cells. however, it is not clear whether the downstream effectors of pdgf-stimulated signaling are accessible from intracellular compartments. bejcek et al. (1992) have demonstrated that internally activated receptors may associate with pi-3 kinase in a manner similar to mature cell surface pdgf receptors, suggesting that these receptors may indeed be capable of signaling from within the cell.indirect methods that rely upon pharmacologic agents have been used by some researchers in attempts to identify the site of ligand/receptor interactions. monensin has been shown to block transport of proteins through the trans-golgi portion of the secretory pathway (tartakoff, 1983) . treatment of v-sis-expressing cells with monensin prevents autophosphorylation of mature pdgf receptors and expression of c-fos (a nuclear protein involved in cellular growth regulation), suggesting that v-sis must be transported beyond the point of monensin's inhibitory activity (past the trans-golgi portion) in order to activate signal transduction pathways (hannink and donoghue, 1988) . however, monensin exerts pleiotropic effects on cations within cells, so other cellular events may have been affected in these experiments. suramin, a potent inhibitor of proliferation of cells expressing v-sis and pdgf receptors, seems to interfere only with ligand/receptor interactions at the cell surface, reducing the level of tyrosine-phosphorylated receptors. suramin has little or no effect on intracellular phosphorylated receptors (fleming et al., 1989) . this suggests a requirement for cellsurface interactions between receptor and ligand for expres-sion of a transformed phenotype. however, the mechanism of action of surarnin is unclear, and there is evidence that it accumulates within endosomes (hawking, 1978) . thus, experiments utilizing agents such as monensin or suramin have been viewed as problematic by some researchers. therefore, we have recently exploited more direct approaches to address this issue of intraceuular ligand/receptor interactions. the recent identification of specific targeting and retention signals makes it possible to localize v-sis protein to specific intracellular compartments. this potentially allows one to scan the secretory pathway for compartments that allow functional transforming interactions between v-sis and pdgf receptors. this represents a powerful approach for examining autocrine interactions, and can be applied to other autocrine growth factors or systems as well. er-anchored forms of v-sis were previously constructed by this lab, using an adenovirus transmembrane protein e3/19k retention signal, dekkmp (nilsson et al., 1989) . these constructs prevented cell surface expression of v-sis protein as determined by immunofluorescence, and transformation was inhibited by retention of the fusion protein in the er . in this report, we continued our analysis of autocrine transformation from within secretory pathway compartments by creating novel v-sis fusion proteins targeted to unique subcellular compartments. one signal that we chose was the cis-golgi localization signal represented by the first transmembrane domain of the avian coronavirus e1 glycoprotein (el) of infectious bronchitis virus, which has been shown by others to target heterologous proteins such as vsv-g and c~m (a derivative of the human chorionic gonadotropin-c~ subunit) to the cis-golgi complex (swift and machamer, 1991) . in addition, we chose to exploit the tgn-localization signal of the protein tgn38, contained within its transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic tail, which has been shown to retarget heterologous proteins, such as the ldl receptor and the tac antigen, to the tgn (bos et al., 1993; humphrey et al., 1993) . the resulting sis fusion proteins, referred to as sis-e1 and sis-tgn38, allowed a further characterization of the site of autocrine interactions between the v-sis oncoprotein and pdgf receptors.plasmid pmsl50, encoding the v-sis gene under control of the rous sarcoma virus promoter, was used as a parental clone to make the fusion proteins. the dna sequence encoding amino acids 238-271 of v-sis is easily removed from pms150 as a bsteii-clai fragment, allowing for insertion of novel sequences to create various fusion constructs. optimized oligonucleotide synthesis and purification were as previously described (xu et al., 1993) . the complementary oligonucleotides for each fusion protein were designed so that, when annealed, 5' bsteii and 3' clai overhangs were produced. oligonucleotides were then ligated with vector dna (pms150) previously digested with bsteii and clai and purified by agarose gel electrophoresis. recombinant clones were recovered and the sequences of the oligonucleotides were confirmed by dideoxy nucleotide sequencing.for example, the sis-e1 contsruct required synthesis of sense and antisense oligonucleotides, designated d369 and d370, respectively. the sequence of d369 is: 5'gtg.acc.tat.aac.ctg.ttc.atc.acc.gcc.ttc. ctg.ctg.ttc.ctg. ac c. atc. atc.ctg.cag.tat.gc~.tat.gcc.acc. cgg.agc.aag.taa.t y. this oligonucleotide encodes the amino acid sequence vtynlfitafllfltiilqygyatrsk*, where the first two amino acids correspond to amino acids 238 and 239 of v-sis, which lie at the bsteii restriction site. the remaining sequence corresponds to amino acids 21--45 of el, which encompasses the first transmembrane domain (swift and machamer, 1991) . mutant versions of sis-e1, designated sis-el(ql) and sis-el(ins), were also constructed in the same manner. the complementary oligonucleotides encoding sis-el(ins) are designated i)419 and i)420 and code for the sequence vtynlfitafliilfltiilqygyatrsk* which contains an insertion of two lie residues between amino acids 29 and 30 of e1 (shown in bold italics). the oligonucleotides encoding the other mutant, sis-el(ql) are designated d421 and d422 and code for the sequence vtynlfitafllfltiil1ygyatrsk* which contains a mutation of glu37 to lie (shown in bold italics).similar constructs were also designed to encode an extended cytoplasmic tail derived from vsv-g. the oligonucleotides encoding sis-e1-g were designated d455 and d456. the sense strand oligonucleotide i)455 encodes the amino acid sequence vtynlfitafllfltiilqygyatrvgihlcik-lkhtkkrqiytdiemnrlgk*. the first 25 amino acids are the same as in the sis-el construct, but the final 28 originate from the cooh-terminus of the vsv-g protein, sis-ei(qi)-g and sis-el(ins)-g were constructed in the same manner.the final constructs utilize the transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic tail of tgn38. sis-tgn38 was encoded by oligonucleotides d496 and d497. the sense strand oligonucleotide d496 encodes the amino acid sequence vtesshffaylvtaavlvavlyiayhnkrkiiafalegkrskv-trrpkasdyqrlnlkl* again the first two amino acids correspond to 238 and 239 of v-sis, and the remaining 57 amino acids correspond to residues 284-340 of tgn38, encoding the transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic tail of this protein. a mutant version, sis-tgn38a, was also constructed using oligonncleotides 13498 and d499. these oligonucleotides encode a truncated version of the sequence shown above: vtesshffa-ylvtaavlvavlyiayhnkrs* and with the final amino acid changed from a lysine to a serine.the parental vector contains an xhoi restriction site just upstream of the v-sis coding sequence. for use in transfection and infection of nih3t3 cells, dna fragments encoding the above described v-sis-fusion proteins were subcloned as xhoi-clai restriction fragments into the murine leukemia virus (mlv) expression vector pms177, which was derived from the previously described retroviral vector pdd102 (bold and donoghue, 1985) .nih3t3 cells were maintained at 370c, 10% coz in dme containing 10% calf serum, fed every 3 d with fresh medium, and passaged when 70-80% confluent. for focus assays, cells were split at a density of 2 x 10 s cells per 60-ram plate and transfected the following day with 50 ng of expressing plasmid, 50 ng pzap helper virus (hoffman et al., 1982) , and 9.9 t~g carrier plasmid dna using the calcium phosphate precipitation protocol (chen and okayanm, 1987) . cells were incubated with precipitate for 18-20 h at 37°c, 3% co2, then refed and transferred to 10% co2. the cells from each 60-mm plate were split 1:12 the following day and scored for foci 4-5 d later.for infections, nih3t3 ceils were transfected as described above with 9/~g of mlv dna plus 1/~g pzap helper virus. transfected cells were split as described above, and allowed to grow for 4 d without refeeding. the supernatant media, containing viral particles, were then collected, centrifuged to pellet any cells, and used to infect monolayers of fresh nih3t3 cells, split 1-2 x 10 s cells per 60-ram plate one day earlier. polybrene (4 #g/ml) was added to the newly infected cells to increase the efficiency of infection. infected cells were refed the following day with fresh dme media, and were used 2 or 3 d later for labeling and intmunoprecipitations or immunofluorescence. this protocol results in a very high percentage of cells expressing the desired protein.nih3t3 cells were subjected to the infection protocol described above. 3 or 4 d after infection with viral supernatants, cells were incubated for 15 rain in mem lacking cysteine and methionine. each plate was labeled with 35 35 100/~ci [ s]met and [ s]cys in 0.5 rnl mem minus cysteine and methionine for 2 h. calls were lysed with 1.0 rnl radioimmunnprecipitation assay buffer (10 mm sodium phosphate, ph 7.2, 150 mm nac1, 1% np-40, 1% doc, 0.1% sds, 10/~g/ml aprotinin), clarified by centrifugation, and incuhated with a rabbit antiserum directed against bacterially synthesized v-sis protein, generously provided by ray sweet and keith deen (smith, kline and french, king of prussia, pa) for 2 h at 4°c with rotation. protein a-sepharose beads (sigma chemical co., st. louis, mo) preincubated with unlabeled nih3t3 cell lysate were used to isolate immune complexes. after separation on a sucrose gradient and extensive washing in radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer, the beads were treated with 2× sample buffer, and immunoprecipitates were separated on a 15% sds-page gel and detected by fluorography. for analysis of dimer formation, half of each sample was treated with reducing sample buffer (50 mm tris, ph 6.8, 2 % sds, 20% 2-mercaptoethanol, 10% glycerol), while the other half was resuspended in nonreducing sample buffer which lacked the 2-mercaptoethanol. the samples were run on the same 15% sds-page gel and detected as described above.nih3t3 cells were grown on coverslips and transfected as described above with 10 t~g of rous sarcoma virus constructs, or subjected to infection with viral supernatants (see above). to detect intracellniar v-sis fusion proteins, ceils were fixed in 3 % paraformaldehyde/pbs for 10 rnin, followed by permeabilization in 1% triton/pbs for 5 rain. cells were then incubated with a rabbit antiserum directed against the v-sis protein, followed by a rhodamine-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody. to detect cell surface v-sis fusion proteins, cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde and incubated with antibodies without permeabilization, as described previously (hannink and donoghue, 1986a; lee and donoghue, 1992) .for double-labeling experiments to detect expression of both intracellular and cell surface fusion proteins, cells were fixed as described above, then treated with a rabbit antibody to v-sis, then with rhodamine-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody. the same cells were then permeabilized and treated with 10/~g/rnl of mab p5d4 (kries and lodish, 1986) against the cooh terminus of vsv-g (kindly made available by william balch, scripps clinic and research foundation, la jolla, ca). these intracellular proteins were detected with a biotin-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody which was in turn detected by fitc-conjugated streptavidin. for colocalization experiments, nih3t3 cells grown on coverslips were infected with viral supernatants derived from sis-el-g-expressing cells, coverslips were fixed and permeabilized as described above, and sis-e1-g was detected with a-sis antibody and rhodamine-conjugated goat anti-rabbit igg, for colocaiization with the lectin, cells were then incubated with fitcconjugated lens culinaris lectin (sigma). for colocalization with mab 10e6, cells were then incubated with 10e6 mab, which was detected with fitc-conjngated goat anti-mouse igg (kindly provided by v. malhotra [univ. california, davis, ca] and w. j. brown [cornell univ., ithaca, ny)).nih3t3 cells were transfected as described above with 9 #g of mlv expression constructs plus 1 /~g pzap helper virus. cells from individual foci were isolated with cloning rings and transferred to 24-well plates with trypsin, and allowed to grow for 2-3 d, refeeding after 1 d. the cells were trypsinized, transferred to 60-mm plates, then 1 d later split 1:4 to two 10-cm plates, and the following day treated with media with or without 100 #m suramin. cells were examined for morphological changes after 24 h.nih3t3 cells were transfected with 9/~g of mlv constructs plus 1 #g pzap, and supernatants collected and used for infection of fresh nih3t3 cells. 2 d after infection, the 60 mm plates of ceils were serum starved in dme for 24 h, then treated for 5 rain with 100 ng/ml pdgf-bb (amgan, thousand oaks, ca) or left untreated. cells were lysed in np-40 lysis buffer (20 mm tris, ph 7.5, 137 mm naci, 1% np-40, 1 mm sodium orthovanadate, 5 mm edta, 10 t~g/ml aprotinin, and 10% glycerol) and scraped from plates with rubber policemen. the lysates were clarified by centrifugation, then incubated for 2 h with a rabbit antiserum specific for the mouse pdgf-b receptor (upstate biotechnology inc., lake placid, ny). immune complexes were collected with protein a-sepharose beads, spun through a 10% sucrose in np-40 lysis buffer solution, washed twice with np-40 lysis buffer, and once with 20 mm tris, ph 7.5. 40 t~l of kinase buffer (20 mm tris, ph 7.5, 10 mm mnci2, 10 mm mgci2) containing 5 #ci ['y-32p]atp was then added to the beads, and reactions were incubated for 10 min at 37°c. reaction products were separated by sds-page (7.5 %) and visualized by autoradiography. figure 1 . structure of golgilocalized v-sis derivatives. all constructs used the first 239 amino acids of the v-sis protein, which includes: a signal sequence; a pmpeptide with n-linked oligosaccharide addition site and dibasic proteolytic processing site; and the 82-amino acid mtr. the sis-g-er + and sis-g-erconstructs were produced by fusing a known er retention signal (dekkmp) or a scrambled signal (dempkk) from an adenoviral protein, e3/19k, onto the cytoplasmic end of sis-g fusions (lee and donoghue, 1992). the next six constructs contain residues 21-45 of el, a glycoprotein from an avian coronavirus. these residues encode the first transmembrahe domain of el, which has been shown to confer cis-golgi localization. the last three constructs in the e1 set have a 39-amino acid section of the glycoprotein g from the vesicular stomatitis virus (vsv-g) fused to the cytoplasmic tail. the mutant forms of these constructs,should abolish the signal's golgi-retention capabilities. the final two constructs have a section of tgn38, a tgnlocalized protein, encoding the transmembrane domain and c-terminal tail (amino acids 284-340) fused to v-sis. a mutant form was made by truncating the cytoplasmic tail region, and thus uses only amino acids 284-311 of tgn38. this construct should not be retained intracellularly.proteins constructed for these experiments. the first three constructs, sis-g, sis-g-er +, and sisg-er-, were described previously , and served as a basic model for the construction of these new fusion proteins. in all cases, the first 239 amino acids of v-sis are included in the fusion proteins. this portion of v-sis provides a signal sequence, a dibasic proteolytic processing site, and the 82-amino acid minimal transforming region (hannink and donoghue, 1986b; sauer et al., 1986; giese et al., 1987; sauer and donoghue, 1988) . all constructs are in type i orientation-the nh2 terminus is "out; and the cooh terminus "in"the sis-e1 fusion incorporates a 25-amino acid segment of the avian coronavirus e1 protein, containing the entire first transmembrane domain of e1 and a short cytoplasmic tail. this region has been shown to confer localization of e1 to the cis-golgi cisternae, allowing for assembly of the coronavirus to occur at intracellular membranes (swift and machamer, 1991; machamer et al., 1990) . when incorporated into heterologous proteins, this e1 transmembrane domain can function as a cis-golgi localization signal, as shown by incorporation of this transmembrane domain into fusion proteins with vsv-g and a m (a human chorionic gonadotropin/vsv-g fusion protein) (swift and machamer, 1991) . the sis-el(qi) construct incorporates a mutation that changes gin 37 to fie, and this mutation abolishes correct localization (swift and machamer, 1991) . the sis-el(ins) construct contains an insertion of two lie residues in the transmembrane domain, which similarly abolishes cis-golgi localization. the sis-e1-g constructs are quite similar to the above, but they have an extended cooh-terminal domain provided by a portion of the g protein from vsv-g (rose and gallione, 1981) . the addition of the g tail allows for doublelabel immunofluorescence experiments to be performed, and does not significantly alter the localization efficiency or function of the fusion proteins, as described below.the membrane-anchor region of sis-tgn38 consists of 59 amino acids, containing the transmembrane domain and cytoplasmic tail of tgn38, a type i-oriented protein which was isolated from rat liver golgi membranes (luzio et al., 1990) and is normally localized to the tgn (ladinsky and howell, 1992; bos et al., 1993; reaves et al., 1993) . a tyrosine-containing motif, tyr-gln-arg-leu (yqrl), in the cooh-terminal domain of tgn38, has been shown to be essential for tgn localization (bos et al., 1993; humphrey et al., 1993; wong and hong, 1993) . this motif has also been shown to be sufficient for localizing heterologous proteins, such as the ldl receptor and the tac antigen (interleukin-2 receptor a-chain) to the tgn (bos et al., 1993; humphrey et al., 1993) . a mutant version of the sis-tgn38 construct, referred to as sis-tgn38a, was constructed using only the 28 amino acids of tgn38 that encompass the transmembrane domain. thus, the sis-tgn38a construct lacks the essential tyrosine-containing motif, and should not be retained in the tgn.the transforming ability of the various v-sis fusion proteins was assayed by transfection of nih3t3 cells using mlvbased retroviral constructs (bold and donoghue, 1985) . the relative ability to transform cells was based on the number of foci formed, with both positive and negative (mock) controis for comparison. the same amount of dna was transfected for each construct, and the number of foci formed was normalized to the activity of the positive control, sis-g. as shown in table i , cells transfected with sis-e1 or sis-e1-g exhibited negligible transforming activity, comparable to the mock-transfected cells. the presence of the vsv-g cytoplasmic tail in the sis-e1-g construct seemed to have little or no effect on its transforming activity. thus, addition of the retention signal of the e1 protein abrogated the transforming potential of v-sis, presumably by localizing virtually all of the fusion protein to an intracellular location incapable of autocrine stimulation.in contrast, all of the derivatives that incorporated mutations in the e1 localization signal, including sis-el(q1), sis-el(q1)-g, sis-el(ins), and sis-el(ins)-g, exhibited transformation with efficiencies ranging from '~25-50% of sis-g (table i) . these fusion proteins were consistently less transforming the sis-g, but this phenomenon has been observed before in our lab, with other membrane-anchored derivatives of v-sis (hannink and donoghue, 1986a; lee and donoghue, 1991; xu et al., 1993) . this may result from the fact that these membrane-anchored ligands are restricted in their ability to diffuse, and thus less likely to activate receptors as efficiently as the native secreted protein.focus assays were also performed by transfecting nih3t3 cells with the sis-tgn38 and sis-tgn38a constructs. table  i shows that, when fused to a portion of tgn38 containing the tgn-localization signal, v-sis can interact with the pdgf receptor to result in autocrine transformation with an efficiency of 32% of the sis-g control. the mutant derivafive, sis-tgn38a, which lacks the tyrosine-containing tgn localization signal, was consistently more active in transformarion assays, exhibiting 55 % as many foci as the sis-g control. recently, it was demonstrated that tgn38 recycles from the tgn to the cell surface (reaves et al., 1993) . this observation complicates our results, in that we are at this point unable to determine if the transforming potential of the sis-tgn38 fusion protein is due to a subpopulation of protein molecules present on the cell surface at any given time, or whether it is truly mediated by ligand/receptor interactions occurring within the tgn. further experiments will be needed to clarify this.to verify that the constructs used in this study were capable of encoding the desired proteins, the coding regions from each construct were swapped into a psp64(polya) vector (promega biotec, madison, wi) for in vitro transcription and translation experiments. messenger rna was synthesized (melton, 1987) and translation reactions were performed in rabbit reticulate lysate in the presence of [35s]cys. sds-page analysis of the products of these reactions demonstrated proteins with molecular weights that correlated with the expected sizes of each of the fusion proteins (data not shown). this indicates that our constructs encode the desired fusion proteins. the results summarized in table i indicate that sis-e1 and sis-e1-g chimeric proteins are not able to cause transformation. the most likely explanation is that these proteins are anchored in a cellular compartment where they are unable to functionally interact with pdgf receptors. however, one might postulate other explanations for the lack of transforming activity exhibited by these proteins. for example, a critical post-translational event may be altered by forcing v-sis to remain intracellular, thereby abolishing its activity. n-linked glycosylation of v-sis is not required for its biological activity (sauer et al., 1986) , and bacteriauy-expressed pdgf-bb (which has no n-or o-linked glycosylation) is biologically active (hoppe et al., 1989) . therefore, glycosylation of v-sis, although altered in these fusion proteins, does not constitute a critical processing event. however, v-sis must dimerize in order to function , so perhaps these fusion proteins do not dimerize correctly. to address this, we infected nih3t3 cells with viral supernatants collected from cells transfected with the indicated v-sis fusion constructs (see legend to fig. 2) . the fusion proteins were immunoprecipitated using the a-sis antibody, and one half of the sample was treated with nonreducing sample buffer to examine dimeric proteins, while the other half was treated with reducing sample buffer to examine monomeric forms. fig. 2 , lanes 3 and 9 shows that the sis-e1 chimera indeed dimerizes, yielding a dimer band of •62-64 kd under nonreducing conditions, and a 32-kd monomer band un-der reducing conditions. comparison of the left and right panels of fig. 2 further illustrates that all of the chimeric proteins dimerize as expected, indicating that this critical processing event is not altered in the fusion proteins. thus, these data suggest that the transforming activity of the v-sis fusion proteins described here most closely correlates with their subcellular localization within the cell, as verified further below, rather than resulting from differences in posttranslational processing events.like most other secreted proteins, v-sis undergoes a variety of posttranslational modifications as it passes through the secretory pathway. one of these processing events is cleavage at a dibasic site to release the propeptide region of the protein. this is thought to occur late in the secretory pathway, between the trans-cistemae of the golgi complex and the plasma membrane (robbins et al., 1985; lokeshwar et al., 1990) . thus, sis-e1 and sis-el-g, if retained in the early golgi complex, should not undergo this processing step. the mutant versions of these two fusion proteins, however, should reach the cell surface and thus should exhibit processing of this propeptide. similarly, the sis-tgn38 and sis-tgn38a fusion proteins both should exhibit processing, since these should be either retained in a compartment that is past the site of this modification, or be present on the cell surface.to examine proteolytic processing of our fusion proteins, nih3t3 cells expressing the desired proteins were metabolically labeled with [35s]cys and [35s]met, and labeled proteins were immunoprecipitated and separated by sds-page. as shown in fig. 3 , the sis-e1-g protein showed no detectable processed forms (fig. 3, lane 2) , implying retention in an early golgi compartment. on the other hand, the mutant derivatives sis-el(ql)-g and sis-el(ins)-g both exhibited processing, which appears as a doublet of lower mo- lecular mass bands (fig. 3, lanes 3 and 4, indicated by arrows). similar results were obtained using the constructs lacking the g tail (data not shown). the diffuse signal above the major bands most likely represents heterogeneity of o-linked oligosaccharides which, although previously observed , have not been extensively characterized. in summary, these results are consistent with localization of sis-e1 and sis-e1-g to the early golgi complex, whereas the proteins encoded by the other constructs have clearly progressed through the secretory pathway beyond the trans-golgi complex.cleavage of the propeptide region of v-sis is not required for its activity, as demonstrated initially in previous work from this laboratory in which the lys-arg cleavage site of v-sis was mutated to asn-ser with no change in biological activity (saner et al., 1986) . in subsequent studies from our lab, the kr to ns mutation has been incorporated into a variety of membrane-anchored derivatives (hannink and donoghue, 1986b; lee and donoghue, 1992; xu et al., 1993) , including sis-g and sis-g-er-, with no effect on biological activity. this is an important point, as the constructs that are retained in the early golgi, sis-e1 and sis-el-g, would not be expected to undergo this cleavage process. thus, we can conclude that the inactivity of these proteins is not due to their lack of propeptide cleavage.to examine the subcellular location of v-sis fusion proteins, nih3t3 cells were transfected with mlv expression constructs and then processed for immunofluorescence. the proteins were detected by an antibody to the v-sis portion of the fusion proteins. as visualized in the permeabilized cells shown in fig. 4 , there was a high level of expression for all the fusion proteins presented in this figure (see fig. 4 , a, c, e, and g). staining can be seen of the er and golgi of these cells, indicating the presence of these fusion proteins throughout the secretory compartment. the cells depicted in fig. 4 are representative of the positive cells seen in these transient expression assays. the percentage of cells expressing the desired constructs typically ranged from ,,ol-5 %.surface staining of nonpermeabilized cells was readily detectable for cells expressing sis-el(ins), sis-el(ql), and sis-tgn38a derivatives (see fig. 4 , b, d, and h), indicating that these fusion proteins are efficiently transported to the cell surface, as expected. the sis-tgn38 construct (f) displays decreased but detectable surface staining, indicating that a portion of the population of this protein reaches the cell surface. this is consistent with the behavior of native tgn38, which has been shown to recycle between the tgn and the cell surface (reaves et al., 1993) . since a small amount of this sis-q'gn38 fusion protein reaches the cell surface, this may explain the transforming activity of this construct in the focus formation assays (see table i ). however, at this time we have no way of determining if the tgnretained population of the fusion protein contributes in any way to the transforming activity. while fig. 4 clearly demonstrates that the sis-e1 mutants and the sis-tgn38 derivatives reach the cell surface, it does not answer the question of whether the sis-e1 or sis-e1-g fusions do not reach the surface. to address this question, double-label immunofluorescence was performed using the constructs bearing the vsv-g cytoplasmic tail. this allowed for simultaneous examination of both intracellular and cell surface populations of the various fusion proteins within the same cell. cell surface protein was detected with an antibody against v-sis. the cells were then permeabilized, and intracellular fusion proteins were detected with a monoclonal antibody to the vsv-g protein. as positive controls, both the sis-el(ins)-g and the sis-el(ql)-g fusion proteins were included in this assay. as in fig. 4, fig. 5 shows that these proteins were readily detected within the cell (e and g) as well as on the cell surface (f and h). as another control, sis-g was included. this fusion protein was created in our lab for previous experiments, and it localizes to the cell surface (hannink and donoghue, 1986a) . a and b of fig. 5 clearly demonstrate both intracellular and surface staining for this construct. c demonstrates the reticular and perinuclear intracellular staining consistently seen for sis-el-g, indicating presence of this protein within the er and golgi complex.when looking for sis-e1-g protein on the surface of the same cell, d demonstrates that there is no detectable surface staining. as with fig. 4 , these were transient expression assays, and the typical percentage of cells expressing the transfected fusion constructs was ,,ol-5 %. we deliberately examined cells expressing high levels of protein within the cell, so that even weak cell surface staining would be detectable. although deliberate selection of high-expressing cells tended to obscure any detail present in the permeabilized cells, the issue of whether sis-e1 and sis-e1-g are in fact localized to the early golgi complex is addressed in colocalization experiments in the subsequent section. the cell featured in fig.  5 is representative of all sis-el-g-expressing cells, in that we were never able to detect protein on the cell surface. thus, the cis-golgi retention signal of the e1 glycoprotein, when appended to the v-sis protein, results in efficient retention of the fusion protein to an intracellular compartment.to demonstrate that sis-e1 and sis-e1-g fusion proteins are indeed targeted to the early golgi complex, we have used double-label immunofluorescence to colocalize these chimeric proteins with known golgi markers. the golgi markers used were (a) lens culinaris lectin, a carbohydratebinding protein that binds to terminal o~-mannosyl and o~-dglucosyl residues (kornfeld et al., 1981) , and has been shown to stain primarily the golgi complex of cells (hsu et al., 1992; machamer et al., 1993) ; and (b) a monoclonal antibody 10et, described by wood et al. (1991) , which was localized to the cis-golgi complex of nrk cells by immunoelectron microscopy. in these studies, the sis-e1-g chimera was expressed in nih3t3 cells by infection with retroviral supernatants, and was detected in fixed and permeabilized cells with a polyclonal rabbit antisera to v-sis. this in turn was visualized with a rhodamine-conjugated goat anti-rabbit igg. to visualize the golgi complex, these same cells were treated with either a fluorescein-conjugated lens culinaris lectin, or with the mouse mab 10e6, which was visualized with a fluorescein-conjugated goat anti-mouse igg. the two cells shown for each condition in fig. 6 are representative cells expressing various fusion proteins were processed for immunofluorescence. surface proteins were detected by a rabbit serum directed against the v-sis protein, and rhodamine-conjugated goat antirabbit antibody (b, d, f, and h). intrac~llular proteins were detected by a mouse mab against the cooh-terminal portion of the vsv-g protein and a biotin-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody, followed by fitc-conjugated streptavidin (a, c, e, and g). a and b , sis-g, c and d, sis-el-g; e and f, sis-el(ins) of the sis-el-g-expressing cells generated in these immunofluorescence assays. the percentage of ceils expressing protein was higher using this infection protocol than that obtained by transient transfections. this percentage varied from •10-15 %. as fig. 6 shows, the sis-e1-g fusion protein clearly colocalizes with both the lectin (see a and b, c and d) and the mab 10e6 (see e and f, g and h). thus, the e1 cis-golgi targeting signal functions correctly and targets v-sis to the early golgi when incorporated into a fusion protein.suramin is a polysulfonated naphthylurea derivative reported to inhibit pdgf mitogenic activity and to revert the v-sis transformed phenotype (betsholtz et al., 1986) . it is postulated to exert this effect by disruption of ligand-receptor interactions that occur on the cell surface. this mechanism of action is supported by the ability of suramin to reduce the level of tyrosine-phosphorylated cell surface pdgf receptors, while having no effect on the levels of tyrosine phosphorylation of the intracellular, immature forms of the receptors (fleming et al., 1989) . since suramin has been shown to accumulate intraceuularly (hawking, 1978; la-rocca et al., 1990) , it may also be possible for it to interfere with intracellular interactions between receptor and ligand (huang and huang, 1988) .to further examine the mechanism of transformation occurring in our cells, we treated nih3t3 cells expressing the transforming constructs with suramin to see if the transformed phenotype would revert in its presence. transformed cells expressing sis-el(ql), sis-el(ins), sis-q~3n38, sis-tgn38a, and v-sis as a positive control, were examined in the absence of suramin (fig. 7 , a, c, e, g, and i), or in the presence of suramin (fig. 7, b, d, f, h, and j) . in all cases, suramin did indeed revert the phenotype. it has been shown that e5, an oncoprotein derived from the bovine papillomavirus, can interact with immature intracellular forms of pdgf receptors, and may stimulate their autophosphorylation activity (goldstein et al., 1992; petti and dimaio, 1992; cohen et al., 1993) . it has also been shown by xu et al. (1993) that bpv-e5-transformed cells do not revert in the presence of suramin. thus, cells transformed by e5 were included as a negative control in the suramin reversion assay. as expected, the presence of suramin did not affect the transformed phenotype of nih3t3 cells expressing e5 (fig. 7 , k and l). these results indicate that the productive transforming interactions between pdgf receptors and the v-sis fusion proteins described here are occurring in a suraminsensitive site, most likely the cell surface.a normal response in cells that are chronically exposed to pdgf is the downregulation of pdgf receptors (garrett et al., 1984) . this downregulation occurs via endocytosis of arrows indicate regions of each cell that stain positively for both the sis-e1-g fusion protein and the golgi complex. to analyze if such a process occurred in cells expressing any of the v-sis fusion proteins described in this paper, pdgf-/3 receptors were immunoprecipitated from serum-starved cells expressing the fusion proteins either before or after stimulation with pdgf-bb. these receptors were then subjected to an in vitro kinase assay, and incorporation of labeled phosphate from [3,-32p]atp into the receptor protein was visualized by sds-page. as seen in fig. 8 , in the absence of stimulation with pdgf, little or no activatable receptors were detected (b, lanes 1-9). after stimulation with pdgf-bb, however, nih3t3 cells, mock-transfected cells, and cells expressing sis-e1 all exhibited a significant level of cell surface activatable receptors (a, 1-3), as demonstrated by the phosphorylation of pdgf-# receptors of ~180 kd. expression of the mutant sis-el(ql) and sis-el(ins) constructs, which reach the cell surface, led to downregulation of cell surface activatable receptors, and thus there was little detectable kinase activity in these samples (fig. 8a, lanes 4  and 5) . similar results were obtained with sis-tgn38, sis-tgn38a and v-sis, which also reach the cell surface ( fig.  8/1, lanes 6, 7, and 8) . these results demonstrate that when v-sis is forced to remain in an intracellular compartment, such as the early golgi, it is unable to downregulate cell surface pdgf receptors. (b, d, f, h, j, and l) . a and b, c and d, e and f, g and h, 1 and j, k and l, retention of the v-sis oncogene in the early golgi complex by means of a transmembrane retention signal abolishes its transforming ability, as demonstrated by a dramatic decrease in focus forming activity. all fusion proteins constructed for these experiments dimerized properly, indicating that this critical post-translational modification of the v-sis portion of the fusions was not altered. the fusion proteins sis-e1 and sis-e1-g were efficiently retained intracellularly, as evidenced by the lack of proteolytic processing of the constructs and lack of downregulated cell surface pdgf receptors. immunofluorescence data are consistent with golgi localization of the sis-e1 and sis-e1-g constructs. colocalization with lens culinaris lectin and mab 10e6 confirm targeting to the early golgi complex of the sis-e1 and sis-e1-g constructs. mutant derivatives of the these constructs, containing defects in the cis-golgi localization signal, were not retained inside the cell and were transforming. these proteins were proteolytically processed as expected, and were detectable on the cell surface by immunofluorescence. suramin reverted the transformation induced by these latter constructs, providing further evidence that functional interactions between v-sis and pdgf receptors occur primarily on the cell surface. the results obtained with the sis-e1 and sis-e1-g constructs indicate that the intracellular compartment of the early golgi complex does not allow for autocrine activation of pdgf receptors.attempts to retain v-sis protein in a more distal golgi region by attachment of a tgn retention signal yielded ambiguous results. while most of the sis-tgn38 fusion protein was retained intracellulady, some of the protein was able to reach the cell surface, as shown by immunofluorescence. indeed, it has been demonstrated recently that tgn38 actually recycles from the cell surface and back to the tgn (reaves et al., 1993) . it is likely that this population of molecules that reached the cell surface was responsible for the transformation seen in the focus assays in cells expressing this fusion protein, since treatment with suramin reverted the transformed phenotype. however, we cannot conclusively rule out the possibility that functional autocrine interactions can occur in the tgn. significantly, however, when the coohterminus of the tgn38-derived domain was truncated, the transforming efficiency of the derivative sis-tgn38a nearly doubled (table i) . this data certainly provides a correlation between transformation and increased cell surface localization, compared with tgn localization.since v-sis-transformed ceils express both v-sis protein and pdgf receptors, there exists the possibility that these two proteins can interact as they pass simultaneously through the secretory pathway. keating and williams (1988) reported the detection of pdgf receptors that are activated intracellularly in v-sis-transformed cells. these receptors were of an immature form, as determined by their molecular mass (160 kd) and lack of glycosylation (huang and huang, 1988; keating and williams, 1988) , and are rapidly degraded after stimulation by v-sis (keating and williams, 1988; bejcek et al., 1992) . high concentrations of antisera to pdgf were shown to be unable to reverse transformation of nrk cells. also, high levels of exogenously added v-sis protein have not been shown to cause transformation of nrk cells (bejcek et al., 1989) . both of these observations suggest that an intracellular autocrine mechanism may exist. these same researchers attached a six-amino acid er-retention signal, sekdel, to the v-sis protein and observed morphological transformation of cells expressing this fusion protein. no secreted fusion protein was detectable. bejcek and coworkers (1992) also have shown that v-sis, but not endogenously expressed pdgf-a homodimers, can activate pdgf receptors intracellularly; thus the capacity of v-sis to act intracellularly may underlie its mechanism of transformation.the kdel retention signal used by bejcek et al. (1989) has since been shown to be a retrieval signal-not a true retention signal-allowing for return of escaped proteins to the er (pelham, 1991) . there is also evidence that this signal allows some leakage of proteins to the cell surface (zagouras and rose, 1989) . thus, the finding that v-sis can transform cells with this kdel signal attached most likely indicates that an undetectable amount of the fusion protein was able to escape the er to a more distal location, such as the cell surface, where productive autocrine interactions occurred. if protein was secreted, it likely was rapidly internalized by receptor-mediated endocytosis, and thus escaped detection. indeed, we have experienced difficulty in immunoprecipitating and detecting wild-type v-sis protein in transformed cells due to this rapid internalization (data not shown).a different er retention signal has been identified by nilsson et al. (1989) from the adenovirus protein e3/19k. lee and donoghue (1992) appended this signal to the cooh terminus of the v-sis protein and demonstrated that (a) the retention signal effectively retained v-sis in the er, with no leakage to the cell surface as confirmed by immunofluorescence, and (b) this er-retained form of v-sis was no longer able to transform nih3t3 cells in an autocrine fashion. this evidence suggests that v-sis cannot productively interact with the pdgf receptor within this compartment. hannink and donoghue (1988) constructed an inducible autocrine system in nih3t3 cells by placing the v-sis gene under control of the hsp70 heat shock promoter, allowing for induction of v-sis expression by a short incubation at 45°c.with this system, they demonstrated that productive interactions between v-sis and pdgf receptors occur in a monensin:insensitive site. since monensin acts by disrupting the structure and function of the trans-golgi complex, and reduces the rate of transport of proteins to the cell surface (tartakoff, 1983) , these results indicate that transformation only results when v-sis interacts with receptors in a region past the trans-golgi complex. however, since monensin is a pleiotropic agent, there may have been other effects on the cells that were not taken into account. also, the temperature shock required for induction of the hsp70 promoter may have induced other endogenous heat shock proteins.it has also been demonstrated that suramin treatment of v-sis-transformed cells reverts the transformed phenotype (fleming et al., 1989) , and that suramin decreases phosphorylation levels of cell-surface pdgf receptors with little effect on intracellular receptor phosphorylation. these experiments suggest that v-sis protein can interact with intracellular forms of the pdgf receptors in cells and stimulate autophosphorylation activity of these immature receptors, but that activated receptors must reach a suramin-sensitive, cell surface location in order to trigger the signal transduction cascade that leads to transformation.previous experiments by lee and donoghue (1992) suggested that the er compartment of the secretory pathway does not support transforming interactions between v-sis and pdgf-r. one reason that the sis-g-er ÷ construct could not productively interact with pdgf-r could be that either the ligand or the receptors had not yet undergone critical posttranslational modifications required for functional interactions and signal transduction. such modifications may occur in the golgi portion of the secretory pathway, particularly modifications of n-linked oligosaccharide or the addition of o-linked oligosaccharide which are largely confined to the later golgi compartments. we have previously demonstrated that, except for disulfide bond formation which occurs in the er very shortly after translation, further posttranslational modifications are not required for the biological activity of the v-sis protein hannink and donoghue, 1986b; sauer and donoghue, 1988) . however, extensive oligosaccharide addition and modification to pdgf-r occurs, and its importance is not clear (keating and williams, 1987) . use of an early golgi retention signal-the first transmembrane domain of the e1 glycoprotein-allowed us to begin to investigate possible autocrine interactions within the golgi region by retaining v-sis as a fusion protein in this compartment. this retention of the v-sis oncoprotein within the early golgi complex completely abrogated its transforming ability, and thus we conclude that productive autocrine interactions cannot occur in the early secretory pathway.localization of v-sis to the tgn by means of a retention signal derived from tgn38 resulted in decreased levels of transforming ability. however, immunofluorescence data indicate that a small portion of this sis-tgn38 fusion protein was able to reach the cell surface, a finding that is consistent with reports by reaves et al. (1993) that tgn38 recycles be: tween the tgn and the cell surface. suramin treatment of cells expressing sis-tgn38 leads to reversion of the transformed phenotype, further implicating a cell surface pool of sis-tgn38 in the transformation of these cells. however, we are unable to conclusively determine from these experiments that v-sis targeted to the tgn is not transforming. currently, we are undertaking studies which should further clarify interactions within the late golgi compartments. these new studies utilize a similar approach of constructing fusion proteins, this time using the transmembrane domains and cytoplasmic tails of well-characterized glycosyltransferases, which are resident golgi enzymes. these membrane anchors should give tighter retention in the later golgi compartments than seen with the tgn38-derived retention signal, and will hopefully provide a conclusive indication of whether v-sis is able to engage in productive autocrine interactions within the late golgi complex.while it has been established that immature forms of the pdgf-r can be stimulated by v-sis to undergo phosphorylation within the secretory pathway (hannink and donoghue, 1988; keating and williams, 1988; bejcek et al., 1992) , the question remains-are these interactions functional? that is, does this simple intracellular interaction between v-sis and pdgf-r contribute to acquisition of the transformed phenotype? one argument against this possibility is that the downstream effector molecules, such as plc-3, (kumjian et al., 1989; meisenhelder et ai., 1989; wahl et al., 1989; morrison et al., 1990) , pi-3 kinase (coughlin et ai., 1989; kazlauskas and cooper, 1989) , ras-gap kazlauskas et al., 1990) , and others, that normally interact with activated pdgf-r at the plasma membrane may not be available to the immature activated receptors present within the secretory pathway. the evidence from bejcek et al. (1992) that indicates the intracellularly phosphorylated, immature forms of the receptor are capable of interacting with pi-3 kinase in 3t3 cells begins to address the functionality of intracellular v-sis/pdgf receptor interactions, but far from answers the question. future studies in our lab will be aimed at examining the availability of such effector molecules within the secretory pathway, and whether they can indeed be activated intracellularly. these studies will include attempts to retarget some members of the signal transduction machinery to the early golgi complex, to see if this will then allow sis-e1 or sis-e1-g to signal from this compartment. the results of these future studies should provide significant insight into the mechanisms of autocrine transformation.covid-19 has completely changed the world's view on pandemic with dire consequences to global health and economy. within only four months (from january to april 2020), 210 countries and territories around the world have reported more than three million infected people including more than two hundred thousand deaths [1] . beside the global health crisis, covid-19 has also been causing massive economic losses (e.g., a possible 25% unemployment rate in the u.s. [2] , one million people lost their jobs in canada during march 2020 [3] , 1.4 million jobs lost in australia [4] , and a projected global 3% gdp loss [5] ), resulting in a global recession as predicted by many experts [5] - [7] . in such context, there is an urgent need for solutions to contain the disease spread, thereby reducing its negative impacts and buying more time for pharmaceutical solution development.in the presence of contagious diseases such as sars, h1n1, and covid-19, social distancing is an effective nonpharmaceutical approach to limit the disease transmission [8] , [20] , [27] . social distancing refers to the measures that reduce the disease spread by reducing the frequency and closeness of human physical contacts, such as closing public places (e.g, schools, workplaces), avoiding mass gatherings, and keeping a sufficient distance amongst people [8] , [9] . by reducing the probability that the disease can be transmitted from an infected person to a healthy one, social distancing can significantly reduce the disease's spread and severity. if implemented properly at the early stages of a pandemic, social distancing measures can play a key role in reducing the infection rate and delay the disease's peak, thereby reducing the burden on the healthcare systems and lowering death rates [8] , [20] , [27] . fig. 1 illustrates the effects of social distancing measures on the daily number of cases [11] . as can be observed in fig. 1(a) , social distancing can reduce the peak number of infected cases [27] to ensure that the number of patients does not exceed the public healthcare capacity. moreover, social distancing also delays the outbreak peak [27] so that there is more time to implement countermeasures. furthermore, social distancing can reduce the final number of infected cases [27] , and the earlier social distancing is implemented, the higher the effects will be as illustrated in fig. 1(b) [11] .during the ongoing covid-19 pandemic, many governments have implemented various social distancing measures such as travel restrictions, border control, closing public places, and warning their citizens to keep a 1.5-2 meters distance from each other when they have to go outside [12] - [14] . nevertheless, such aggressive and large-scale measures are not easy to implement, e.g., not all public spaces can be closed, and people still have to go outside for food, healthcare, or essential work. in such context, technologies play a key role in facilitating social distancing measures. for example, wireless positioning systems can effectively help people to keep a safe distance by measuring the distances between people and alerting them when they are too close to each other. moreover, other technologies such as artificial intelligence (ai) technologies can be used to facilitate or even enforce social distancing.in this article, we present a comprehensive survey on enabling and emerging technologies for social distancing. the main aims are to provide fundamental background about social distancing as well as effective technologies that can be used to facilitate the social distancing practice. in particular, we first present basic concepts of social distancing together with its measurements, models, effectiveness and practical scenarios. after that we review enabling wireless technologies which are especially effective in monitoring and keeping distance amongst people. then, we discuss various emerging technologies, e.g., ai, thermal, computer vision, ultrasound and visible light, which have been introduced recently in order fig. 1 : effects of social distancing [11] .to address many new issues related to social distancing, e.g., contact tracing, quarantined people detection and monitoring, and symptom prediction. finally, some important open issues and challenges (e.g., privacy-preserving, cybersecurity) for implementing technologies for social distancing will be discussed. furthermore, potential solutions together with future research directions are also highlighted and discussed in this section.although there are few surveys related to localization and positioning systems, e.g., [15] - [18] , to the best of our knowledge, this is the first survey in the literature discussing about technologies for social distancing. it is important to note that, due to the increasingly complex development of many types of viruses as well as the rapid growth of social interaction and globalization, the concept of social distancing is not as simple as physical distancing. in fact, it also includes many non-pharmaceutical interventions or measures taken to prevent the spread of contagious disease such as monitoring, detection and warning people (as presented in table i ). alternatively, thanks to the significant development of emerging technologies, e.g., ai, data analytics, many new solutions have been introduced recently which can make favorable conditions for practicing social distancing. thus, this survey aims to provide an overview of technologies together with their impacts to social distancing in practice.as illustrated in fig. 2 , the rest of this paper is organized as follows. we first provide a brief overview of social distancing and distance measurement methods in section ii. then, section iii and section iv discuss enabling wireless technologies and other emerging technologies for social distancing, respectively. after that, we discuss open issues and future research directions of social distancing in section v, and conclusions are given in section vi.a. social distancing 1) definition and classifications: social distancing refers to the non-pharmaceutical measures to reduce the frequency of physical contacts and the contact distances between people during an infectious disease outbreak [10] . social distancing methods can be classified into public and individual measures. public measures include closing or reducing access to education institutions and workplaces, canceling mass gatherings, travel restrictions, border control, and quarantining buildings. individual measures consist of isolation, quarantine, and encouragement to keep physical distances between people [9] . although these measures can cause some negative impacts on the economy and individual freedom, they play a crucial role in reducing the severity of a pandemic [10] . if implemented properly, social distancing can effectively reduce the transmission and severity of a disease, thereby reducing the pressure on healthcare systems and allowing more time for government countermeasures [10] .2) measurements and models: the evaluation of social distancing measures is often based on several standardized approaches. one of the main criteria for social distancing measures selection is the basic reproduction number r o which represents on average how many people a case (i.e., an infectious person) will infect during its entire infectious period [19] . for example, r o < 1 indicates that every case will infect less than 1 person, and thus the disease is declining in the considered population. since the value of r o represents how quickly the disease is spreading, r o has been one of the most important indicators for social distancing measures selection [20] , [27] . mathematically, r o can be determined bywhere b(a) is the average number of new cases an infectious person will infect per unit of time during the infectious period a, and f(a) is the probability that the individual will remain infectious during the period a [19] .besides showing the transmissibility of a disease, r o also gives some intuitive ideas how to limit the disease spread. as observed from (1), r o can be reduced in different ways, i.e., to decrease b(a) or f(a). to reduce b(a), there are several approaches such as to lower the number of contacts the infected individuals make per unit of time (e.g., avoid mass gatherings and public places closures) or to reduce the probability that a contact will infect a new person (e.g, by wearing masks). to reduce f(a), the infected person needs to be cured or completely avoid contacts with the non-infected (e.g., isolation and quarantine).3) effectiveness: to evaluate the effectiveness of social distancing, a common approach is to measure the attack rate which is the percentage of infected people in a susceptible population (where everyone has no immunity in the beginning of the disease) at the time of measurement [22] . the attack rate reflects the severity of a disease at a given time, and thus it has different values during the disease outbreak. among these values, the peak attack rate is often considered and compared to the current healthcare capacity (e.g., intensive care unit capacity) to see the current system's ability to handle the peak number of patients. after the outbreak is over, data is often collected to determine the final attack rate which is the ratio between the total number of infected cases in the population over the entire course of the outbreak.social distancing measures are proven to be effective if implemented properly [22] - [28] . different types of social distancing measures may have diverse levels of effectiveness on the disease spread. in [22] , the effect of social distancing measures at workplaces is evaluated by agent-based simulation approach. in particular, six different workplace strategies that reduce the number of workdays are simulated. the results show that, for a seasonal influenza (r o = 1.4), reducing the number of workdays can effectively reduce the final attack rate (e.g., up to 82% if three consecutive workdays are reduced). nevertheless, in a pandemic-level influenza (r o = 2.0), reducing the number of workdays has significantly less impact, i.e., 3% (one extra day off) to 21% decrease (three extra consecutive days off). several other studies present similar results. in [23] , it is shown that workplace social distancing can reduce the final attack rate by up to 39.22% in a r o = 1.4 setting. similarly, [24] shows that different types of measures can reduce the attack rate from 11% to 20% depending on the frequency of contacts among the employees.for school closure measures, studies also show positive effects. in [25] , a modeling technique is employed to examine the effects of four different social distancing measures under three varying r o settings. among different types of measures, the school closure measure is shown to be able to reduce the final attack rate by 20%, 10%, and 5%, and the peak attack rate by 77%, 47%, and 32% in the cases where r o < 1.9, 2.0 ≤ r 0 ≤ 2.4, and r o > 2.5, respectively. similarly, it is shown in [26] that prolonged school closure in a pandemic context can reduce the final attack rate by up to 17% and the peak attack rate by up to 45%.another common social distancing measures is isolation of the infected cases and cases with similar symptoms. in [27] , large-scale epidemic simulations are performed to evaluate different strategies for influenza pandemic mitigation. among the simulated strategies, the results show that the proper implementation (such that an isolated individual reduces 90% of its contact rate) of isolation can reduce the final attack rate by 7% in a r o = 2 setting. similarly, it is shown in [25] that isolation can reduce the final attack rate by 27%, 7%, and 5%, and the peak attack rate by 89%, 72%, and 53% in the cases where r o < 1.9, 2.0 ≤ r 0 ≤ 2.4, and r o > 2.5, respectively.for household quarantines, studies have shown that this measure can be effective if the compliance level is sufficient. in [27] , the effects of voluntary quarantine of household for a duration of 14 days are examined. simulations are carried out with the assumption that 50% of households will comply with, which leads to a 75% reduction of external contact rates, while the internal contact rate will increase by 100%. the results show that this measure can reduce the final attack rate by up to 6% and the peak attack rate by up to 40%. similarly, in [28] , simulations are performed to examine the impacts of different measures. for household quarantines, the result shows that this measure can reduce the final attack rate by 31% and the peak attack rate by 68% with r o = 1.8 and a compliance rate of 50%.apart from the abovementioned measures, the effectiveness of the other social distancing measures either received limited attention or was often considered in combination with another approach. in [27] , the effectiveness of travel restrictions and border control measures are examined. however, the results only show that different levels of travel restrictions (from 90% to 99.9%) can delay the peak attack rate by up to six weeks, while how travel restrictions affect the attack rate is not examined. another type of measures that does not receive much attention is community contact reduction measures (e.g., avoid crowds and mass gatherings cancellation). in [25] , it is shown that this type of measure can reduce the final attack rate by 17%, 14%, and 10%, and the peak attack rate by 72%, 49%, and 38% in the cases where r o < 1.9, 2.0 ≤ r o ≤ 2.4, and r o > 2.5, respectively.when combined together, social distancing measures are proven to be even more effective in various studies [25] , [27] , [29] . it is shown in [25] that when all four measures, i.e., school closure, isolation, workplace nonattendance, and community contact reduction, are in effect, they can drastically reduce the attack rates in all the considered r o settings. in particular, the final attack rate can decrease from 65% to only 3% and the peak attack rate from 474 cases per 10 thousand to only five cases, in the highest r o setting. similarly, [27] examines the effects when household quarantines, workplace closures, border control, and travel restrictions are combined. the results show that the final and peak attack rate are three times and six times, respectively, less than when no policy is implemented. moreover, the peak attack rate can be delayed by nearly three months in a r o = 1.7 setting. in [29] , it is also shown that when four types of measures (i.e., school closure, household quarantines, workplace nonattendance, and community contact reduction) are in effects, the final attack rate can be reduced 3-4 times depending on r o .there are several studies focusing on the negative impacts of social distancing. in [30] , simulations are performed to evaluate the benefit and cost of different social distancing strategies. in this study, simulations are carried out without and with social distancing under different caution levels settings. simulation results are evaluated based on the benefits of the reduced infection rate and the economic cost of reducing contacts. the main finding of this work is that a favorable result can only be obtained by implementing social distancing measures with a high caution level. since the economic cost is also considered, it is shown that implementing social distancing with an insufficient caution level gives worse results than that of the without social distancing case. in [31] , a game theoretical approach based on the classic sir model is proposed to evaluate the benefits and costs of social distancing measures. interestingly, the results show that in the case where r o < 1, the equilibrium behaviors include no social distancing measures. moreover, social distancing measures are shown to achieve the highest economical benefit when r o ≈ 2.in the current covid-19 pandemic, the world health organization (who) estimates that the value of r o would be in the range of 2-2.5 [33] . as can be seen from the abovementioned studies, social distancing measures can play a vital role in mitigating this pandemic with such r o values. for example, fig. 3 illustrates the rolling 3-day average of daily new confirmed covid-19 cases in several countries [32] . generally, after a country began implementing social distancing (e.g., lockdown in all those countries) for 13-23 days, the daily number of new cases begins to drop. moreover, the figure also shows the total number of confirmed cases. as can be seen from the second graph, the curves representing the total number of cases become less steep after social distancing are implemented (i.e., flattening the curve).despite its significant potential, ait can be observed that social distancing is very effective only when applied properly. nevertheless, it is not easy to implement because of many fig. 3 : real-world effects of social distancing [32] .reasons such as the negative economic impacts, personal freedom violation, and difficulties in changing people's behaviors. thus, technologies play a key role in facilitating social distancing, which will be reviewed in the next sections. 4) practical scenarios: the practical social distancing scenarios presented in this survey are illustrated in fig. 4 and summarized in table i fig. 5 .since the main principle of social distancing is to reduce the closeness of human contacts, approaches to determine the positions and measure the distance between people can play a vital role in facilitating social distancing measures. using ubiquitous technologies, such as wi-fi, cellular, and gps, positioning (localization) systems can thus play a key role in many abovementioned practical social distancing scenarios such as distance keeping, public places monitoring, contact tracing, and automation.1) overview of positioning systems: fig. 6 illustrates the general process and several popular methods of a positioning system [34] . generally, a positioning system's main aim is to continuously determine the position of an object in realtime [18] . to achieve this goal, firstly, signals are transmitted from the target to the receiving nodes (e.g., sensors). from the received signals, useful properties such as arrival time, signal direction, and signal strength (depending on the measurement methods) are extracted in the signal measurement phase. based on these properties, the position of the target can be calculated using various methods in the position calculation phase [34] . several effective signal measurements and position calculation methods are presented in the rest of this section.2) signal measurements: typical signal measurement methods can be classified based on the extracted property of the received signal. among them, time-based methods use the arrival time of the signal to determine the distance between the receiving nodes and the target [34] . time-based methods can be further classified as follows:• time-of-arrival (toa) [37] : this method determines the distance d between the receiving node and the target based on the time it takes for the signal to travel from the target to the node, i.e.,enabling technologies for social distancing where c is the speed of the signal transmission and t is the time for the signal to reach the receiving node. • time difference-of-arrival (tdoa) [37] : this method uses two kinds of signal with different speeds and calculates d based on the difference between them, i.e.,where c 1 , c 2 , t 1 , and t 2 are the speeds and arrival time of the two signals, respectively. • round trip time (rtt) [34] : the rtt method measures the duration in which the signal travels to the targets and comes back, i.e.,where t rt is the time of the whole round trip, and ∆t is the predetermined delay between when the target receives the signal and when the target starts sending back. a common disadvantage of the toa and tdoa methods is that they require synchronized clocks at the node and the target to determine t, t 1 and t 2 , which may be costly to implement and requires frequent calibrations to maintain the accuracy. although the rtt method does not require clock synchronization, it needs to know the delay ∆t which cannot be predicted in many circumstances [35] . consequently, extra efforts are needed to determine ∆t in advance.unlike the time-based methods, the angle-of-arrival (aoa) method determines d by measuring the angle of the incoming signals by using directional antennas or array of antennas. the measured angles can then be used in the triangulation method to geometrically determine the target position. however, a main disadvantage of this method is that it requires extra directional antennas which are costly to implement [34] .the received signal strength indicaton (rssi) method measures the attenuation of the signals to determine the distance. typically, the relationship between rssi and distance can be formulated as follows [41] :where p r is the rssi value at the receiver (e.g., access point), d represents the distance from the user device to the access point, x is a random variable (caused by the shadowing effect) which follows the gaussian distribution with zero mean. α is a constant value which can be known in advance and depends on fading, antennas gain, and emitted power of the user device. thus, based on the rssi level of the received signals, the distance between  any two people   detect and monitor the distance  between any two people bluetooth, ultrasound, thermal, inertial, ultra-wideband [72] , [195] , [237] , [102] , [286] distance to/from crowds alert when approaching a crowd ai, thermal, inertial, ultra-wideband, vision [103] , [248] , [341] , [236] , [286] real-time monitoringmonitor and gauge the number of people inside/at a public placewi-fi, rfid, zigbee, cellular, gps [110] , [111] physical contact monitoring monitor physical contacts, e.g., handshakes, hugs, between people thermal [236] , [237] symptom detection and monitoringdetect and monitor sickness symptoms, e.g., body temperature, coughs. vision [172] susceptible group detection monitor highly susceptible groups thermal [244] , [245] detect and monitor quarantined peopledetect and monitor quarantine people (e.g., for complying/violating the isolation/quarantine requirement) ai, cellular, visible lights, vision [180] , [343] crowd detection detect crowds/gatherings in public placeswi-fi, bluetooth, rfid,zigbee, ultra-wideband, cellular, gps, vision, visible light, ai [43] , [102] , [117] , [70] , [76] , [84] non-essential travel detectionusing location information to determine if the trip is essential (e.g., medical facilities and gasoline stations) or not (e.g., restaurants and cinemas) gps, thermal [161] , [162] , [241] traffic/movement monitoring detect the vehicles on the street when isolation measures are in effect gps, vision, cellular [119] , [161] , [162] lockdown violation detection public place/building access scheduling control the number of people inside public buildings wi-fi, rfid, zigbee [47] , [76] , [84] traffic control regulate and reduce vehicles and pedestrians density scheduling [279] - [281] automation robot-assisted social distancing improve positioning and navigation of robots, especially medical robots inside hospitals ultra-wideband, gps, visible lights, ultrasound, inertial [166] , [291] , [292] [211], [228] autonomous delivery systems (e.g., uavs, ...)reduce the number of people going outside (food, merchandise, etc., delivery) gps, inertial [159] , [293] , [294] ai infected movement prediction predict infected people's movement ai [342] quarantined/at-risk people location predictionpredict quarantined and at-risk people's current location to enforce them stay at isolation/protection facility ai [343] , [344] people/traffic density prediction predict people density and traffic density cellular, ai [128] - [132] , [345] sickness trend prediction predict sickness trends in specific areas ai [347] access point can estimate the position of the user device in indoor environments.3) position calculation: based on the measured signal properties, different methods are employed to calculate the target's position. among them, trilateration is a common method which uses three reference nodes and the distances between them to the target to calculate the position [34] , as illustrated in fig. 6 . more specifically, using the coordinates (x 1 , y 1 ), (x 2 , y 2 ), (x 3 , y 3 ) of the reference nodes and the corre-sponding measured distances d 1 , d 2 , and d 3 , the coordinate (x, y) of the target can be determined byinstead of using distances, the triangulation method uses the angles of the signal (from the aoa method) to determine the target's position. as illustrated in fig. 6 , if the coordinates of two references nodes and the corresponding measured angles α 1 , α 2 are known, the target's position can be geometrically determined [34] .to address the uncertainty in measurements, the maximum likelihood estimation (mle) method is often employed. this method utilizes the signal measurements from a number of reference nodes (usually three or more) and apply some statistical approaches such as the minimum variance estimation method [36] to calculate the target's position while minimizing the impact of noises in the environment [34] .to enable social distancing, many wireless technologies can be adopted such as wi-fi, bluetooth, rfid, zigbee, ultra-wideband, cellular, and gps. in this section, we first briefly provide the fundamentals of these technologies and then explain how they can enable, encourage, and enforce people to practice social distancing. after that, we discuss the potential applications, advantages, limitations, and practical feasibility of these technologies.due to the fact that wi-fi technology is widely deployed in indoor environments, this technology can be considered to be a promising solution to practice social distancing inside multistory buildings, airports, alleys, parking garages, and underground locations where gps and other satellite technologies may not be available or provide low accuracy [38] . in a wi-fi system, a wireless transmitter, known as a wireless access point (ap), is required to transmit radio signals to communicate with user devices in its coverage area. currently wi-fi enabled wireless devices are working on the ieee 802.11 standards. wi-fi 6 (based on 802.11ax technology) is the newest version of wi-fi standards which provides highthroughput and reliable communications [39] . thus, wi-fi technology can be adopted to support social distancing in many scenarios.1) crowd detection: one potential application of wi-fi technology in social distancing is positioning [41] - [58] . based on the location of users, the authority can detect crowds inside a building and force them to maintain a safe distance. this is an essential factor to practice social distancing during a pandemic outbreak in indoor public places such as train stations and airports. there are two main reasons making wi-fi technology possible in social distancing. first, due to the convenience of hardware facilities, we can quickly deploy wi-fi systems for user positioning with very low cost and efforts [40] . second, with recent advances in wi-fi based indoor positioning, wi-fi can provide reliable and precise location services to enable social distancing. the most common and easiest way for indoor positioning is calculating the user's location based on the rssi of the received signals from the user device [41] , [42] .however, the accuracy of this solution much depends on the propagation model. thus, in [41] , the authors present a new method to dynamically estimate the channel model from the user device to the access point. the key idea of this solution is continuously determining the rssi values in real-time to obtain the estimated channel model that is close to the real channel model. once the propagation is estimated, the distance between the access point and the user device can be accurately determined. after that, the user's location will be derived by using the trilateration mechanism.differently, the authors in [42] propose to adopt the inertial navigation system (ins) to significantly increase the accuracy of conventional rssi-based methods. the key idea of this solution is using a kalman filter to combine and fill the signal database with the ins data. as such, the authors can obtain the average distance error as small as 0.6m. the above rssi-based solutions can be easily adopted to detect crowds in indoor environments. then, the local authorities can take appropriate actions to disperse the crowds or suggest other people to not go to the place. for example, if there are too many people in a supermarket, the authorities can notify and recommend new coming customers to go to other supermarkets or come in another time, so that they can avoid crowds and practice social distancing.2) crowd detection in dynamic environments: although the rssi-based solution can detect the user's location with sufficient accuracy, they may not be effective to implement in dynamic and complicated indoor environments such as airports or train stations [43] , [44] , [45] . specifically, the geometric approach calculates the user device's position through the geometric relations between the device and the access point. although being simple and easy to implement, this solution has low accuracy when detecting the user's location. this is due to the effects of nonline of sight (nlos) on the wireless signals between the user's device and the access point, especially in dynamic and complicated environments in which the wireless signals are greatly affected by obstacle shadows caused by activities of people (e.g., running and walking) and infrastructures [43] . another rssi-based indoor localization technique is the fingerprinting approach (or radio map) that locates devices based on a previous built database. in particular, this database contains the signal fingerprints corresponding to several access points in a specific area. nevertheless, collecting fingerprint data is time-consuming and laborious [46] , especially in large areas such as airports or train stations. in addition, it is infeasible to directly apply the pre-obtained fingerprint database to new areas for localization [47] , [48] . the principle reason is that the adjustment process to apply the fingerprint database of an area to other areas is time-consuming and requires human intervention.to address these problems, several solutions [43] - [48] are proposed to enable indoor localization in dynamic and complicated areas such as airports and train stations. with these solutions, the authorities can detect crowds and force people to leave to enable social distancing in pandemic outbreaks. specifically, in [43] , the authors study that when the environment changes, e.g., the presence of people in the line of sight between the user device and the access point, the performance of conventional rssi-based localization techniques is greatly decreased. thus, the authors propose an adaptive signal model fingerprinting algorithm to adapt with the dynamic of environment by detecting users' positions and updating the database simultaneously. in [47] , the authors propose a new localization technique to locate multiple users in different areas by performing a fine-grained localization. in addition, the authors introduce a transfer mechanism to adjust the fingerprint database over multiple areas to minimize the human intervention. differently, an interesting design is proposed in [49] to locate and track people by using wi-fi technology, namely wi-vi (stands for wi-fi vision). this technology allows the authorities to track people in indoor environments and detect potential crowds, so that they can take appropriate actions to enable social distancing, e.g., notify people to not go to potential crowded places. in particular, wi-vi uses an mimo interference nulling to remove reflections from static objects and only focuses on moving objects, e.g., a user. moreover, the authors propose to consider the movement of a user as an antenna array and then track the user by observing its rf beams. if there are many people having the same direction, e.g., going to the same place, the authorities can notify them to avoid forming crowds. thus, wi-vi can be considered as a promising technology to enable social distancing.3) public place monitoring and access scheduling: another way to apply wi-fi technology in social distancing is controlling the number of people inside a building, e.g., supermarket, shopping mall, and university. specifically, with various wi-fi access points implemented inside the building, the number of people currently inside the building can be estimated based on the number of connections from user devices to the access points. based on this information, several actions can be made to practice social distancing such as forcing people to queue before entering the building to maintain a safe number of people inside the facilities at the same time. another application is notifying people who want to go to the building. specifically, based on the number of people inside the building, the authority can encourage/force them to stay home or come at a different time if the place is too crowded. however, the accuracy of this approach depends on many factors such as the number of smart devices one person possesses and how many devices can be connected to a network simultaneously. 4) stay-at-home encouragement: wi-fi technology can also be used to encourage people to stay at home by detecting the frequency of moving outside their houses for a particular time, e.g., a day. specifically, when user devices move far away from the access point inside their houses, the connection between them will be weak or lost. based on this information, the access points can estimate the frequency of moving out of their house and then notify the users to encourage them to stay at home as much as possible.in summary, wi-fi technology is a prominent solution to quickly and effectively enable, encourage, and force people to practice social distancing. with the current advances of wi-fi, the accuracy of localization systems can be significantly improved, resulting in effective and precise applications for social distancing. however, wi-fi based technology is mainly used for indoor environments as this technology requires several access points for localization which may not be feasible for outdoor environments. for outdoor environments, other wireless technologies, e.g., bluetooth, gps and cellular technologies, can be considered.over the past four decades, cellular networks have seen tremendous growth throughout four generations making it the primary way of digital communications. the fifth generation (5g) of cellular networks is coming around 2020 with the first standard. according to the cisco mobile traffic forecast, there will be more than 13 billion mobile devices connected to the internet by 2023, up from 8.8 billion mobile devices in 2018 [114] , that enables deploying the cellular technology to practice social distancing in many circumstances including real-time monitoring, people density prediction and encouraging stay-at-home by enabling 5g live broadcasting as illustrated in fig. 7 .1) real-time monitoring: individual tracking and mobility pattern monitoring are potential approaches using the cellular technology to practice social distancing as shown in fig. 7(a) . according to the 3gpp standard, the current cellular networks, i.e., lte and lte-a, are employing various localization methods such as assisted-gnss (a-gnss), enhanced cell-id (e-cid), and observed tdoa (o-tdoa) as specified in the release 9; uplink-tdoa (u-tdoa) included in the release 11; and with the aids of other technologies like wi-fi, bluetooth, and terrestrial beacon system (tbs) as stated in the release 13 [115] , [116] . cellphone location data collected by the current cellular network is normally used for network operations and managers [116] such as network planning and optimization to enhance the quality of service (qos) rather than user applications due to the low accuracy and resource consumption. however, in the context of social distancing, user tracking based on data of user movement history can be considered to be an effective approach for quarantined people detection, and infected people tracing. for instance, the authorities can check whether infected people are violating the quarantine requirements or not. in cases if they do not follow the requirements, the authorities can send warning messages or even perform some aggressive measures, e.g., fines and arrests, to force them self-isolation. moreover, when a user has been exposed to the virus, the user's mobility history can be extracted to investigate the spread of the virus. in these cases, the cellular technology can outperform other wireless technologies in term of availability and popularity. for example, localization services relying on wireless technologies such as gps that always need to be run in the foreground application (i.e., the availability), while this service is a part of cellular network operations. in addition, ultra-wideband and zigbee technologies require additional hardware [86] , [103] (i.e., the popularity). incoming 5g networks with the presence of key technologies such as mm-wave communications, d2d communications, and ultra-dense networks (udns) [117] are capable of performing a high precision localization. two positioning schemes exploiting the mm-wave communications are proposed in [118] based on validation of triangulation measurements and angle of differences of arrival (adoa). the authors in [119] proposed a positioning scheme in udns using a cascaded extended kalman filter (ekf) structure to fuse the doa and toa estimations from the reference nodes. the proposed scheme can localize a moving target at speed 50 km/h with a sub-meter level accuracy. it can be used for tracking vehicles and monitoring the traffic density.recently, some governments have required the telecom companies to share cellphone location data to implement social distancing to deal with covid-19. for instance, taiwan deployed an "electronic fence" exploiting the cellular-based triangulation methods to track who are quarantined stay in their homes [120] . the local officials call them twice a day to ensure they do not leave their phones at home, and visit them within 15 minutes after their phones are turned off or they move away from their home. moscow government is also said to be planning to use sim card data for tracking foreigners and residents who have close contacts with foreigners when the border closure order is lifted [121] . however, individual tracking using the cellular technology has risen concerns about privacy [122] , [123] . instead, group/crowd detecting and monitoring based on shared location data which is anonymous and aggregated from carriers become the key approach utilized by several governments such as italy, germany, austria), the uk, korea, and australia [124] - [127] . this approach is intended to alleviate privacy concerns compared with individual-level tracking (i.e., it satisfies the eu privacy rules [123] ). the metadata can be used to obtain the mobility patterns, thus the governments can monitor whether people are complying with the lock-down rules or not. it can be also employed to model the spread of the virus to aid the governments to analyze and evaluate the effectiveness of quarantine measures during the outbreak.2) people density prediction: in addition to the real-time crowd monitoring and modeling the spread of the virus, the movement historical data can be utilized to predict the network traffic thanks to the large-scale location data provided by carriers and the recent advances of machine learning. there are many research works on network traffic prediction proposed in [128] - [132] based on the history of users' movements. furthermore, the number of users in a specific area can be also estimated from the network traffic of that area as illustrated in fig. 7(b) . thus, the authorities can predict the crowd gathering in public places (e.g., shopping malls, airports and train stations) relying on the corresponding forecasted network traffic. then, appropriate actions can be performed by the authorities to prevent crowd gathering in these places. for example, if the predicted number of people entering a shopping mall exceeds a threshold, the authorities can notify customers to avoid coming to this place at this time or recommend them to go to other shopping malls having lower densities. in addition, this method can be also applied in residential areas to study how often people stay home as well as predict when they go out or the places they come to. this can provide significant data input for network traffic forecast in public places. in addition, if they regularly go to necessary places, the authorities can warn or force them to stay at home as much as possible.3) stay-at-home encouragement: to implement social distancing, many people must do their daily activities remotely from their home such as working, studying, and entertainment. therefore, some video conference applications used to work from home or study online have witnessed an explosion of downloads. for example, the zoom application has achieved an increase by 1,270% from 22 feb to 22 mar in 2020 [133] and the number of newly registered users of microsoft teams has also risen 775% monthly in italy after the full lockdown was started [134] . as a result, 5g live broadcasting technology can be used to encourage people to stay at home as much as possible without any impacts on their work, or study ( fig. 7(c) ). there are many works to enhance the quality of video multicast/broadcast applications by utilizing the advances of 5g networks [135] - [139] . video multicast/broadcast services are defined as an ultra high definition slice in an mimo system [135] . to improve the spectrum efficiency for video multicast/broadcast in the proposed system, the authors introduce a hybrid digital-analog scheme to tackle channel condition and antenna heterogeneity. another possible solution that can significantly improve qualities for video multicasting/broadcasting is data caching. a novel caching paradigm proposed in [136] is applied for multicast services in heterogeneous networks. with the awareness of multicast files, the proposed caching policy can select files efficiently for the caches. studies in [137] , [138] propose using noma techniques to support multicast/broadcast by increasing the spectrum efficiency in multi-user environments. finally, the authors in [139] propose a video multicast orchestration scheme for 5g udns which can help to improve the spectrum efficiency.4) infected movement data: due to the omnipresence of mobile phones and the near world-wide coverage of cellular signals, cellular technology can be an effective tool to track the movement of people. unlike in the quarantined people detection scenarios where these people may deliberately leave their phone at home, people do not have any reason to do so in the infected movement data scenario. therefore, cellular can be an effective technology in this scenario. the authors of [257] summarized the methods to trace human position in outdoor environment using base stations and indoor environment using access points. however the accuracy of the outdoor environment still needs to improved because small errors of cellular network would lead to bigger errors in the distance measurement.given aforementioned studies, cellular technology can be considered to be one of most important approaches to assist social distancing. it can be deployed on a large scale due to its convenience and ubiquitousness compared to other wireless technologies. it can be used to track quarantined or infected individuals. furthermore, it can provide a unique solution to not only monitor crowds in real time, but also allow the local authorities to predict the forming of crowds in public areas (e.g., airports, train stations and shopping malls) based on the forecasted network traffic. however, the use of subscriber's location data for social distancing measures has can cause privacy concerns which will be discussed more details in section v. in addition, 5g live broadcasting support can be used to encourage people to stay at home during pandemic.with the explosive growth of bluetooth-enabled devices, bluetooth technology is another solution for social distancing in both indoor and outdoor environments. in particular, bluetooth is a wireless technology used for short-range wireless communications in the range from 2.4 to 2.485 ghz [59] , [60] . bluetooth devices can automatically detect and connect to other devices nearby, forming a kind of adhoc called piconet [60] . recently, bluetooth low energy (ble) has been introduced as an extended version of the classic bluetooth to reduce the energy usage of devices and improve the communication performance [60] . given above, the ble localization technology possesses several advantages compared with those of the wi-fi localization. first, the ble signals have a higher sample rate than that of the wi-fi signals (i.e., 0.25 hz ∼ 2 hz) [61] . second, the ble technology consumes less power than that of the wi-fi technology, and thus can be implemented widely in handheld devices. third, the ble signals can be obtained from most smart devices, while wi-fi signals can be obtained from only access points. finally, ble beacons are usually powered by battery, and thereby they are more flexible and easier to deploy than wi-fi.1) contact tracing: one application of bluetooth in social distancing is contact tracing [62] , [63] as illustrated in fig. 8 .the key idea is using bluetooth to detect other users in close proximity with their information (e.g., identifier) stored in a person's bluetooth device, e.g., a mobile phone. when there is an infected case, the authorities can ask people to share these records as a part of a contact tracing investigation. thereby, the authorities can detect people who may have close contact with the infected one and notify them promptly to prevent the spreading of diseases. several attempts to use bluetooth in contact tracing have been reported. apple and google have recently introduced an mobile application (running on both iphone and android devices) that can detect other smartphones nearby by using bluetooth technology [64] , [65] . if a person is tested positive for a disease, he/she will enter the result in the app to inform others about that. then, people who may have close contact with the positive case will be notified and instructed about what to do next. similar apps have 2) crowd detection: bluetooth technology can be used to detect crowds in indoor environments to practice social distancing with the latest advances in bluetooth localization techniques [70] , [72] . in particular, based on signals received from users' bluetooth devices, a central controller can calculate the positions of users and detect/predict crowds in indoor environments. if a crowd is detected, the local manager can force people to leave to practice social distancing. in addition, they can advice people who want to go to the place to come at different time if the place is too crowed at the moment.. in [70] , the authors point out that with the development of bluetooth low energy, bluetooth-based indoor localization can be considered as a practical method to locate bluetooth devices in indoor environments due to its low battery cost and high communication performance. the authors then propose indoor localization schemes that collect rssi measurements to detect the user's location by using the triangulation mechanism. in [71] , the authors show that the ble technology is strongly affected by the fast fading interference, resulting in a low accuracy when detecting the user's device. to improve the accuracy of the ble positioning, the authors run several experimental tests to choose the optimal parameters to set up ble localization systems. the authors demonstrate that the ble-based indoor localization can achieve a better performance than that of wi-fi localization system. the authors in [73] point out that the accuracy of ble-based localization is strongly affected by advertising channels, human movements, and human obstacles.to address these problems, they propose a dynamic ai model that can detect human obstacles on the channel by using three ble advertising channels. then, the rssi values will be compensated accordingly. the experimental results then demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed solution in terms of the rssi-ranges and the localization accuracy. 3) distance between two people: another application of bluetooth in social distancing is determining the distance between two persons by using their bluetooth-enabled devices, e.g., smartphone or smartwatch as shown in fig. 9 . specifically, similar to the wi-fi technology, based on rssi levels, a device can calculate the distances between it and other nearby devices [72] . it is worth noting that the bluetooth technology can allow a device to connect to multiple devices at the same time [59] . thus, the device can simultaneously detect distances to multiple devices in its area. if the distance is too small, e.g., less than 1.5 meters [74], the devices can notify the users to warn and encourage them to practice social distancing.given the above, bluetooth technology is a very promising solution to enable social distancing. however, the privacy of users needs to be taken into account as the applications require users to share information with the authorities and third parties. as such, this can be a research direction to ensure the privacy and encourage people to share their information to prevent the spreading of diseases. in addition, several drawbacks of bluetooth technology in social distancing which need to be considered such as the accuracy of localization techniques when the users' devices are located inside the pockets or bags and their devices always need to turn on the bluetooth mode. furthermore, combining bluetooth and other technologies (e.g., wi-fi [75] ) to improve the localization accuracy is also an open research direction.ultra-wideband (uwb) technology has been deemed to be a promising candidate for precise indoor positioning systems (ipss) that can sustain an accuracy at the centimeter level in the ranges from short to medium due to its unique characteristics (e.g., high time-domain resolution, immunity of multipath, low-cost implementation, low power consumption and good penetration) [99] . due to the wide bandwidth nature of uwb signals (at least 500 mhz as specified by fcc [100] ), the impulse radio (ir) uwb technology has the capability of generating a series of very short duration gaussian pulses in time domain which enables its advantages compared with other rf technology. pulse position modulation with time hopping (th-ppm) is the most popular modulation scheme exploited in the impulse radio based uwb [101] . this pulse can directly propagate in the radio channel without the need of an additional carrier modulation. the basebandlike architecture of the ir-uwb facilitates extremely simple and low-power transmitters. thus, the advantages of the ir-uwb technology can greatly support social distancing, even better than other wireless technologies (e.g., higher accuracy in indoor positioning applications) or provide exclusive solutions (e.g., device-free tracking/counting) for some scenarios, as discussed below.1) real-time monitoring: in this section, we review some social distancing scenarios using ultra-wideband technology for real-time monitoring such as crowd detection (e.g., tracking users' location), public place monitoring and access scheduling (e.g., counting the number of people in a specific area). a) crowd detection: one of the major solutions for crowd detection is tracking locations of people in public areas. there are many commercial products exploiting the ir-uwb technology for real-time localization in both daily life and factories such as decawave [102] , bespoon [103] , zebra [104] , ubisense [105] . decawave and bespoon claim their products based on ranging measurements can offer an accuracy under 10 cm [102] , [103] . furthermore, ubisense and zebra provide industrial products which can obtain the high accuracy even in cluttered, indoor factory environments [104] , [105] . all of them support real-time positioning for multiple mobile tags by using the triangulation techniques based on the absolute locations of reference nodes or anchors (e.g., uwb transceivers). especially, the dimension4 sensor invented by ubisense can be integrated with a built-in gps module for outdoor tracking purposes. experiments conducted to evaluate holistically the performance of three commercial products (i.e., decawave, bespoon, and ubisense) under indoor industrial environment setting (with the presence of nlos) can be found in [106] . the availability of commercial uwb-based localization systems enables real-time people tracking in public places by localizing their uwb-supported phones, or personal belongings equipped with tags (e.g., keys and shoes). thus, the authorities can detect the crowd to notify them and other people in the area, disperse the crowd or even predict and prevent the forming of the crowd by using ai/deep learning algorithms based on the previously collected data.recently, device-free localization (or passive positioning) techniques have witnessed a significant increase of interests since it can tackle problems of communication-based localization approaches mentioned above, which are: (i) privacy issues (e.g., tracking targets do not need to communicate with an access point/network coordinator, thus it can protect private information of the target), and (ii) physical obstacles (e.g., los communications have significant influence by obstacles) [107] . the high time-domain resolution feature of the ir-uwb technology enables the device-free localization methods relying on the changes of very short pulses properties between two transceivers because of absorption, scattering, diffraction, reflection, and refraction [108] , [109] . in particular, the authors in [108] use monostatic radar modules (i.e., p410 platform) equipped with one transmitter and one receiver for multi-target tracking based on gaussian mixture probability hypothesis density (gm-phd) filters. information (including raw signal, bandpass signal, motion filtered signal and detection list) extracted from the reflected signals is used to estimate the locations of targets with an accuracy at the decimeter level. to improve the accuracy, a multi-static is deployed in [109] to track a person in real time by determining the difference between the newly channel impulse response with the presence of a new object with that of the previous one without the object. the location of the object can be found with the mean error of only 3 cm by applying a leading edge detection algorithm on the difference of the two measurements. however, the limitation of this work is that it can track only one target at a time. motivated by the above works, we can easily deploy device-free localization techniques for crowd detection in public areas such as airports, train stations, and shopping malls without revealing any personal information and hardware requirements on target objects. thereby, the authorities can locate exact locations of crowds and have appropriate actions to disperse crowds or force them to practice social distancing. b) public place monitoring and access scheduling: a simple solution for public place monitoring is referred to as device (or tag)-free counting techniques [110] , [111] . specifically, the authors in [110] propose an advanced people counting algorithm with less computation based on the revelation of the received signal pattern according to the number of people illustrated in fig. 10(a) . this method enables people counting even with the presence of dense multipath signals in the environment which is not able to be performed by counting techniques based on detecting single signals corresponding to individual persons. for example, other counting approaches using wi-fi and zigbee rely on the number of connections from users to an access points (i.e., wi-fi) or a network coordinator (i.e., zigbee). major clusters are picked up to find main pulses having maximum amplitude. a joint probability density function derived from these main pulses is utilized to derive maximum likelihood (ml) equation. then, the estimated number of people is determined to be the figure having the maximum likelihood as shown in fig. 10(b) . similarly, the solution in [111] also provides a counting approach without positioning targets by using the crowd-centric method based on energy detection. without the need of hardware deployment on counting objects like wi-fi and zigbee, the approaches proposed in [110] , [111] can provide a low-cost and highprivacy solution to detect the number of people in public areas (e.g., shopping malls, airports, train stations, and offices). further actions can be conducted by the local manager to maintain social distancing such as scheduling people to enter the place based on the counting information or giving advice to other people who are planning to go to the crowded place to come at a different time.2) keeping distance and contact tracing: maintaining distance between two people and between a person and crowd is an important measure that individuals can do to practice social distancing. moreover, close physical contact tracing based on information of the aforementioned solutions can be also implemented when there is a new infected person. we will discuss all these solutions in the following sections. a) keeping distance and contact tracing: similar to bluetooth, the ir-uwb technology can also be applied to maintain the distances between people as well as close physical contact tracing by using ranging methods with high precision in both indoor and outdoor environments [102] , [112] . while decawave provides a ranging measurement using sensors and tags [102] , apple has already brought this feature to their phones (e.g., iphone 11 series) for their primitive location-based services (e.g., finding objects and improving airdrop) [112] . these approaches use time-based ranging techniques like tof, tdoa or combined tof and aoa to measure the distances to nearby sensors, tags or phones. however, these products can be employed to detect close proximity between users in public places. thanks to the ir-uwb technology, they can frequently broadcast pilot messages containing some information (e.g., their specific ids, timestamp, etc.) to nearby devices for ranging measurements with extremely low energy consumption. then, surrounding devices can utilize the information of the received messages to estimate the distance from the source device and warn the users if they are too close to each other (e.g., less than 1.5m in a pandemic situation [12] ). in addition, these devices can also store other information like who had close contacts with them along with the distances and duration periods. this information is very important because it can be used to trace close contacts in the future (e.g., investigate the spread of the virus in a pandemic) with minimal privacy violation.b) distance to/from crowds: in order to help people to avoid crowds, especially vulnerable or at-risk groups, in indoor environments such as shopping malls, hospitals, and office buildings, bespoon introduces a commercial product that allows moving targets to self-localize their positions very accurately (i.e., less than 10 cm over 600 m in los environments) in a short time by using the ir-uwb technology [103] . this product provides both evaluation kits and an ultra-compact uwb module which can be easily integrated into off-the-shelf products (e.g., shopping trolleys or baskets) for localization and navigation purposes. a snaploc platform proposed in [113] allows an unlimited number of tags to self estimate their locations at position update rates up to 2.3 khz. it uses the tdoa technique based on all simultaneous responded information from reference nodes integrated into one single channel impulse response. by combining with the positioning service (i.e., to provide locations of other people in a specific area), a navigation application exploiting commercial products like bespoon can be developed to assist people (e.g., customers) for self-detecting their current locations as well as crowds' locations along the way, thereby assisting them to plan their moves and navigate to stay away from crowds.to summarize, with the aforementioned potential applications, the ir-uwb systems can be considered to be an outstanding solution to handle social distancing in both indoor and outdoor environments. the ir-uwb based localization systems discussed in [102] - [105] can be employed for detecting and monitoring crowds in public places with a lowcost deployment. although this technology can also be used to monitor the positions of self-isolated people to check whether they break the quarantine requirements or not, it has less attractive than other rf technologies like wi-fi or cellular which do not require to install additional hardware for tracking purposes. in addition, uwb-enabled phones like iphone 11 series can assist users in practicing social distancing without localization and navigation services. however, this solution is only working for modern iphone equipped with the uwb chip. last but not least, the device-free technology presented in [108] - [111] is a great advantage of the ir-uwb technology compared with other wireless technologies for the crowd detecting and monitoring in public places with acceptable accuracy at the decimeter level [108] .the gnss (global navigation satellite systems) originally developed the u.s. department of defense global positioning system (gps) has been being the most widely used for positioning purposes in the outdoor environment nowadays.gnss satellites orbit the earth and continuously broadcast navigation messages. when a receiver receives the navigation messages from the satellites, it can calculate the distances from its location to the satellites based on the transmitting time in the messages. basically, to calculate the current location of a user, it requires at least three different navigation messages from three different satellites (based on the trilateration mechanism presented in section ii). however, in practice, to achieve a high accuracy in calculating the location of a user, at least four different messages from four satellites are required (the fourth one is to address the time synchronization problem at the receiver) [140] . currently, some gnss systems (e.g., galileo) can achieve the accuracy less than 1m [147] . as a result, gnss systems can be considered to be a very promising solution to practice social distancing.1) applications for real-time monitoring and automation: due to outstanding features of gnss technology in locating people, especially in outdoor environments, this technology is very useful for tracking people to practice social distancing. specifically, most of smart phones now are equipped with gps devices which can be used to track locations of mobile users when needed. in the context of a pandemic outbreak, e.g., covid-19, many suspects, for example, returning from an infected area, will be required to be self-isolated. thus, to monitor these people, the authorities can ask them to wear gps-based positioning devices to make sure that they do not leave their residences during the quarantine [161] , [162] . the main advantage of using gnss technology compared to wi-fi or infrared-based solutions for people tracking is that this technology allows to monitor people anywhere and anytime globally, and thus even the suspects move from one city to another city, the authorities still can track and monitor them. however, one of the major disadvantages of this technology is that it much depends on the satellite signals. thus, in some areas with weak or high interference signals (e.g., inside a building or in crowed areas), the location accuracy is very low [151] , [160] , [163] .another useful application of gnss to practice social distancing is automation. it comes from the fact that gnss is especially important for navigation in autonomous systems, such as robots, uavs and self-driving cars. thus, in a pandemic outbreak when people are required to stay at home, gnss-based autonomous services play a key role to minimize physical contact between people. for example, customers can shop online and receive their items with drone delivery services. such kind of services have been introduced recently by some large retail corporations such as amazon and dhl. similarly, robotaxi services have been introduced recently in some countries to deal with covid-19 outbreak [159] , [166] . it can be clearly seen that these gnss-based autonomous services can contribute a significant part in implementing social distancing in practice by minimizing workforce for delivery and transportation.gnss technology, a very well known technology in navigation with a lot of applications in civil and military, can provide many useful applications to practice social distancing, e.g., people tracking, distance keeping and autonomous services. however, there are some concerns related to privacy and accuracy of using gnss technology. for the privacy issues, they will be discussed in section v with several solutions such as location information protection and personal identity protection. for the accuracy issues, some recent advanced gnss technologies can be used such as real-time kinematic which can provide an accuracy of less than a centimeter. however, the implement cost for such services is still very high which needs to be further investigated.2) keeping distance and crowd detection: in [155] , the authors introduce a gnss service which can be used to determine the locations of users, thereby can warn them if they violate the social distancing requirements. in particular, in this service, mobile users are required to install a mobile application which can track the location of the users based on gps technology. then, the users' locations will be updated constantly to the service provider. thus, based on the users' locations, the service provider can determine whether the user violates the social distancing requirements or not. for example, if there are more than two users locating too close to each other (e.g., less than two meters), the service provider can send warning messages to remind the users. furthermore, in the cases if a user goes to restricted areas, e.g., isolated areas, they will receive warning messages to be aware of using protection measures.3) infected movement data: in the infected movement data scenario, gnss can be a very effective technology because of its world-wide coverage and positioning accuracy is not a main concern. for outdoor environment, using gnss alone can be sufficient for tracking the location of infected people. with the omnipresence of smartphones with built-in gps feature, the movement path of the infected people can be easily determined. however, a main concern in this scenario is that people have to turn on gps service on their smartphones, which necessitate mechanisms to incentivize people to share their movement information. this issue will be further discussed in section v.although this gnss-based service has many advantages in practicing social distancing, e.g., tracking users, keeping distance, and group monitoring, it has some shortcomings which limit its applications in practice. specifically, this service requires tracking locations of users based on gps in a realtime manner, which may cause some extra-implementation costs and privacy issues for users. furthermore, in terms of determining the distance between two people, the accuracy of gnss services is not high in general, especially for distances less than two meters. thus, some recent advanced gnss technologies like [143] , [149] , [150] can be user to improve the accuracy. however, these technologies are still very expensive and have not been widely deployed for public services, and thus more research in this direction can be further explored.zigbee is also a potential technology that can help to enable social distancing. in particular, zigbee is a standard-based wireless communication technology for low-cost and lowpower wireless networks such as iot networks and wireless sensor networks. a zigbee system consists of a central hub, e.g., network coordinator, and zigbee-enabled devices. zigbeeenabled devices can communicate with each other at the range of up to 65 feet ( 20 meters) with an unlimited number of hops. compared with wi-fi and bluetooth technologies, zigbee is designed to be cheaper and simpler, making it possible for low-cost and low-power communications for smart devices [84] , [85] . moreover, zigbee can operate at several frequencies, such as 2.4 ghz, 868 mhz, and 915 mhz. given the above, zigbee is ideal for constructing mesh networks with long battery life and reliable communications [85] . as a result, zigbee can be considered as a promising candidate in several applications that enable social distancing during a pandemic outbreak.1) crowd detection: one promising application of zigbee is detecting and tracking users' location in indoor environments. the key idea is that based on the rssi level of the received signals from the user's zigbee-enabled device, the zigbee control hub can determine the location of the user. several research works report that zigbee localization systems can achieve high accuracy with low-power and low-cost devices [84] . based on the location of users, the central hub can detect crowds, i.e., many users at the same area, and notify the local manager to ask people to practice social distancing during a pandemic outbreak. with the state-of-the-art mechanisms in the literature, the accuracy of zigbee localization systems is significantly improved, making it feasible for social distancing. in [86] , the authors propose a novel framework to enhance the localization accuracy of zigbee devices by considering the effect of "drift phenomenon" when users move from a place to other places in indoor environments. the authors then demonstrate that the proposed framework can increase the accuracy by up to 60% compared with conventional solutions.differently, in [87] , the authors introduce an ensemble mechanism to further improve the localization accuracy. in particular, instead of using the rssi level, the proposed solution combines the gradient-based search, the linear least square approximation, and multidimensional scaling methods together with spatial dependent weights of the environment to approximate the target's location. in [88] , the authors propose an energy-efficient indoor localization system that can obtain wi-fi fingerprints by using zigbee interference signatures.the key idea of this work is using zigbee interfaces to detect wi-fi access points which can significantly save energy compared with using wi-fi interfaces. furthermore, a k-nearest neighbor method with the manhattan distance is introduced to increase the accuracy of the localization system. the experimental results show that the proposed solution can save 68% of energy compared with the method using wi-fi interfaces. the accuracy is also improved by 87% compared to state-of-the-art wifi fingerprint-based approaches.2) public place monitoring and access scheduling: in a zigbee system, there is a central hub, known as the network coordinator, to control other connected devices in the network. thus, zigbee can be used to control the number of people in indoor environments, e.g., hospitals, supermarkets and shopping malls.. specifically, when a person equipped with a zigbee-enabled device (e.g., id card or member card) enters the place, the device will connect to the zigbee central hub. as such, the central hub is able to calculate the total number of people inside the place at a given time. based on this information, the local manager can ask people to queue before entering the place if it is too crowded.in summary, zigbee technology can play an important role in enabling social distancing during pandemic outbreaks. however, similar to rfid technology, zigbee is a new technology and has not been widely adopted in our daily life, and thus limiting its practical applications. nevertheless, with the support from leading companies such as amazon, google, apple, and texas instruments [85] , the number of zigbee-enable devices is expected to explosively increase in the near future. furthermore, combining zigbee with other technologies (e.g., wi-fi [88] ) is also a promising research direction to improve the performance of localization systems in terms of the accuracy and robustness.radio frequency identification (rfid) plays a key role in real-time object localizing and tracking [76] . thus, rfid technology is also a potential solution for social distancing. an rfid localization system usually consists of three main components: (i) rfid readers, (ii) rfid tags, and (iii) a data processing system [77] . typically, rfid tags can be categorized into two types: (i) active tags and (ii) passive tags. a passive rfid tag can operate without requiring any power source, and it is powered by the electromagnetic field generated by the rfid reader. in contrast, an active rfid tag has its own power source, e.g., a battery, and continuously broadcasts its own signals. active rfid tags are usually used in localization systems. thus, rfid technology can be considered as a potential technology to practice social distancing.1) crowd detection: one potential application of rfid technology is locating users in indoor environments based on recent rfid-based localization solutions [76] - [80] . to that end, each user is equipped with an rfid tag, e.g., the staff id or member cards. based on the backscattered signals from the rfid tag, the rfid reader can determine the location of the user. if there are too many people in the same area, the system can notify the authorities to take appropriate actions, e.g., force people to leave the area to practice social distancing. several recent mechanisms in the literature can be adopted to make this application possible during pandemic outbreaks. in [78] , the authors propose an rfid-based localization system for indoor environments with high localization granularity and accuracy. the key idea of this solution is reducing the rssi shifts, localization error, and computational complexity by using heron-bilateration estimation and kalman-filter drift removal. in [79] , the authors propose to use a moving robot to enhance the accuracy of a real-time rfid-based localization system. in particular, the robot is able to perform simultaneous localization and mapping (slam), and thus it can continuously interrogate all rfid tags in its area. then, based on passive rfid tags at known locations, we can estimate the location of target tags by properly manipulating the measured backscattered power. alternatively, in [76] , the authors propose to equipped two rfid tags at the target instead of only one as in conventional solutions to improve the accuracy of localization techniques. adding one more rfid tag possesses several advantages: (i) easy to implement and adjust the rfid reader's antenna, (ii) enabling fine-grained calculation, and (iii) enabling accurate calibration. the experimental results then show that equipping two tags at the user can greatly increase the localization accuracy of the system. however, the rfid technology has several limitations due to the fact that both the receiver and the rf source are in the rfid reader. specifically, the modulated signals backsacttered from the rfid tag are strongly affected by the round-trip path loss from the receiver and the rf source. in addition, the rfid system can also be affected by the doubly near-far problem [81] . to address these problems, a few recent works propose to use bistatic and ambient backscatter communication technologies (extended version of rfid) for localization [82] , [83] . the key idea is separating the rf source from the receiver. the rf source now can be a dedicated carrier emitter or an ambient rf source. the tag then can transmit data to the receiver by backscattering the rf signals generated by the rf source. based on the received signals, the receiver can estimate the location of the tag. in [83] , the authors propose a localization system based on backscatter communications to locate patients in a hospital. in particular, each patient is equipped with a backscatter tag which can backscatter signals broadcast by an rf source. then, the location of a patient can be detected by a localization algorithm, namely remix, based on the backscattered signals from the backscatter tags. remix consists of two processes. first, the algorithm approximates the distance from the tag to the receiver based on the backscattered signals. second, the signal paths are modeled with linear splines. then, an optimization problem is solved to find the effective distances corresponding to the paths that close to the actual paths from the tag to the receiver. as a result, remix can accurately estimate the position of the backscatter tag by modeling the spline structure. based on the users' locations, remix can detect crowds in the hospital and advice the authorities to take appropriate actions to practice social distancing. note that this solution can also be deployed to detect crowds in other places such as workplaces, schools, and supermarkets where backscatter tags can be easily attached to users/customers' cards, e.g., staff cards, student cards, and member cards.2) public place monitoring and access scheduling: another application of rfid in social distancing is monitoring the number of people inside a place, e.g., a building or supermarket. in particular, an rfid reader will be deployed at the main gate of a place, and users are equipped with rfid tags (can be both active and passive tags). the users' tags can broadcast their id (active) or send their id upon receiving rf signals from the rfid reader (passive). when a user enters the place, the rfid reader can receive the user's id and increase the counter. as such, the rfid reader can calculate the number of people inside the place. if there are too many people, the system can notify the local manager to force people to queue before entering the place to practice social distancing. this solution can be deployed in supermarkets or workplaces where the customer/staff usually have member/staff id cards which can be equipped with rfid tags.in summary, rfid technology is a potential solution to enable social distancing. however, different from other wireless technologies, rfid technology has not been widely adopted in practice due to its complexity in implementation. specifically, to be able to detect the location of people by using rfid technology, they need to be equipped with rfid tags. however, rfid tags are not readily available likes wi-fi access points or bluetooth. thus, applications of rfid technology for social distancing are still limited in practice. table ii summarizes the technologies discussed in this section.in addition to the wireless technologies, other emerging technologies such as artificial intelligence, computer vision, ultrasound, inertial sensors, visible lights and thermal also can all contribute to facilitating social distancing. in this section, we provide a brief overview of each technology, and discuss how it can be applied for different social distancing scenarios.over the last 10 years, we have witnessed numerous applications of artificial intelligence (ai) in many aspects of our lives such as healthcare, automotive, economics and computer networks [296] . the outstanding features of ai technologies are the abilities to automatically "learn" useful information from the obtained data. this leads to more intelligent automation, operating cost reduction as well as the great compatibility to adapt with changing environments. for that, ai (and its underlying machine learning algorithms) can also play a key role in social distancing, especially in the modern lives, with many practical applications, as discussed below.1) distance to/from crowds and contact tracing: applications of machine learning to users' location data allow us to effectively monitor the distance between people and trace the close contacts of infected people. in [341] , the authors analyze the accuracy of a user's location prediction based on his/her friends' location datasets. in this case, a temporalspatial bayesian model is developed to select influential friends considering their influence levels to the user. thus, the service provider can predict the exact location of a mobile user by using the temporal-spatial bayesian model. then, when the user is too close to other mobile users/people at crowded public places or his/her friends when they go in a group as illustrated in fig. 11(a) , his/her smartphone can alert to keep a safe distance. in addition, using the list of influential friends based on their ranks, the service provider can utilize it for the contact tracing purpose when the mobile user or one of his/her influential friends in the list gets infected.2) infected movement prediction: another application of machine learning is to predict infected people movement from one location to another one and hence can potentially predict the geographic movement of the disease. the prediction is particularly crucial as infected people may travel to various wi-fi [38] , [39] , [41] , [43] , [47] , [93] depend on the router, antenna, and modulation technique. typically up to 50m indoors and 100m outdoors [89] 1m -5m [42] low low high indoor mobile phones, smart home, smart city [54] , [93] cellular [128] , [129] , [132] , [135] , [139] short to long less than 50cm [ mobile phones [342] , [344] , [361] , intelligent transportation systems [323] , [324] rfid [76] , [78] , [80] , [93] active: 100m or more. passive: ∼ 10m [91] less than 1m [78] high low medium indoor mobile phones, smart home, smart city [94] , [95] places and can accidentally infect others before know that they carry the disease. in [342] , the authors introduce a smartphonebased location recognition and prediction model to detect current location and predict the destination of mobile users. in particular, the location recognition is implemented using the combination of k-nearest neighbor and decision tree learning algorithms while the destination prediction is realized using hidden markov models. given the history of infected people movement, we can adopt the above model to recognize and predict the potential geographic movement of the disease. using the information, people can be advised to stay away from the possible infected locations through alerts from their smartphones as illustrated in fig. 11(b) .the current location prediction of quarantined people, e.g., infected people, and at-risk people, e.g., sick and old people, is very important to monitor whether they currently stay at the selfquarantined and self-protection areas, e.g., their homes, or not. to this end, machine learning-based location prediction approach can help to detect the current position of those people in a certain area. in [343] , the authors apply the auto-encoder neural networks and one-class support vector machines to verify whether a user is within a specific area or not. considering various channel models, i.e., path-loss, shadowing, and fading, the proposed solutions can achieve neyman-pearson optimal performance by observing the probability of missdetections and false-alarms. the authors in [344] propose a novel localization system leveraging a federated learning to allow mobile users to collaboratively provide accurate location services without revealing mobile users' private location. as such, the authors utilize deep neural networks with the gaussian process to accurately predict the desired location of the mobile users. as a result, we can apply the proposed solutions to detect if infected people or at-risk people currently move away from their homes as illustrated in fig. 11(c) . moreover, we can utilize the proposed solutions to determine the movement frequency of the self-isolated people outside the protection facility. using the movement frequency history, the authorities can enforce them to stay at the protection facility for further infection prevention.predicting the density of people or the number of people in public places allows us to efficiently schedule or guide people to stay away or refrain from coming to soon-to-be over-crowded places. for example, when the predicted number of people in a certain place almost reaches a pre-defined threshold (e.g., according to the social distancing requirement), the service provider can broadcast a local notification to incoming people via cellular network, aiming at encouraging them move to other less density areas. in [345] , the authors adopt advanced machine learning-based approaches for edge networks to predict the number of mobile users within base stations' coverages. particularly, the framework first groups the base stations into clusters according to their network data and deployment loca- fig. 11 : application of artificial intelligence to social distancing.tions. then, using various machine learning algorithms, e.g., the bayesian ridge regressor, the gaussian process regressor, and the random forest regressor, we can predict the number of mobile users within their network coverages. from the preceding architecture, one can utilize wi-fi hotspots and cluster them based on their locations. by doing so, we can predict the number of people within each cluster's coverage.using the same architecture, we can extend the application to predict the traffic level on the roads. specifically, upon predicting the number of vehicular users on the roads, we guide the drivers to choose particular routes to satisfy the social distancing requriements, e.g., suggest alternative routes to avoid crowded areas. in [346] , the authors introduce a uav-enabled intelligent transportation system to predict road traffic conditions using the combination of convolutional and recurrent neural networks. in particular, sensor cameras on the uavs are utilized to capture the current road traffic. by using this information, the uavs can then predict the road traffic conditions using the aforementioned deep learning methods. thus, from the traffic prediction, the uavs can work as mobile road side units to orchestrate road traffic for over-crowding avoidance through informing the upcoming road traffic conditions to vehicular users via cellular networks accordingly (fig. 11(d) ).machine learning-based location prediction method is also of importance to predict the sickness trend in specific areas. this sickness trend prediction can be used to inform people stay safe from possible infected places. for example, the work in [347] designs a contactless surveillance framework, i.e., flusense, to predict the influenzalike disease 7-14 days before the real disease occurs in the hospital waiting areas. in particular, a set of real-time sensors including a microphone array to detect normal speech/cough sounds and a thermal camera to detect crowd density are embedded into an edge computing platform. considering millions of non-speech audio samples and hundred thousands of thermal images for audio and image recognition models, the proposed framework can accurately predict the number of daily influenza-like patients with pearson correlation coefficient of 0.95. the prediction model from this work can be correlated/combined with the localized medical/health information (e.g., from local hospitals/clinics) to further improve the prediction accuracy as shown in fig. 11 (e). we then can inform the local mobile users about the sickness trend prediction to avoid the potential areas where many influenzalike patients exist. computer vision technology trains computers to interpret and understand visual data such as digital images or videos. thanks to recent breakthroughs in ai (e.g., in pattern recognition and deep learning), computer vision has enabled computers to accurately identify and classify objects [167] . such capabilities can play an important role in enabling, encouraging, and enforcing social distancing. for example, computer vision can turn surveillance cameras into "smart" cameras which can not only monitor people but also can detect, recognize, and identify whether people comply with social distancing requirements or not. in this section, we discuss several social distancing scenarios where computer vision technology can be leveraged, including public place monitoring, and highrisk people (quarantined people and people with symptoms) monitoring and detection.1) public place monitoring: despite government restrictions and recommendations about social gathering, some people still do not comply with, which can cause the virus infection to the community. in such context, human detection features in object detection [168] , a major sub-field of computer vision, can help to detect crowds in public areas through realtime images from surveillance cameras. an example scenario is described in fig. 12(a) . if the number of people in an area does not meet the social distancing requirement (e.g., gathering above 10 people), the authorities can be notified to take appropriate actions.there are two main approaches to detect humans from images in object detection namely region-based and unifiedbased techniques. the former detects humans from images in two stages including the region proposal and the procession according to the regions [169] . based on this approach, several frameworks including fast-rcnn [175] and faster-rcnn [176] are developed in combination with convolution neural network (cnn) [173] . in [177] , the authors improve the faster-rcnn by proposing the mask regions with cnn features (mask rcnn) method which masks the bounding box to detect the object with high accuracy while adding a minor overhead to the faster-rcnn. mask rcnn outperforms previous methods by simplifying the training process and improving the accuracy in detecting humans in the images for calculating the density of people in a particular area.although the above region-based approach has high recognition accuracy [177] , it has high complexity, which is unsuitable for devices with limited computational capacity. to address this, the unified approach is a suitable, which can reduce the computational complexity by detecting humans from images with only one step. this approach maps the pixels from image to the bounding box grid and class probabilities to detect humans or objects in real-time. following this direction, the you only look once (yolo) method proposed in [178] can detect/predict objects (even small ones) in real-time with high accuracy. in addition, in [179] , the authors propose the single shot multibox detector (ssd) framework which uses a convolution network on the image to calculate a feature map and then predict the bounding box. through experimental results, they demonstrate that this method can detect objects faster and more accurately than those of both yolo and faster-rcnn. for public place monitoring, both yolo [178] and ssd [179] can be used to detect fast and accurately humans from real-time images or videos of surveillance cameras. after identifying people, we can use a real-time automatic counter to count and identify whether the number of gathering people complying with social distancing requirements or not.to prevent the spread of the virus from an infected person to others, the infected person or people who had physical contact with them must be isolated at the restricted areas or at home. for example, citizens who come back from highly infected countries/regions of covid-19 are often requested to be quarantined or self-isolate for 14 days. due to the lack of facilities, most countries require these people to self-isolate at home. in this case, the face recognition capability of computer vision can help to enforce this requirement by analyzing the images or videos from cameras to identify these people (i.e., to check whether they breach the self-isolation requirements or not). if these people are detected in public, the authorities can be notified to take appropriate actions.unlike object detection, the dataset including the full face images of the isolated people needs to be built. the face recognition system firstly learns from this dataset and then analyzes the images from public surveillance cameras to identify their appearances as in fig. 12(b1) . the authors in [180] propose a framework named deepface using deep neutral network (dnn) which can detect with an accuracy of 97.35% and 91.4% in labeled faces in the wild (lfw) and youtube faces (ytf) dataset, respectively. to improve the accuracy in detecting human from surveillance cameras, some advanced techniques can be implemented such as [181] , [182] and [183] .to prevent the spread of infectious diseases such as covid-19, people are often required to wear masks in public places, which necessitates approaches to recognize or identify people with masks as illustrated in fig. 12(b2) . for example, the cameras in front of a public building can recognize and send warning messages (e.g., a beep sound) to remind the person who does not wear a mask when he/she intends to get into the building. this idea is introduced in [192] by using the cnn to detect people who do not wear the masks. however, this work is justs at the first step, which still needs much more research on it to demonstrate the effectiveness as well as improve the accuracy.3) symptoms detection and monitoring: after a few days of being infected with the virus, the infected person may have some symptoms such as coughing or sneezing. to minimize spreading the virus to others, it would be very helpful if we can detect these symptoms from people in public and inform them or the authorities. the idea here is similar as that of using thermal imaging cameras at airports or train stations. specifically, detecting human behaviors, motion, and pose in computer vision can play a pivotal role [187] . pose estimation captures a person with different parts (as illustrated in fig. 12(c) ) then detects human behaviors by studying the parts' movements and their correlation. for example, a coughing person in fig. 12 (c) usually moves his hand near his head and his head would have a vibration.recognition of human behaviors from surveillance cameras is a challenging problem because the same behaviors may have different implications, depending on the relationship with the context and other movements [188] . the recent advances in ai/ml are instrumentals in correlating different movements/parts to interpret the associated behavior. in [189] the authors propose to use cnn [173] to enhance the accuracy of the model of the interaction between different body parts. in addition, the authors in [190] introduce several methods to detect body parts of multiple person in 2d images, and the authors in [191] propose methods to estimate 3d poses from matching of 2d pose estimation with a 3d pose library. these works can be further developed for future studies to detect people with symptoms of the virus like coughing or sneezing in real-time. to improve the accuracy of the symptom detection in social distancing, computer vision-based behavior detection methods can be combined with other technologies, e.g., thermal imaging.to prevent the spread of the virus, tracing the path of an infected person plays an important role to find out the people who were in the same place with the infected person. for this purpose, computer vision technology can not only detect the infected people by facial recognition, but also contribute in the positioning process. in [249] , the movement of people is determined by analyzing the key point of transition frames captured from smartphone cameras. this method can draw the trajectory of movements and the location with the accuracy around 2 meters. in [250] , the authors propose to combine the human detection techniques of computer vision with digital map information to improve the accuracy. in this study, the user path from cameras is mapped to the digital map which has the gps coordinates. this method gave can achieve a very high accuracy within two meters. in another approach, the authors in [251] propose to use both smartphones' cameras and inertial-sensor-based systems to accurately localize targets (with only 6.9 cm error). this approach uses fusion of keypoints and squared planar markers to enhance the accuracy for cameras to compensate the errors of inertial sensors. 5) keeping distance: keeping a suitable distance, especially from crowds, to prevent infection with the virus is one of the key factors of practicing social distancing. to support people in keeping distance to/from the crowds, computer vision can be utilized. in [248] , the authors develop an ondevice machine learning-based system leveraging radar sensors and cameras of a smartphone. when the radar sensor detects the surrounding moving objects, the smartphone camera can be utilized to capture its surrounding environment. taking into account the recorded data, the smartphone can train the data using machine learning algorithms to determine the existence of nearby people and its distance from those people with respect to the social distancing requirements. we can also use a smartphone to estimate the distance between the mobile user and other people using radar sensors and cameras along with machine learning algorithms.in summary, computer vision can be utilized in several social distancing scenarios, especially the ones that require people monitoring and detection. particularly, computer vision is the only method that can differentiate between people and identify complex feature such as mask and symptoms. thus, computer vision technology can play a vital role in the social distancing scenarios. to further improve the effectiveness of computer vision in the social distancing context, future research should focus on increasing the accuracy and reducing the complexity of computer vision methods, so that they can be integrated to existing systems such as surveillance cameras.the ultrasound or ultrasonic positioning system (ups) is usually used in the indoor environment with the accuracy of centimeters [193] . the system includes ultrasonic beacons (ubs) as tags or nodes attached on users and transceivers. beacon units broadcast periodically ultrasonic pulses and radio frequency (rf) messages simultaneously with their unique id numbers. based on these pulses and messages, the receiver's position can be determined by position calculation methods such as trilateration or triangulation [194] . in comparison with other rf-based ranging methods, the ups does not require a line of sight between the transmitter and the receiver, and it also does not interfere with electromagnetic waves. however, since the propagation of the ultrasound wave is limited, most ups applications for social distancing are only applicable for the indoor environment. 1) keeping distance: keeping distance in social distancing aims to maintain a safe distance between people to prevent the spread of the disease. for this purpose, ups can be used to position and notify people. one of the first well known ups systems is active bat (ab) [195] based on the time-offlight of the ultrasonic pulse. typically, an ab system consists of an ultrasonic receiver matrix located on the ceiling or wall, a transmitter attached to each target, and a centralized computation system to calculate the objects' positions. as presented in [195] , by using a receiver matrix with 16 sensors, the ab system can achieve very high positioning accuracy, i.e., less than 14 centimeters. however, a limitation of this system is its high complexity, especially if a large number of ultrasonic sensors are deployed.another limitation of the ab system is the privacy risk for users, since the location of users under the ab system is calculated at the central server. to address that, the criket (ck) system is proposed in [199] , [200] wherein the position calculation is executed at the receivers. specifically, a receiver in the ck system passively receives rf and ultrasound signals from ubs located on the wall or ceiling, and then the receiver calculates its position by itself based on ubs' id and coordinates. since the receivers do not transmit any signals, the privacy of users will not be compromised. fig. 13 demonstrates the two systems in the keeping distance application.2) real-time monitoring: in the context of social distancing, ups can be an effective solution for real-time monitoring scenarios, especially gauging the number of people in public buildings. in particular, a main characteristic that differs ups from other positioning technologies is confinement, i.e, the ultrasound signal is confined within the same room as the ubs [194] . among the other positioning technologies, only the infrared technology shares the same characteristic. nevertheless, infrared signals prone to interference from sunlight and other thermal sources, and they also suffer from line-ofsight loss [194] . as a result, ultrasound is the most efficient technology for binary positioning [194] , i.e., determine if the object is in the same room as the ubs or not. thus, ups can be particularly useful in the social distancing scenarios where the exact positions of people are not as necessary as the number of people inside a room (e.g., to limit the number of people). this technology is more efficient because it needs a few reference nodes (e.g., ubs) to determine the binary positions of people, which can significantly reduce implementation costs.3) automation: ultrasound can also be applied in the social distancing scenarios that utilize medical robots or unmanned aerial vehicle (uav). mobile robots, especially medical robots, can play a key role in reducing the physical contact rates between the healthcare staffs (e.g., doctors and nurses) and the patients inside a hospital, thereby maintaining a suitable social distancing level. in such scenarios, ups can help to improve the navigation of medical robots. in [211] , a navigation system based on wi-fi and ultrasound is proposed for indoor robot navigation. to deal with the uncertainties which are very common in crowded places like hospitals, the system employs a partially observable markov decision process, and a novel algorithm is also introduced to minimize the calibration efforts.in the social distancing context, beside their outdoor appli-cations, uavs can also be employed to reduce the necessity of human physical presence. for example, uavs can be used to deliver goods inside a building or to manage warehouse inventory. however, most of existing studies focus on uav navigation in the outdoor environnment, which often relies on gnss for uav positioning. since gnss's accuracy is low for the indoor environment, these methods cannot be applied directly for uav navigation inside a building. to address that limitation, a navigation system is proposed in [207] , which utilize ultrasound, inertial sensors, gnss, and cameras to provide precise (less than 10cm) indoor navigation for multiple uavs.in summary, ultrasound can be applied in several social distancing scenarios. in the keeping distance scenarios, ups systems such as ab and ck can be applied directly to position and notify people to keep a safe distance. moreover, due to its confinement characteristic, ultrasound is one of the most efficient technology for binary positioning, which is particularly useful for monitoring and gauging the number of people inside the same room. in the automation scenarios, ultrasound can facilitate uavs and medical robots navigations, especially for the indoor environment.in the context of social distancing, inertial-sensors-based systems can be applied in distance keeping and automation scenarios as illustrated in fig. 14. for example, positioning applications utilizing built-in inertial sensors can be developed for smartphone which can alert the users when they get close to each other or a crowd. moreover, inertial sensors can be integrated into robot and vehicles positioning, which can facilitate autonomous delivery services and medical robots navigation. all of these scenarios can contribute to reduce the physical contact rate between people.inertial sensors consist of two special types of sensors, namely gyroscopes and accelerometers, attached to an object to measure its rotation and acceleration. based on the measured rotation and acceleration data, the orientation and position displacements of the object can be determined [285] . because inertial sensors do not require any external reference system to function, they have been one of the most common sensors for dead reckoning, i.e., calculation of the current position is based on a previously determined position, navigation systems. such navigation systems can provide accurate positioning within a short time frame. however, since the current position is determined based on the previously calculated positions, the errors accumulate over time, i.e., integration drift. therefore, inertial-navigation-system (ins) is often used in combination with other positioning systems, e.g., gps, to periodically reset the base position [285] .1) keeping distance: traditionally, ins have been widely used for aviation, marine, and land vehicles navigation. recently, the ever-increase presence of smartphones has enabled many ins applications for pedestrian positioning and navigation, which can support social distancing scenarios. moreover, ins is one of the few technologies that can enable accurate pedestrian positioning for outdoor environment, especially fig. 13 : ultrasound application for keeping distance using a) cricket system [199] , and b) active bat system [195] .fig. 14: inertial-sensors-based systems for several social distancing scenarios.when combined with other outdoor positioning technique such as gps. in [286] , a smartphone-based positioning system is proposed. the system makes use of a smartphone's builtin sensors, including gyroscopes, accelerometers, and magnetometers (sensors that measure magnetism), to calculate the smartphone's position. in particular, magnetometers are combined with gyroscopes to improve the accuracy in rotation measurements. this is done by correlating their measurements via a novel algorithm which uses four different thresholds to determine the weights of the gyroscope and magnetometers measurements in the correlation function.in [287] , a novel indoor positioning system is developed using wi-fi and ins technologies. in this system, ins is utilized for the area where wi-fi coverage is limited, while wi-fi positioning is used to compensate ins's integration drift. another positioning system using inertial sensors and wi-fi is presented in [288] , where wi-fi fingerprinting technique is used to improve the accuracy of the dead reckoning navigation. because of the integration drift, a dead reckoning navigation system needs to frequently update its position by referencing to an external node. in the proposed system, a wi-fi fingerprinting map is set up in advance and the dead reckoning system can use the map to update its position. moreover, in [252] , the authors proposed using kalman filter to combine the measurement data from wi-fi and ins, which can reduce the error to 1.53 meter.beside wi-fi, ins can be used in combination with other positioning technologies. in [289] and [290] , ins has been combined with the uwb technology for pedestrian positioning and tracking. generally, ins helps to reduce uwb's high implementation cost and complexity, while ins's integration drift can be compensated. particularly, ins is employed to compensate for the uwb's low dynamic range and proneness to external radio disturbances in [289] . to enable the combination, an information fusion technique using the extended kalman filter is proposed to fuse the measurement data coming from both the ins and uwb sensors. the result shows that the hybrid system can achieve better performance than both the individual systems. in [290] , the information fusion problem between the ins and uwb is optimized to minimize the uncertainties in the measurements. as a result, the positioning accuracy can be significantly improved.2) automation: besides pedestrian positioning, ins can also be applied for social distancing scenarios involving autonomous vehicles, e.g., medical robots and drone delivery. generally, ins has been commonly used for medical robots applications, including surgeon assists, patient motion assists, and delivery robots. in this section, we will only focus on the medical and delivery robots applications for social distancing purposes. in [291] , a novel ins system is developed specifically for mobile robot navigation. in addition, an error model is proposed to increase the accuracy of the involved inertial measurements. a kalman filter is also proposed to precisely estimate the velocity and orientation of the robot in the presence of noises. a novel data fusion algorithm, leveraging an adaptive kalman filter is presented in [292] for indoor robot positioning based on a ins/uwb hybrid system. unlike ins for mobile robots that are mostly developed for indoor environment, ins for uav focuses on outdoor applications. note that uav navigation must also consider its altitude, which adds more complexity. the authors of [293] leverage inertial sensors and cameras to determine the uav's position, velocity, and altitude. particularly, the cameras attached to the uav capture the images of the surrounding environment and send to a control station. this station will then process the images to determine the uav's pose in regards to the surroundings. the pose's data is then combined with the inertial sensors data via a kalman filter to determine the uav's position and velocity. similarly, a system combining inertial and vision sensors is developed in [294] for uav positioning and navigation. the system utilizes two observers which have inertial and vision sensors. the first observer calculates the orientation based on gyroscope and vision sensors, while the second observer determines the position and velocity based on data from the accelerometers and vision sensors.summary: the omnipresence of smartphones with built-in inertial sensors has opened many opportunities for developing positioning systems based on ins. for the distance keeping scenarios, ins positioning systems, especially for pedestrians, can play a vital role as they are readily available. in the other scenarios such as medical robot and uav delivery, ins-based techniques can help to increase the efficiency (better path, lower traveling time) of the existing navigation systems.the recent development in the light emitting diodes (leds) technology has enabled the use of existing light infrastructures for communication and localization purposes due to attractive features of visible lights such as reliability, robustness, and security [215] - [217] . visible light communication (vlc) systems usually comprise two major components, i.e., led lights corresponding to transmitters to send necessary information (e.g., user data and positioning information) via visible lights and photo detectors (e.g., photodiodes) or imaging sensors (e.g., camera) playing the role of receivers [17] . due to the ubiquitous presence of led lights, vlc can be leveraged in many social distancing scenarios as discussed below.1) real-time monitoring: communication systems using visible light (e.g., led-based communications) can provide precise navigation and localization solutions in indoor environments. utilizing this technology, some applications can be implemented to support social distancing such as tracking individuals who are being quarantined, detecting and monitoring crowds in public places (e.g., shopping malls, airports, train stations and workplaces) as shown in fig. 15(a) . a) photodiode-based vlc systems: due to many advantages such as low cost and easy to implement, the vlc receiver using photodiodes can be employed as a "tag" that is integrated into mobile targets such as trolleys/shopping carts, autonomous robots, etc. people attached with these tags can perform self-positioning based on the triangulation method, so that they can avoid crowed areas. furthermore, the tags' locations can be collected by the authorities to monitor people in the public areas. based on this location data, further actions can be carried out such as warning people by varying the color temperature of the lights in the crowded areas. it is worth noting that this solution can not reveal any personal information of users (e.g., customers) since it only requires communications between vlc-based tags and light fixtures. however, most vlc systems only provide a half-duplex communications due to the fact that led lights operate as the role of transmitters. therefore, they should be combined with other wireless technologies like bluetooth [218] , [219] , infrared [220] to enable an uplink communication with the server for location information exchange. moreover, to improve the accuracy of positioning people in indoor environments using photodiodes, some advanced techniques can be used such as data fusion of aoa and rss methods proposed in [221] and the aoa method using a multi-led element lighting fixture introduced in [222] . one main disadvantage of the photodiodebased vlc systems is the need of additional hardware (i.e., the photodiode receiver) mounted on smart trolleys/shopping carts to receive light signals. consequently, the system might fail to detect the locations of people who do not carry them. nevertheless, purelifi company has recently invented a tiny optical front end which can be integrated into smartphones to take benefits of the photodiode receiver in high accuracy vlc-based localization services [223] .b) camera-based vlc systems: the rapid development of smartphones has enabled vlc-based applications on handheld devices such as indoor localization and navigation applications (e.g., smart retail systems [218] , [219] , [224] ). these system use front-facing cameras of mobile phones to receive visible light signals contained positioning information (e.g., the led light's id or location) from visible light beacons [225] . the captured photos collected regularly by the front-facing camera are sent to a cloud/fog server for image processing to alleviate the computation on the phone. then, the beacon's id and coordinates can be extracted and sent back to the phone. after that, the aoa algorithm is implemented to estimate the location and orientation of the phone. an attractive use case of the camera-based vlc systems [218] , [219] , [224] is to assist users to quickly find specific products in shopping malls, or supermarkets. thus, we can adopt this function to implement tracking and monitoring crowds in public places (e.g., shopping malls, airports and train stations) as well as assisting people to avoid crowds in a proactive manner. it is worth noting that this solution is more convenient than using photodiodes since it uses front-facing cameras of smartphones as the vlc receivers, thus everyone using smartphones can be tracked. however, due to continuous photo shooting, these positioning applications are very energyconsuming, which is a major drawback of camera-based vlc systems when they are used for tracking people.2) automation: in public places, there is always a need for assistance in specific circumstances (e.g., information or physical supports for customers, older and disabled people). for instance, supporting staffs in supermarkets can assist customers to find products or help older/disabled people to carry their goods. similar assistance scenarios can be seen in hospitals, banks, and libraries. this results in an increase of close physical contacts between customers and assistants. therefore, autonomous assistance systems using vlc technology can be employed to minimize the physical contacts as shown in fig. 15(a) and (b) . a) information assistance: besides the navigation purpose, the smart retail systems [218] , [219] can also provide information assistance services for shoppers. for example, the product description, sale information or other necessary information can be displayed on screen when the phone is under a certain led light. another example system is information assistance services in museum [226] , [227] . this can help to reduce the number of close physical contacts in these places. b) autonomous robot: similar to the information assistance systems for reducing close physical contacts, autonomous robots using the vlc technology for communication and localization can also be deployed to assist people in certain circumstances, for example, elderly-assistant robots, walking-assistant robots, shopping-assistant robots, etc., [228] , [229] . moreover, visible light signals do not cause any interference to rf signals, and thus they can effectively deployed in diverse indoor environments such as hospitals, schools and workplaces.3) traffic control: in the context of social distancing, high demand traffic can cause a large concentration of people in a certain area (e.g., city centre). by adopting smart traffic light systems in [230] , [231] , we can deploy an intelligent traffic controlling system using the vlc technology to control large traffic flows as illustrated in fig. 15(c) . that can help to avoid high density of vehicles in public areas. the vlc technology provides a communication method between vehicles and the light infrastructure (e.g., traffic lights, street lights). first, vehicles can send its information (e.g., their ids) to the light infrastructure by using its headlights as transmitters, thus the system can detect and monitor the traffic flow. however, in this case, it is required that the light infrastructure must be equipped with vlc receivers (e.g., traffic cameras or photodiodes). second, based on the awareness of the traffic, the system can control the vehicles by sending instructions to guide them. in this case, the system uses traffic lights, or street lights as transmitters to send information and the vehicles use dash cameras to receive the information. for example, the system will notify them about hot zones that have a high density of vehicles and do not allow them to enter, so that they can avoid these zones.in conclusion, the availability of smart retail systems is proof of the superior performance and convenience of vlc technology compared to other rf technologies in high precise indoor localization and navigation. by leveraging such commercial approaches, we can deploy the cost-effective crowd monitoring system on a large scale, not only in shopping malls or hypermarkets, but also in other public places such as airports, train stations and hospitals based on the existing illuminating infrastructures. building/facilities managers can immediately alert or notify the users if they are in the middle of a crowd (e.g., varying the color temperature of the lights in the high-density zones). people can also take the initiative in planning their move to the desired locations without encountering the crowds. on the other hand, assistance systems help to reduce the number of staffs/volunteers, nurses inside public buildings; or limit the close contacts between them and customers, patients. moreover, the combination with other rf technologies such as bluetooth and infrared also ensures the location-based services are not interrupted when the smartphone is not being actively used by the user (e.g., the phone is in the pocket). last but not least, the vlc technology can be a potential communication method between the intelligent traffic controlling system and vehicles in the outdoor environment. however, the main disadvantage of the vlc technology is that interference from ambient and sun lights have significant impacts on the visible light communication channels [215] , [217] . it results in poor performance of the rss-based positioning approaches and outdoor communications.thermal based positioning systems can be briefly classify into two main categories which are infrared positioning (irp) systems and thermal imaging camera (thc). typical irp systems such as [232] , [235] , [236] are low-cost, short-range (up to 10 meters) systems that use infrared (ir) signals to determine the position of targets via aoa or toa measurement method. on the other hand, the thc which constructs images from the object's heat emission, can operate at a larger range (up to a few kilometers) [240] . because of this difference, irp and thc can be applied in different social distancing scenarios as discussed below.1) keeping distance: in keeping distance scenarios, irp systems such as active badge [235] , firefly [237] , and op-totrak [236] can be utilized. in the active badge, badges that periodically emits unique ir signals are attached to the targets. based on the distances from the fixed infrared sensors to the badges, the target's position can be calculated. as a result, this application can be useful to determine the distance between two people as well as to identify crowds in the indoor environments. one of main advantages of this solution is low cost and easy implementation. however, it requires user to wear tag devices to track their locations.to achieve a higher positioning accuracy, the firefly [237] and optotrak [236] systems can be implemented. these systems contain infrared camera arrays and infrared transmitter called markers. due to the difference in setups (one target is attached with one tag in firefly and multiple tags in optotrak), the firefly system can accurately determine the target's 3d position, whereas the optotrak system can capture the target's movement. the main disadvantage of these systems is that they are prone to interference from other radiation sources such as sunlight and light bulbs. combined with their short-range, irp is mostly applicable in small rooms with poor-light conditions.2) contact tracing: since the firefly and optotrak systems can accurately capture movements, they can be useful for contact tracing scenarios in social distancing. for example, markers can be attached to the target's body parts which are usually used in physical contacts, e.g., hands for handshakes and body for hugs. the movement of these body parts can then be captured by the ir camera as illustrated in fig. 16 , and the recorded data can be analyzed later to determine if there is close contacts between the target and other people. based on this information, the contacts that the target made can be traced later if necessary. fig. 16 : contact tracing by infrared system [237] .3) real-time monitoring: for traffic monitoring in social distancing contexts, both irp and thc can be utilized, especially in poor-light conditions. the authors in [239] propose a robust vehicle detector based on the irp under the condition to quantify traffic level and flow. the collected data can be sent to help the authorities in social distancing monitoring. however, since irp has a short range, thc systems such as [242] can be a better choice in a larger area with high density of vehicles,.due to its very high observation range (a few kilometers) [241] - [243] , thc is particularly effective for real-time monitoring scenarios, such as public building monitoring, detecting closure violation, and non-essential travel detection, which does not requires high positioning accuracy. thc systems such as those proposed in [232] , [233] are efficient in these scenarios since they are light-weight and can cover wide area with a medium accuracy.another application of thermal technology is to detect susceptible groups. since the thcs measure heat emitted from people or other objects, they can be used for checking people's temperature quickly from a far distance [244] , [245] . further, the thc system has the ability to detect slight differences in heat with a resolution of 0.01 degree [246] . thus, it can be a good means to check health conditions and sickness trends of patients. moreover, the system can be deployed in shopping centers to measure customers' temperature remotely. this can help to detect infection symptoms early and also the prevent disease spreading.in summary, thermal based positioning systems are helpful in some social distancing scenarios, especially in poor-light conditions. for short-range communication applications, the irp is cost effective and can be used for positioning and tracing purposes. whereas, some light-weight thc systems can be leverage for monitoring over large distances due to their high range. can be used in real-time monitoring in large areas with larger vision and resolution. however, the high cost of thc should be considered when implementing in practice. vision [177] , [178] , [186] , [188] , [190] , [191] depends on the cameras low to high medium to high low high both public and private camera systems ultrasound [194] , [195] , [207] , [211] short, confined by walls less than 14cm [195] highlow [195] to high [199] yes indoor none inertial sensors [285] - [288] , [291] , [295] not applicable in this section, we discuss the open issues of social distancing implementation such as security and privacy concerns, social distancing encouragement, work-from-home, and the increased demands in healthcare appointment, home healthcare services and online services. to addressed these issues, potential solutions are also presented.most aforementioned social distancing scenarios (see table iii for more details) call for people's private information, to a different extent, ranging from their face/appearance to location, travel records, or health condition/data. these data, if not protected properly, attract cyber attackers and can turn users into victims of financial, criminal frauds [316] . users' data like health conditions can also adversely impact people's employment opportunity or insurance policy. given that, to enable technology-based social distancing, it is critical to develop privacy-preserving and cybersecurity solutions to ensure that users' private data are properly used and protected.the general principle of users' privacy-preserving is to keep each individual user's sensitive information private when the available data are being accessed by public. to do so, data privacy-preserving mechanisms including data anonymization, randomization, and aggregation can be utilized [306] . for example, apple, google, and facebook have developed people mobility trend reports while preserving users' privacy during the covid-19 outbreak. in particular, apple utilizes random and rotating identifiers to preserve mobile users' movements privacy [309] . meanwhile, google aggregates and uses anonymized dataset from mobile users who turn on their location history settings in their android smartphones. in this case, a differential privacy approach is applied by adding random noise to the location dataset with the aim to mask individual identification of a mobile user [307] . similar to google, facebook utilizes aggregated and anonymized user mobility datasets and maps to determine the mobility trend in certain areas including the social connectedness intensity among nearby locations [308] . in addition to the apple's, google's, and facebook's latest privacy-preserving implementation, in the following, we will thoroughly discuss how the latest advances in security and privacy-preserving techiques can help to facilitate social distancing without compromising users' interest/privacy. fig. 18 : location-based privacy preserving for social distancing scenarios.in social distancing, some advanced location-based privacy protection methods can be adopted. specifically, we can anonymize/randomize/obfuscate/perturb the exact location of each mobile user to avoid malicious attacks from the attackers using the following mechanisms. for example, the authors in [317] develop a privacy-preserving location-based framework to anonymize spatio-temporal trajectory datasets utilizing machine learning-based anonymization (mla). in this case, the framework applies the k-means machine learning algorithm to cluster the trajectories from real-world gps datasets and ensure the k-anonymity for high-sensitive datasets. using the k-anonymity [318] , [319] , the framework can collect location information from k mobile users within a cloaking region, i.e., the region where the mobile users' exact locations are hidden [320] , [321] . in [322] , the use of k-anonymity is extended into a continuous network location privacy anonymity, i.e., k dt-anonymity, which not only considers the average anonymity size k, but also takes the average distance deviation d and the anonymity duration t into account. leveraging those three metrics, the mobile users under realistic vehicle mobility conditions can control the changes of anonymity and distance deviation magnitudes over time.the authors in [323] propose a mutually obfuscating paths method which allows the vehicles to securely update accurate real-time location to a location-based service server in the vehicular network. in this case, the vehicles first hide their ip addresses due to the default network address translation operated by mobile internet service providers. then, they generate fake path segments that separate from the vehicles' actual paths to prevent the location-based service server from tracking the vehicles. exploiting dedicated short range communications (dsrc) among vehicles and road navigation information from the gps, the vehicles can mutually generate made-up location updates with each other when they communicate with the location-based service server (to obtain spatio-temporal-related information). in [324] , vehicles which use location-based services can dynamically update virtual locations in a realtime with respect to the relative locations of current nearby vehicles. this aims to provide deceptive information about the driving routes to attackers, thereby enhancing location privacy protection.in addition to the anonymization and obfuscating methods, the use of randomization and perturbation to preserve the users' locations have been investigated in the following works. in [325] , a location privacy-preserving method leveraging spatio-temporal events of mobile users in continuous location-based services, e.g., office visitation, is investigated. specifically, an -differential privacy is designed to protect spatio-temporal event against attackers through adding random noise to the event data [328] - [330] . in [331] , the authors present a location privacy protection mechanism using data perturbation for smart health system in a hospital. in particular, instead of reporting the patient's real locations directly, a main processing unit attached to a patient's body can adaptively produce perturbed locations, i.e., the relative change between different locations of the patient. in this case, the system considers the patient's travel directions and computes the distance between the patient's current locations and the patient's sensitive locations (i.e., patient's pre-defined locations which he/she does not want to reveal to anyone, e.g., patient's treating room). using this dynamic location perturbation, the need of a trusted third party to store real locations can be removed. leveraging the aforementioned methods, we can also prevent the service provider to access mobile users' and vehicles' exact locations/trajectories/paths when they implement social distancing for crowd/traffic density and movement detection. specifically, a platoon of mobile users/vehicles in a certain area can collaborate together to mix their real locations/trajectories/paths anonymously ( fig. 18(a) ). in this way, the service provider will only obtain the aggregated location/trajectory/path information of the platoon instead of each individual's exact location/trajectory/path for its location privacy.2) personal identity protection: in addition to protecting mobile users' location-related information, preserving their personal identities is of importance to improve users' acceptance of latest technologies to social distancing. specifically, we can exchange or anonymize personal identities among trusted mobile users to avoid the attackers identifying the actual identity of each individual user. in [332] , the authors de-velop a pseudo-identity exchanging protocol to swap/exchange identity information among mobile users when they are at the same sensitive locations, e.g., hospital and residential areas. in particular, when a mobile user receives another trusted user's identity and private key, the mobile user will verify if the encryption of another user's identity hash function and public key is equal to the encryption of the received private key. if that condition holds, the mobile user will change his/her identity with that user's identity and vice versa.in another work, the authors in [333] introduce an individual information privacy protection through indirect-or proxyrequest. in particular, instead of directly submitting a request to the server, a mobile user can have his/her social friends through the available social network resources, i.e., trusted social medias, to distribute his/her request anonymously to the server. the request result can be returned to his/her social friends and then forwarded to the requested mobile user, thereby preserving the requested mobile user's identity. in fact, there may exist some malicious friends which expose the identity of the mobile user. therefore, the authors in [334] investigate a user-defined privacy-sharing framework on social network to choose his/her particular friends who are trusted to obtain the mobile user's identity information. in this case, the mobile user only shares his/her identity information with the particular friends whose pseudonyms match the mobile user's identity through authorized access control. using the same approaches from the above works, we can use local wireless connections, e.g., bluetooth and wi-fi direct, to anonymously exchange actual location information in a mobile user group, i.e., between a mobile user and his/her trusted nearby mobile users, in an ad hoc way. as shown in fig. 18(b) , when the service provider requires to collect location-related information for the current crowd density detection, a representative mobile user from the group can send the group's anonymous location information to the service provider, aiming at preserving personal identity of each mobile user in the group.moreover, apple and google have recently introduced a key schedule for contact tracing to ensure the privacy of users [65] . specifically, there are three types of key: (i) tracing key, (ii) daily tracing key, and (iii) rolling proximity identifier. the tracing key is a 32-byte string that is generated by using a cryptographic random number generator when the app is enabled on the device. the tracing key is securely stored on the device. the daily tracing key is generated for every 24-hour window by using the sha-256 hash function with the tracing key. the rolling proximity identifier is a privacy-preserving identifier which is sent in bluetooth advertisements. this identifier is generated by using the sha-256 hash function with the daily tracing key. each time the bluetooth mac address change, the app can derive a new identifier. when a positive case is diagnosed, their daily tracing keys are uploaded to a server. this server then distributes them to the clients who use the app. based on this information, each of the clients will be able to derive the sequence of the rolling proximity identifiers that were broadcasted from the user who tested positive. in this way, the privacy of the users can be ensured because without the daily tracing key, one cannot obtain the user's rolling proximity identifier. in addition, the server operator also cannot track the user's location or who users have been in proximity.similarly, several solutions have been proposed in [67] , [68] . the key idea of these solutions is generating a unique identifier and broadcasting it to nearby devices. in particular, pact [67] regularly (every few seconds) emits a data string, called chirps generated by cryptographic techniques based on the current time and the current seed of the user to ensure the privacy. similarly, in [68] , the identifier e phi d (called ephemeral id) is created as follows:where prf is a pseudo-random function (e.g., sha-256), broadcast key is a fixed and public string, and prg is a stream cipher (e.g., aes in counter mode). sk t is the secret key of each user during day t which is computed as follows:where h is a cryptographic hash function. upon receiving the identifier, other nearby devices will keep it as a log. if a user is diagnosed with the disease, other users who may have encountered with the infected person will receive a warning of a potential contact.3) health-related information protection: to monitor the sickness trend in a certain place, e.g., the hospital, for social distancing purpose (i.e., to inform the upcoming mobile users not to enter a high-risk area/building), the health-related condition information of visiting mobile users require to be shared to provide reliable learning dataset. to protect this highly sensitive information, the authors in [335] proposes a differential privacy-based protection approach to preserve the electrocardiogram big data through utilizing body sensor networks. in particular, non-static noises are applied to produce sufficient interference along with the electrocardiogram data, thereby preventing the malicious attackers to point out the real electrocardiogram data.to provide secure health-related information access for authenticated users, a dynamic privacy-preserving approach leveraging biometric authentication process is introduced in [336] . specifically, when a user wants to access the medical server containing his/her health condition, a secure biometric identification at the server for the user's validity is employed where the exact value of his/her biometric template remains unknown to the server. in this way, the personal identity of the authenticated user can be preserved. to further enhance the anonymity of his/her medical information, the random number that is used to protect the biometric template is updated after every successful login. then, the authors in [337] propose a secure anonymous authentication model for wireless body area networks (wbans). specifically, this framework enables both patients and authorized medical professionals securely and anonymously examine their legitimacies prior to exchanging biomedical information in the wban systems. motivated from the above works, we can utilize iot and mobile devices, secure service provider, and the aforementioned privacy preserving approaches to anonymously collect people's health condition information for illness monitoring in the hospital/medical centre (fig. 18(c) ). in this way, the social distancing through monitoring the sickness trend can be implemented efficiently while preserving the sensitive information of the people in the illness areas.in the context of social distancing, real-time scheduling and optimization techniques can play a key role in preventing too many people at the same place (e.g., supermarkets, hospitals) while maintaining a reasonable quality-of-service level. fig 19 illustrates several social distancing scenarios where scheduling and optimization techniques can be applied. in particular, scheduling techniques can be applied to reduce the number of necessary employees at the workplace and the number of patients coming to the hospital, thereby reducing the unnecessary contacts among people. moreover, traffic scheduling can help to reduce the peak number of vehicles and pedestrians, and optimization techniques can help to deal with the extra pressures on the online services when there are more people staying at home. 1) workforce scheduling: workforce scheduling can help to limit the number of people at the workplaces, while ensuring the necessary work is done. while working from home is encouraged in social distancing, sometimes employees must be present at the workplace for certain tasks (e.g., machine operators). moreover, different types of tasks impose different constraints such as due date (time constraints), dependence among tasks (precedence constraints), skill requirements (skill constraints), and limited resources usage (resource constraints) which further complicates the scheduling problem. for such scenarios, workforce scheduling techniques can be utilized to optimally align and reduce the number of required employees to practice social distancing. in [263] , a novel threephase algorithm is proposed for workforce scheduling to optimize the operational cost and service level simultaneously. another genetic-algorithm-based hybrid approach is presented in [264] , which optimizes the schedules of workforce according to multiple objectives including urgency, skill considerations, and workload balance. similarly, in [265] , a mixed-integer-programming-based approach is developed to minimize the operational cost with consideration of skill constraints. it is worth noting that the main objective of these approaches is to minimize cost, which is not the highest priority in the context of social distancing. in [266] , [267] , and [268] , several methods are proposed to optimize the workforce schedules with consideration of rotating shifts, which indirectly reduce the number of employees to a certain extent. nevertheless, the main objective of these approaches is also reducing cost. therefore, developing techniques which account for the physical contacts or distance among employees at the workplace is critical for workforce scheduling in social distancing scenarios.2) medical/health appointment scheduling: beside workforce planning, scheduling techniques can also help to optimize healthcare services, especially healthcare appointments and home healthcare services, thereby decreasing unnecessary traffic and the number of patients coming to hospitals. several approaches have been proposed to effectively schedule appointments. in particular, a local search algorithm is proposed in [269] to minimize the patient waiting times, doctor idle times, and tardiness (lateness). moreover, a two-stage bounding approach and a heuristic is presented in [270] and [272] , respectively. however, a common limitation of these techniques is that they do not take into account the uncertainties in the duration of the appointments and the possibility that the patient will not come to the scheduled appointment. to address that, the uncertainty in the processing times (e.g., of surgeries) is considered by a conic optimization approach in [271] . similarly, a multistage stochastic linear program is developed in [273] to minimize patient waiting times and overtime, which takes into account the unpredictable appointment duration and unplanned cancellations. although there are many effective approaches to optimize appointment scheduling, the open issue is to develop techniques that specifically minimize or control the number of patients simultaneously coming to the hospitals to maintain a suitable level of social distancing, similar to that of the workforce scheduling scenario.3) home healthcare scheduling: similar to appointment scheduling, home healthcare services (hhs) can help to reduce the pressure on hospitals and traffic in the social distancing context. in [274] , a multi-heuristics approach is proposed for hhs scheduling to minimize the total traveling times of hhs staff. an extended problem is presented in [275] , where the objective also includes minimizing the tardiness and additional skills and time constraints are considered. for this problem, local search-based heuristics are proposed in the paper. an-other local search-based heuristic is proposed in [276] for hhs scheduling with the objective to minimize traveling times and optimize quality-of-service, while considering workload and time constraints. in [277] , a genetic-algorithm-based hybrid approach is proposed for hhs scheduling with uncertainty in patient's demands to minimize transportation cost. also addressing uncertainties, a branch-and-price algorithm is proposed in [278] to minimize the traveling costs and delay of services while considering stochastic service times. unlike in workforce planning and appointment scheduling, hhs scheduling techniques can be directly applied in the related social distancing scenario because they already aimed to minimize the traveling distances while ensuring quality-of-service.4) traffic control: furthermore, scheduling techniques have also been applied for traffic control. in social distancing scenarios, scheduling techniques can help to regulate the traffic level, especially the number of pedestrians. in [279] , a novel scheduling algorithm is developed for traffic control, considering both vehicles and pedestrians, to minimize the delays. similarly, a macroscopic model and a scheduling algorithm is proposed for traffic control that jointly minimize both the pedestrians and vehicle delays in [280] . another scheduling approach is proposed in [281] that considers both pedestrians and vehicles. different from the previously mentioned approaches, this approach only focuses on minimizing pedestrian delay. although there is a vast literature on traffic scheduling techniques, the social distancing implications have not been taken into account. for example, to maintain social distancing, a more meaningful objective would be to reduce/constrain the peak number of pedestrians on the street at the same time.5) online services optimization: when social distancing measures are implemented, more people will be staying at home e.g., working from home. physical meetings/gatherings will move to virtual platforms, e.g., webinars. that results in much higher internet traffic and corresponding virtual service demands (e.g., video streaming, broadcasting, and contents delivery). therefore, optimizing online services delivery is a challenging issue in the social distancing context. fortunately, online services optimization is a well-studied topic with a substantial body of supporting literature.for example, in [282] , a novel algorithm is proposed to optimize the contents delivery process in a cdn semi-federation system. in particular, the algorithm optimally allocate the content provider's demand to multiple content delivery networks (cdns) in the federation. the results show that the latency can be reduced by 20% during the peak hours. another technique to reduce the delay and network congestion is edge-caching, which brings the contents closer to the network users. in [283] , the performance of two edge-caching strategies, i.e., coded and uncoded caching, are analyzed. moreover, two optimization algorithms are developed to minimize the content delivery times for the two caching strategies.beside the contents delivery, the demands on video streaming traffic is also much higher during social distancing implementation because there are many people who work from home. in that context, emerging networking technologies can be an effective solution. for example, an architecture utilizing http adaptive streaming [284] and software defined networking is proposed to enable video streaming over http. moreover, a novel algorithm is developed to optimally allocates users into groups, thereby reducing communication overhead and leveraging network resources. the results show that the proposed framework can increase video stability, quality-of-service, and resource utilization.summary: scheduling and optimization are well-studied topics with a vast literature available, which can be utilized for different social distancing scenarios such as workforce , healthcare appointment, home healthcare, and traffic scheduling, and optimization of online services delivery. nevertheless, except for the home healthcare service scenario, the existing techniques' objectives do not align with the objectives of social distancing. moreover, scheduling algorithms often are developed such that they are only efficient for their specific problems. therefore, developing novel optimization/scheduling algorithms in operations research and adopting social distancing as a new performance metric or design parameter is very much desirable. furthermore, the optimization of internetbased services such as content delivery can help to encourage people to stay at home during social distancing periods by ensuring the service levels.due to the people's self-interested/selfish nature characteristics in their daily life [348] (especially during the pandemic outbreak), incentive mechanisms can be very helpful in encouraging people to accept or share relevant information to enable new social distancing methods. these mechanisms have been thoroughly discussed in crowdsourcing as implemented in [326] , [353] - [356] . in this case, the service providers can provide incentives to a large number of people to attract their contributions in data collection for crowdsourcing process. for example, the contract theory-based incentive mechanism for crowsourcing is discussed in [353] , [354] . in particular, this approach is considered as an efficient mechanism to leverage common agreements between the participating enttities, e.g., a service provider and its mobile users, in a certain area under complete and incomplete information from the participants [349] . the use of game theory-based incentive mechanism to encourage a set of mobile users form a crowsourcing community network is investigated in [326] , [355] . then, in [356] , the authors utilize an auction theory-based approach incentive mechanism to stimulate mobile user participating in the crowsourcing tasks including traffic monitoring. in the following, we also highlight the existing incentive mechanisms and how they can be further adopted to encourage the social distancing applications.1) distance between any two people and distance to/from crowds: to motivate people to keep distance from themselves to others, contract theory-based incentive model via d2d communications, e.g., bluetooth, wi-fi direct, can be employed. in [350] , the authors propose a contract theory-based mechanism to provide a higher reward for d2d-capable mobile users if they send the information to a requesting mobile user with a higher transmission data rate. taking number of potential nearby mobile users in proximity, the authors in [351] introduce the same mechanism such that a mobile user will receive a higher payment if they can share the information to more nearby mobile users. likewise, the same approach considering a higher reward for a mobile user who has shorter distances in sharing its information to nearby d2d pairs is presented in [352] . inspired by the aforementioned works, we can consider the contract theory-based method along with d2d communications to encourage people to keep distances from other people/crowds. specifically, mobile service providers can be subsidized/funded or requested by the government to provide incentives to their users to keep distance from others when they are in public. specifically, a service provider can offer contracts to mobile users, as illustrated in fig. 20(a) . considering the current distances from the nearby mobile users and capability to inform them through d2d communications, those mobile users can obtain more rewards when they successfully keep a sufficient distance (e.g., at least 1.5 meters) from other people/users. a violation (e.g., getting closer than 1.5 meters to someone) can lead to "penalty" (e.g., losing part of the previous rewards).2) contact tracing: in a pandemic outbreak, contact tracing is considered as one of the most important actions to contain the spread of the disease. to trigger each mobile user for information sharing, e.g., mobile user's public identity, the network operator requires to offer incentives to those who contribute such information (beside privacy-preserving solutions). in [353] , the authors introduce a contract theory-based incentive mechanism in a crowdsourced wireless community network. in particular, the network operator offers contracts to network-sharing mobile users containing a wi-fi access price (for their nearby mobile users accessing the network sharing) and a subscription fee (for the network-sharing mobile users). motivated from this work, we can also develop a contacttracing framework which allows a mobile user to broadcast his/her public identity to the nearby mobile users as long as their distances are within 1.5 meters. then, the nearby mobile users can store this public identity in their close-contact log files including the time and location when they receive that public identity as shown in fig. 20(b) . as a compensation for this information sharing, they need to pay a certain payment to the sharing mobile user correspondingly. in this way, when at least one of the mobile users in the log files is infected by the contagious disease, the mobile service provider can alert the mobile users with the log files to implement social distancing.3) crowd detection: high density of people in specific areas can help contagious diseases to spread the infection more quickly due to people's close proximity. to support the social distancing, an incentive mechanism approach can also be applied to detect the people density in public areas or the number of people in a building. in [354] , the authors present a tournament model-based incentive mechanism to encourage mobile users (with various performance ranks) connected to the local wireless networks, e.g., wi-fi hotspots, to send the location and unique identifier of the networks to the service provider ( fig. 20(c) ). from the hotspots' location information, the service provider can then determine the people density in each hotspot area or the number of people in a building (which may have several hotspot areas). using the above method, we can also encourage the mobile users to avoid non-essential public places, e.g., restaurants and shopping malls. in this case, the reward can be adapted according to the locations and essential level of the services (e.g., cinemas, restaurants, grocery stores, schools, and hospital).in addition to the people density detection, we can adopt an incentive mechanism to monitor the density of vehicles on the city roads for traffic crowd avoidance purpose. in fact, the contagious diseases, e.g., coronavirus, can remain on the surfaces for 4 hours up to several days [357] . thus, avoiding traffic jam on the roads can reduce the possibility of the disease infection. in [358] , the authors propose a reward-based smartphone collaboration method to support data acquisition for location-based services. specifically, a client will attract surrounding smartphone users, e.g., vehicular users on a highway, to collaborate together with the aim to build a big database containing location information as implemented in google's android smarphones and apple's iphone [359] . the joining smartphone users then receive shared rewards from the client considering their collaboration costs. based on this database, the client can determine the traffic levels according to the vehicles' density on the roads dynamically. then, the client can sell these information to a service provider which are further used to inform upcoming vehicular users avoid crowds on the roads for social distancing implementation. 4) location/movement sharing stay-at-home encouragement: to further drive people away from high density public places, we can also consider incentive mechanisms for better social distancing efficiency (especially for the people with their mobile devices). in particular, the authors in [360] study the uneven distribution of the crowdsourcing participants when maximizing the social welfare of the network. to address this problem, a movement-based incentive mechanism to stimulate the participants move from popular areas to unpopular ones was introduced. this approach guarantees that the participants will announce their actual costs for further reward process. likewise, an incentive mechanism in spatial crowdsourcing considering budget constraints to reduce imbalanced data collection is discussed in [361] . particularly, the service provider will provide a higher reward when the mobile users are willing to participate at the remote locations instead of nearby locations where they belong to (based on their daily routines). a similar work utilizing a redistribution algorithm to incentivize crowdsourced service providers from oversupplied areas to undersupplied ones is also investigated in [327] . the above works are then extended in [362] . instead of encouraging mobile users to completely move to faraway locations, the service provider will offer a task-bundling containing the nearby and remote tasks for each participating mobile user. all of these works show that the proposed incentive mechanisms can efficiently balance the various location popularity such that we can encourage people move to less density places.in a narrow-down scenario, we can also utilize an incentive mechanism to encourage family-isolation/group-isolation for the possible vulnerable/at-risk people, e.g., sick people and older people. for example, the authors in [363] propose a spatio-temporal-based incentive mechanism using both smartphone and human intelligence in an ad hoc social network. this framework allows a very large crowd to work together in providing information sharing, i.e., geo-tagged multimedia resources, while receiving incentives from the system. based on this method, we can also engage the vulnerable/at-risk groups to isolate themselves and deliver incentives for them at a certain location during a particular period (fig. 20(d) ). the larger number of vulnerable/at-risk members in a group, the higher incentives will be given. furthermore, we can design a real-time incentive mechanism to encourage people to implement self-isolation through providing more rewards for those who spend more time at a given location, e.g., at home. in this case, the reward can be negative, i.e., penalty, to discourage people from going to crowded places.an occasional pandemic outbreak in a particular period can drive the mobile service providers, e.g., google and apple, to build up a pandemic mode application for current users' mobile devices, e.g. smartphones. this application represents a comprehensive framework utilizing the current pandemic situation, i.e., infected movement data, to help the mobile users stay aware of the contagious diseases and perform cautious actions to slow down the spread of the diseases through implementing social distancing. to this end, the use of users' smartphones is very crucial to realize this pandemic mode application as similarly implemented for smartphone-based disaster mode application in [297] - [303] . when a contagious disease outbreak is imminent, the government can first broadcast an urgent notification for mobile users to install/deploy the official pandemic mode application in their smartphones. then, based on the current infected movement data, e.g., current reported number of infected people and current infected areas, from the government officials, the service providers can determine the risk levels of the pandemic and activate a certain level in the smartphones. considering the risk level, the smartphones can leverage the existing sensors and wireless connections to perform effective contact tracing activity for contagious disease containment. 1) infected movement data: to determine the risk levels of pandemic mode, the service providers first need to monitor the current infected movement information, i.e., infected areas and number of infected people. based on this observation, the service providers then can orchestrate the pandemic mode risk levels and notify mobile users such that they can avoid the areas where the highly-likely infection exists according to the current risk level. in [304] , the authors introduce an identification framework to observe the spatial infection spread based on the arrival records of infectious cases in subpopulation areas. considering susceptible and infectious people movement in metapopulation networks, the framework first splits the whole infection spread into disjoint subpopulation areas. then, a maximum likelihood estimation is applied to predict the most likely invasion pathways at each subpopulation area. using a dynamic programming-based algorithm, the framework can finally reconstruct the whole spread by iteratively assembling the invasion pathways for each subpopulation to produce the final invasion pathways. then, the authors in [305] present a spatial-temporal technique to locate realtime influenza epidemics utilizing heterogeneous data from the internet. in particular, the technique constructs a multivariate hidden markov model through aggregating influenza morbidity data, influenza-related data from google, and international air transportation data. this aims to identify the spatialtemporal relationship of influenza transmission which will be used for surveillance application. through experimental results, the technique can predict an influenza epidemic ahead of the actual event with high accuracy. recently, google and apple also create a framework to demonstrate the community mobility trend with respect to the covid-19 outbreak [307] , [309] . in particular, this framework is generated based on the regions of mobile users and change in visits monitoring at various public places, e.g., groceries, pharmacies, parks, transit stations, workplaces, and residential areas.motivated by the above works, we can utilize the service providers to first collect the spatio-temporal infectious diseaserelated information from the internet and official reports. using the aforementioned methods, the service providers can then extract meaningful information about the spread locations/pathways and time of the infectious diseases, which leads to various spatio-temporal disease spread levels. based on these disease spread levels, the service providers can customize the pandemic mode risk level for different regions, e.g., states, cities, and provinces, at different times. for example, if the disease spread level, e.g., the density of infected people, at a particular city is high, the service providers can set the pandemic mode into high-risk level for a week (as shown in fig. 21) . otherwise, the pandemic mode level can be set at low-risk level.2) contact tracing: after determining the risk levels of pandemic mode based on the infected movement data, the service providers can broadcast the risk level notification through smartphones' pandemic mode application. afterwards, the smartphones can perform contact tracing to help quickly discovering infected people for efficient outbreak containment [310] , [311] . based on the risk level of the pandemic mode, the smartphones can automatically trace contacts using certain sensors and wireless connections. for example, google and apple currently collaborate together to develop a contact tracing application utilizing bluetooth technology, aiming to quickly detect the past contacts among mobile users in a close proximity [312] . in this case, the bluetooth is used to exchange beacon signals containing unique keys between two smartphones prior to storing these keys to the cloud server for infected people notification. similarly, the work in [313] develops a wireless sensor system to exchange beacon signals between a mobile device with other nearby mobile devices as its contact information. in another work, an epidemiological data collection scheme utilizing users' smartphones is described in [314] . specifically, a user's smartphone can be used as a sensor platform to collect high accurate information including user's location, activity level, and contact history between the user and certain locations. then, a smartphonebased contact detection system leveraging the smartphone's magnetometer history is investigated in [315] . to determine the close contact, the system measures the linear correlation between two smartphones' magnetometer records.inspired by the aforementioned works, the smartphones can be utilized as crucial tools to implement contact tracing considering the current risk level of the pandemic mode activated by the service providers (as illustrated in fig. 21 ). in particular, if the service providers activate low-risk level, i.e., the current number of infected people and areas are small, the smartphones can trace close contacts using cellular networks only. in this case, the pandemic mode application will disable certain sensors, bluetooth, and wi-fi by default. however, if high-risk level pandemic mode, i.e., the current number of infected people and areas are big, is activated, the pandemic mode application will enable all of the wireless connections including bluetooth, wi-fi, and cellular network, as well as relevant sensors automatically to trace contacts faster.vi. conclusion social distancing has been considered to be a crucial measure to prevent the spread of contagious diseases such as covid-19. in this article, we have presented a comprehensive survey on how technologies can enable, encourage, and enforce social distancing. firstly, we have provided an overview of the social distancing, discussed its effectiveness, and proposed various practical social distancing scenarios where the technologies can be leveraged. we have then presented and reviewed various technologies to encourage and facilitate social distancing measures. for each technology, we have provided an overview, examined the state-of-the-art, and discussed how it can be utilized in different social distancing scenarios. finally, we have discussed open issues in social distancing implementations and potential solutions to address these issues.the covid-19 pandemic has drastically changed the behavior of individuals and communities around the world, including healthcare organizations. the typical operations of medical practices, hospitals and academic health centers have been upended in response to the pandemic.in the united states (u.s.) for example, government orders, centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) and surgeon general advice, and local practices have aimed to reduce contact with others, increase hospital capacity to care for surges of patients sickened by the virus, reduce risk of infection among healthcare providers and conserve limited personal protective equipment (ppe). [1] [2] [3] [4] non-emergent procedures and surgeries have been cancelled or postponed, clinic visits have been transitioned to telehealth, and inpatient hospital censuses have dropped in many areas, especially for children's hospitals. 1 while covid-19 related research has skyrocketed, other research operations have been grounded or restricted. 2, 3 these pervasive changes have impacted healthcare trainees through reduced typical clinical exposure, redeployment of trainees to new roles, reduced research activity, and alterations to in-person learning activities such as conferences and lectures. 4, 5 the training committee of the north american society for pediatric gastroenterology, hepatology and nutrition (naspghan) sought to understand how covid-19 has affected pediatric gastroenterology fellowship training in north america and to help these training programs share how they were managing changes in clinical work (including telehealth), teaching and learning, research activities, and endoscopy training.a survey was developed by leaders of the naspghan training committee and distributed to committee members for feedback regarding comprehension and solicitation of new, pertinent copyright © espghan and naspghan. all rights reserved.questions. after iterative editing and committee approval, committee leaders distributed a weblink to complete the survey in surveymonkey tm (san mateo, ca) via email on april 7, 2020 to all 77 program directors (pds) in the naspghan program director database (table 1) . one reminder was sent on april 13, 2020. responses were collected through april 19, 2020.respondents were directed to answer questions related to pediatric gastroenterology fellows and not to subspecialized advanced training fellows (transplant hepatology, neurogastroenterology, interventional endoscopy etc.). descriptive statistics were used to analyze responses using excel (microsoft™, redmond, wa) and surveymonkey software. free text answers were abstracted and quoted directly or grouped in themes by the authors. information about programs that did not respond was collected from the naspghan pd database.fifty-one of 77 (66%) pds responded to the survey, including pds from canada, mexico and all regions of the u.s. forty-two programs (82%) had 6 or fewer fellows across all 3 years, and half were associated with freestanding children's hospitals (table 1) . a large majority of pds, 46/51 (90%), reported their area was under a "stay-at-home" order, with median duration of 4 weeks at the time of their response.pds were asked about fellows' utilization of telehealth for outpatients prior to the covid-19 pandemic. forty-nine (98%) programs indicated they did not use telehealth in the pre-covid-19 era. in the covid-19 era, 39 (76%) of programs reported having fellows use telehealth. of the programs that were engaging fellows in telehealth, 33 estimated the number of telehealth visits per week per fellow, with a median of 5 visits (range 1-25). there was a variety of ways that faculty managed telehealth visits with fellows ( figure 1 ). some individual programs reported multiple methods. counting programs who only indicated the fellow and attending were in the same room, 14/51 (27%) were conducting visits with the attending present for the entire telehealth call. for 22/51 (43%) programs, fellows had stopped seeing patients in clinic. fifteen of these 21 (68%) programs had fellows participating in telehealth, and 7 programs' fellows were not seeing outpatients in clinic or via telehealth. the remaining 29 programs had continued having fellows see outpatients in-person, and comments indicated these patients were selected, copyright © espghan and naspghan. all rights reserved. urgent patient visits, resulting in fewer visits for fellows. eight of the 29 (28%) programs with fellows still seeing outpatients in clinic estimated fellows were seeing 1-2 patients per fellow per week, and 29 programs (31%) reported fellows seeing 3-6 patients in-person in clinic per week.twenty-four of 29 programs (83%) with fellows attending in-person clinics were also including fellows in telehealth.when asked about fellows working on the inpatient hospital service, 26/51 (51%) programs had reduced the number of on-site fellows seeing inpatients as follows, including 14/51 (27%) cutting the number by 50% or more. eight (16%) of programs reported no significant changes in how fellows were engaging in inpatient rounds and consults, but for most programs, fellows were limiting in-person contact in various ways ( figure 2 ). in 26 (52%) programs, fellows were not participating in endoscopy procedures.call schedules were changed in 21/51 (41%) programs, with comments about adjusting duties for fellows who were pregnant, had other health conditions, had childcare needs, or had spouses working emergency department or intensive care unit shifts. some program directors noted they adjusted call schedules to allow fellows two weeks without call duties following a period of service, modified backup call schedules, or had fellows staying at home take call to allow rest for fellows on service. three of six new york city-area programs reported that some of their fellows were re-deployed to adult medicine teams, and two of the remaining three commented "expected any day now" and "awaiting redeployment".of the 50 pds who responded to a question regarding changes in education resources, 47/50 (92%) had started using online audio/video virtual conference platforms for meetings or lectures, 26/50 (52%) reported offering readings and 6/50 (12%) were using pre-recorded lectures. pds not going to the lab and were working from home (table 2) . for programs with fellows involved in clinical research, 25% of programs reported no changes, and 31/51 (61%) programs reported their institution had placed restrictions on clinical research (table 2) .pds were asked to share changes they felt were critical to their covid response. responses were varied but reflected prior survey responses related to reduced interpersonal and patient exposure, institution of telemedicine and adapting conferences and personal check-ins to virtual meetings ( themes that emerged included ensuring fellows' readiness for independent care and credentialing, safety and missed opportunities regarding endoscopy, implementation of telemedicine, and addressing fellow wellness.pds who responded to this survey represent all regions of the u.s. and include some programs in adaptations is unknown, and this survey of pediatric gastroenterology pds echo questions that have been raised by educators in other specialties. 6 the accreditation council of graduate medical education(acgme) has issued some guidance to u.s. programs, although recommendations for reducing clinical encounters or increasing the ability of trainees to work in new ways have not been firmly established. 4, 7 the accreditation body has not changed work-hour restrictions and has reiterated calls for adequate supervision, training, and provisions for safety in the work environment. they also have recommended continued didactic training using web-based remote conferencing, which our survey respondents are doing. 4 the acgme accelerated its implementation of telemedicine guidance to make them effective mar 18. under these requirements, residents and fellows are permitted to use telemedicine under direct supervision where the "supervising physician and/or patient is not physically present with the resident and the supervising physician is concurrently monitoring patient care through appropriate telecommunication technology." 4 however, a clarification statement was posted on march 20, stating "we want to be clear that those residents and fellows who are capable of providing this service (telemedicine) with indirect supervision available or immediately available are covered under the indirect supervision requirements." 8 the post also reminds readers that graded supervision from direct to indirect is at the discretion of programs for typical care, and indicates that decisions for implementing supervision of telehealth should be made at the program level. pd respondents to our survey reported rapid but variable implementation of telehealth. only 14/51 (27%) programs indicated the attending was present by video the whole time, and 12 programs, nearly one quarter of programs, reported the attending did not staff the patient encounter until after the call was completed suggesting that no current clear path exists for attendings staffing fellows during telehealth.the center for medicare and medicaid services (cms) has added an interim rule during this public health emergency that allows payment for services provided by teaching physicians as long as they are present during the key portions of the service, using interactive telecommunications technology. cms defines interactive telecommunication as requiring realtime, two-way, audio and video telecommunication. 5 this rule includes supervision of telehealth visits conducted by a resident (or fellow). implementation of telehealth supervision practices is copyright © espghan and naspghan. all rights reserved.informed by the acgme, by hospital and university guidance, and by payors, and program directors should familiarize themselves with relevant policies.rapid and wide uptake of telehealth may present new opportunities for appropriate clinical care and training applicable to existing telehealth practices. teaching through apprenticeship and role-modeling is the foundation of graduate medical education, and telehealth should be no exception. berg, et al., recently published a "playbook" for rapid implementation of telehealth during the pandemic, including best practices adapted from aap and american medical association and specific applications in pediatric gastroenterology. 9 the acgme also has recognized the reduced clinical volume and potential for trainees not achieving recommended numbers of cases or procedures and has left decisions about determining whether a graduating resident/fellow is "prepared for unsupervised practice to program directors with consideration of the program's clinical competency committee". 4 pds for pediatric subspecialty fellowships received a letter april 13, 2020 from the american board of pediatrics (abp) with corollary guidance for pds as they submit verification of clinical competence forms for graduating fellows. 10 that letter does specifically recommend additional clinical experiences for non-final year trainees to make up for lost opportunities in the covid era.our study indicates pediatric gastroenterology fellows' research activities have been curtailed, with a disproportionate 89% of those involved in bench research not coming to the lab compared with 64% of programs reporting restrictions for fellows involved in clinical research. whether scaling back research for fellows will translate into delayed progress is yet unknown, but it does raise concerns about lost opportunities to generate the research that could allow timely completion of manuscripts or grants that drive early academic career development and which are needed as evidence of scholarly activity for graduation and board certification. potential ways to keep research active during the covid-19 pandemic include redesigning studies to be less labor intensive, having the ability for open communication regarding research progress, prioritization of necessary outcomes, considering alternative methods for collecting data, and working remotely to work on outcomes data. 11, 12 for some fellows, reduced clinical workload and stalled research projects may present opportunities for alternative scholarly activities such as curriculum development, retrospective studies, and reviews that do not require presence in a lab or clinical copyright © espghan and naspghan. all rights reserved.encounters. while some allowances for altered clinical training have been addressed by the acgme and abp, the impact on scholarly activity requirements has not been addressed in detail. the american board of medical specialties signed on to a statement of the coalition for physician accountability recognizing the "extreme disruption" to student, resident and fellow training, licensing and credentialing and will provide guidance for how to manage that impact. 13 regulatory guidance that recognizes the disruption, reinforces the importance of learner safety and supervision, and underscores competency-based assessment is welcome. however, regulations only go so far to inform educators in the day-to-day adjustments to teaching and learning in our specialty, especially in the setting of the current covid-19 pandemic. residents and fellows are crucial in many settings, especially for busy inpatient services. adjusting staffing of inpatient service and on-call duties was a theme in our survey responses with consideration of limiting contact with patients and each other, personal health risks, childcare obligations, and the potential for trainees to become ill or enter quarantine due to suspected exposure. some respondents mentioned addressing fellow wellness and morale, and the emotional toll on trainees merits attention. 6, 14 our survey is meant to inform and spur communication among pediatric gastroenterology fellowship directors, and others, so we can learn from each other.about half of the programs in our study reported that fellows were no longer participating in endoscopy in the covid-19 era. this is a tremendous loss of learning opportunities for skills that are integral to our subspecialty. adapting to the needs to protect learners and co-workers and to conserve ppe likely drives this change, and careful consideration is needed to readdress these concerns as assessments of risk and ppe supply change in the coming weeks and months. to maximize educational value, fellows can still be involved in the decision-making surrounding timing and type of procedures performed as well as interpretation of findings for actual cases. in addition, programs with endoscopy simulators can encourage fellows to practice their endoscopy skills, assuming they can sanitize equipment and comply with social distancing guidance.training in video capsule endoscopy or ph-impedance studies also can be considered, if fellows have access to software with synchronous or asynchronous feedback from experienced supervisors. curating and generating other educational activities related to endoscopy may bewith the emergence of covid-19 (sars-cov-2) as a novel coronavirus in late 2019, a global pandemic has led to varying levels of social distancing restrictions across the world. this includes restrictions on public gatherings, the conduct of businesses, the accessibility of healthcare, and movement outside the home.the unintended consequences of these measures may included disrupted routines for people living with dementia, increased stress on care partners as they manage the demands of caring for someone living with dementia, and difficulty satisfying essential needs such as obtaining groceries and medications without the typical social and health service support, or support from personal networks. these measures have the potential to cause social isolation, which is increasingly recognized to be detrimental to overall well-being (vernooij-dassen & jeon, 2016; ward et al., 2018) well-being requires deep and meaningful human connections, health status above an expected baseline, positive interpersonal expectations, and a sense of self (feeney & collins, 2015) . maintaining well-being is a key component of person-centered dementia care (kitwood, 1997) . moreover, the rapid move to virtual care provision may influence how and when people access treatment from healthcare providers, in addition to how providers can continue to provide high quality care in new virtual settings.multiple professional organizations including alzheimer's disease international (2020) have issued emergent covid-related advice for persons with living with dementia, but so far these recommendations have been based on little evidence, rarely collected systematically.to begin building an evidence base for the impact of the covid-19 pandemic on well-being and healthcare of persons living with dementia, we conducted a qualitative study of persons living with dementia and care partners receiving community-based care at a dementia specialty clinic. a qualitative approach was used to collect rich data on lived experience that incorporated a reflexive thematic approach to content analysis.we completed remote, in depth interviews using telephone with family members or care partners, as well as the person with dementia if they wished to and were able to provide consent. in order for participants to provide detail on the changes and impacts of the pandemic on their lives it is important that these data ae collected while the pandemic is occurring and while social distancing measures are in place.likely through a community network for younger people living with dementia. the calgary cognitive neurosciences clinic operates out of two large tertiary-care sites in calgary, alberta, canada. it is the only dementia speciality clinic in southern alberta, with a catchment area of approximately 1.5 million. patients are referred by a primary care provider and assessed for cognitive impairment and dementia by a staff of nurses and either a cognitive neurologist or psychiatrist. in alberta, there is universal government funding for physician visits and diagnostic testing. prompt was established in the clinic in 2010 to investigate patient outcomes. additional details on prompt design have been published previously (sheikh et al., 2018) . all patients seen at the clinic are eligible to participate and enrol in prompt. participation includes the opportunity to provide consent to be contacted for future research.consent was obtained using qualtrics survey software (qualtrics, 2019) or explicit oral consent. due to the nature of some of the clinic populations, explicit oral consent was necessary so that participants who wanted to participate but perhaps did not have access to the internet, email, or who had disablements preventing them from using devices or computer screens could still be included. explicit oral consent provided a way to ethically include a diverse population. process consent (dewing, 2007) was used throughout the project, where all participants provided verbal assent at every research encounter (including the initial call to introduce the project and any subsequent contact including interviews) to ensure that the participants were comfortable participating at that day or time. options of telephone or zoom interviews were used as a technological tool to complete the interviews in order to adhere to social distancing mandates put in place in the province of alberta when the public state of emergency was declared on march 17, 2020. potential participants were then contacted by telephone and informed of the project, after which information sheets and consent forms were emailed or mailed to interested participants who had a minimum of 24 hours to consider the information and discuss it with family members or health providers before providing consent to participate and the interview is scheduled. this study was approved by the conjoint human research ethics board at the university of calgary (reb20-0559).in depth interviews were used as they are an appropriate way to gain a robust understanding of lived experience and allow for exploration of topics that are important to the participant, maintaining a participatory approach to working with people living with dementia and care partners. an interview guide was created asking general questions about experiences of isolation due to the pandemic and virtual health care experiences, and was tested and updated after the first two interviews to act as pilots. it was anticipated that theoretical saturation of participant experiences would be achieved after completion of 15-20 interviews and so a target of recruiting 20 participants was initially determined. in depth interviews were audio-recorded and field notes were taken during the interviews in a dedicated field journal, along with reflexive field notes written directly after the interviews. demographic data was also recorded and was available through the current registry, and information on whether the participants had contracted covid-19 or were tested for sars-cov 2 was collected by interview. to collect the planned sample size of 20 completed interviews, we contacted 45 people of whom 21 consented and completed the interview. interviews ranged in duration from 8m:33s to 34m:38s (mean length = 21m:12s) and all interviews were completed over the phone as per participant request. interviews were conducted between april 23 and may 21, 2020, with recruitment and data collection completed by kf, az and ec, all research staff with extensive experience working with people living with dementia. the interviewers were unknown to the participants at the time of interview but introduced themselves and the reason for the work at initial contact and at the time of interview.in canada, provincial governments are primarily responsible for implementing public health measures for pandemics. a timeline of provincial measures for social distancing and health system reorganization was created by review of public records of the city of calgary and government of alberta, communications from alberta health services (the single public audio recordings were transcribed verbatim using a secure professional transcribing service, and anonymized and verified by the research team. transcripts and field notes were managed using nvivo 12 (qsr international, 2018) for the qualitative analysis and data management. interviews were transcribed concurrently while data collection was still occurring so that generated themes could be discussed at subsequent interviews to achieve theoretical saturation. immersion in the qualitative data was the first step of data analysis. transcripts were read and reread while the interview recordings are replayed. a reflexive thematic analysis (braun et al., 2016; clarke et al., 2019) was used to analyse the interview and field note data. reflexive thematic analysis positions the researcher as a mechanism in the production of the analysis. this form of analysis also requires a cognizance of theoretical assumptions that centers the experience of the person living with dementia and care partner, and their experiences within the data and the analytical process. analytical thoughts and iterative analyses were captured using memos and annotations. disagreements over analyses and emergent themes were resolved via team discussion. themes and subthemes were brought back to the participants for member checking and to enhance qualitative rigor and establish trustworthiness of the data (lincoln & guba, 1985) .there were 20 dyads of persons living with dementia and care partners; in 18 cases the persons living with dementia declined to participate but the care partner participated and in one case the person living with dementia and care partner each participated on their own. diagnoses and last folstein mini mental status examination (folstein et al., 1975) scores for the persons with dementia are shown in table 1 . no participants reported a diagnosis of covid-19 for anyone living in their household; two care partner participants suspected they may have had covid-19 due to symptoms but were not tested; and a third care partner participant reported being told to isolate due to being in a high risk group of complication from covid-19. through the completion of the qualitative analysis with coding and synthesis completed by az, ec and directed by pr (principal investigator and qualitative methods expert), three overarching themes emerged from the data (see table 2 ) that clearly demonstrated the impact of the covid-19 pandemic on experiences of cognitive neuroscience patients and their care partners. the themes built on a coding tree that started with small, descriptive codes about discrete areas of day to day life and were then synthesized to larger descriptions of experience. these themes are described in more detail below and have edited only for general grammar and spelling to enhance readability. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 /2020 it was also clear that the informal support provided by the community or by family members was crucial for many people who were anxious or afraid to leave the house for essentials. those participants who had family support reinforced these messages. "the first time we did something at the superstore, we put in a pick-up order. i don't have a cell phone. i have a computer but not a cell phone. so my daughter said 'you know, you put your order in and then i'll go over and pick it up when it's ready.' she would do that for me. and we social distanced the whole time, like she'd drive up in the driveway." (participant 123; care partner) managing day to day activities many care partners reported stress around coping with day to day activities of living and some of this stress was due to no longer having the formal home care service they had been receiving before the pandemic and shut down of services. the personal impact of the pandemic and associated public health measures is closely associated to the health services impact of these same measures. participants reported feeling alone and unsupported in many cases and were largely understanding of the need for health services to focus on the pandemic response. it was also clear, however, that some degree of ongoing contact was crucial for continuing to support families living with dementia."that's kind of what i feel is, 'you're just on your own.'…i haven't heard from anyone. i finally phoned someone the other day and 'yeah. well people in ahs [alberta health services] have been redeployed ', etc. etc ., which is just fine. so maybe it would have been all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. some participants did report formal service and community programming continuing to stay in contact and support families in innovative ways, and this continued contact was appreciated, even if the service level and model delivery had changed when the program had to stop in-person programming."he goes to an adult day program on wednesdays through [program] . they have been fabulous. absolutely fabulous. they're very good. they phone to see if we need groceries or anything at all because they're willing to do it. and then tomorrow they said they were going around to all the clients and delivering baking. every day of the program we always hear from them. over the phone. yeah." (participant 111; care partner)due to the scale of immediate shift to social and physical distancing, health care providers and patients had to quickly adapt to remote delivery of care in a virtual medicine format. overall, many participants expressed that although they prefer face to face appointments with their care team, there were perceived advantages to receiving care in a remote format. these included not feeling as rushed, having options presented such as telephone vs zoom, and care partners expressed an ability to be more candid with the doctor if the person living with dementia was not participating in the call. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 /2020 conversely, care partners did also report that if the person living with dementia was in the room or wanted to be part of the call there was less opportunity for frank one on one conversations with the doctor and that this could be potentially distressing for the person living with dementia, depending on the nature of the discussion. participants also expressed some concern with technological barriers of connecting via internet and while recognizing that body language and non-verbal communication was important to the appointment, support is necessary for people who are unfamiliar with the technology to be able to fully participate in this way. participants described feeling anxiety about the pandemic in general and about needing to leave the house, both personally and perceived anxiety on the part of the person living with dementia. this highlights the need to be cognizant of increased mental health needs for cognitive clinic patients and family members in times of social and physical distancing.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122192 doi: medrxiv preprint social distancing and cognitive decline a number of participants also expressed concern that the person living with dementia was experiencing more cognitive decline since the start of the public health measures during the covid-19 pandemic. these concerns were focused around the decrease in social interaction impacting the progress and severity of cognitive decline, which was perceived as progressing more rapidly the previous two months. many care partners expressed feeling as though they could not cope on their own, with limited access to both formal and informal supports .the changes to the health systems and services provided described in the section above have effects on the amount of burnout expressed by family members and care partners. participants also worried about returning to work if the services that enabled them to do so pre-pandemic were not reinstated. this study provides early evidence of the impact of covid-19 on persons living with dementia and their care partners. these interviews identified multiple adverse consequences of the public health measures implemented to contain spread of sars-cov-2, including loss of informal caregiving, lack of access to health care, and social isolation, contributing to burn out symptoms among care partners. this validates the concerns expressed by multiple advocacy organizations (such as the alzheimer society of canada, alzheimer's association (usa), and alzheimer's disease international), which although well founded have nonetheless been based on anecdotes or speculation without data collected directly from persons living with dementia. our data were collected during a period of "lockdown" when all non-essential businesses were closed, health clinic access was mandated to be online or telephone except for emergencies, and most in-person home care services were no longer being provided. therefore, it provides a snapshot of the adverse effects of the aggressive public health efforts that were needed to "flatten the curve" to prevent health system collapse. these drastic public health measures, while being lightened in many jurisdictions, may yet be required in other countries at an earlier stage of the pandemic or in case of a second wave of viral infections in the northern hemisphere in the fall.so far, there are few data on the impact of covid-19 on dementia care even though it is well understood that older people with medical comorbidities are at much higher risk of fatal infection. in a letter in the lancet, physicians from wuhan province cited multiple barriers to good dementia care including difficulty adhering to social distancing and good hygiene, loss of services, and difficulty accessing telemedicine (wang et al., 2020) . however, no perspective from persons living with dementia or quantitative information was included. a hospital-based cohort from italy noted that patients with covid-19 infection with a history of dementia were more likely to die, and often presented with hypoactive delirium (bianchetti et al., 2020) . a all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20122192 doi: medrxiv preprint quantitative survey study of community dwelling persons with mild cognitive impairment or mild dementia in spain reported overall good mental health (goodman et al., 2020) . however, that study used a quantitative survey without open-ended questions, did not include care partners, and was limited to persons with mild dementia. in contrast, this study elicited many serious concerns particularly among care partners of persons with more moderate to severe dementia.we identified multiple impacts on well-being of people living with dementia and their family members and/or care partners. though most participants understood the need for social distancing, they found it difficult both physically and emotionally. meaningful activity and social engagement are vital to the well-being and functioning of families of persons living with dementia (phinney, 2006; phinney et al., 2007; roach & drummond, 2014; roach et al., 2016) . care partners expressed concerns that cognitive decline accelerated during social distancing. this is consistent with literature finding that loneliness can be detrimental to well-being and quality of life (moyle et al., 2011) and increase the risk of mortality and morbidity (luo et al., 2012; tilvis et al., 2012) . social interaction can be beneficial for cognitive functioning (vernooij-dassen & jeon, 2016) and so it is plausible that social isolation could provoke accelerated cognitive decline and or an exacerbation of neuropsychiatric symptoms of dementia.the adverse impact of the covid-19 pandemic on mental health is increasingly recognized (armitage & nellums, 2020; holmes et al., 2020) . these mental health impacts may be compounded when care partners no longer have access to formal and informal supports that provide respite, help with hygiene, medication, day to day activities of living, and essential tasks such as shopping for groceries or collecting medications. moreover, the challenges of assisting a person living with dementia to navigate changing public spaces where physical distancing, wearing of masks, and controlled movements are necessary leads to additional stress for the care partner and greater risk for the person living with dementia.participants were understanding of these measures but at the same time expressed concern for their own ability to continue to cope on a long-term basis, and the possibility of burnout without these supports. this echoes general concern of burnout by families living with dementia in times before the covid-19 pandemic (brodaty & donkin, 2009; sörenson & conwell, 2011; takai et al., 2009) , but with these caring demands now amplified by isolation and anxiety. with the accompanying sudden shift to virtual care by almost all health care teams there was additional anxiety experienced with regards to the availability of care and how to access it.many of the stresses and anxieties identified in this study could potentially be mitigated through health system innovations. remote support for social interaction for people living with dementia and care partners should be explored. there is evidence that tablet based interventions can benefit cognition and self-perceived quality of life for people living with dementia kong, 2020) and ongoing work is being made with integrating social robots into the care of people with dementia in the community (hung et al., 2019; korchut, 2017) . rapid implementation of these innovative technological solutions may provide one strategy to increase social interaction and improve well-being in times of pandemic public health restrictions. additional evidence is needed to demonstrate what kind of interaction may be valuable for these all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 /2020 approaches, and what types support may be most facilitative of a protective effect for cognition (kim et al., 2015) .other possible remote support for people living with dementia and families include virtual social networking, including virtual dementia cafes or day programming moving to online interaction . where this is not possible, telephone check-ins may also prove to be a valuable source of support for the mental health and needs assessment for families. the more problematic question remains focused on remote approaches to care partner respite, which is difficult to navigate during times of public health restrictions. possible solutions for home care or social care workers may include scheduled home care visits incorporating walks where the formal care provider and person living with dementia maintain an appropriate social distance; meal or medication collection and delivery at a safe distance or with the appropriate personal protective equipment, and flexibility on maximum limits for dispensing medications to the reduce the number of needed trips to the pharmacy.delivering high quality telemedicine will be essential to ensuring good health during a time of social distancing. it was evident in the data that if patients and care partners are expected to connect with internet technology, clear guidance should be provided to explain how to set up and use technology that may be unfamiliar to many. the ability for a care partner to provide confidential information to a clinical care team in advance of a scheduled virtual appointment was also expressed, particularly when the care partner wished to notify the medical team of symptoms that are potentially distressing or humiliating to the patient, or could lead to conflict. to address this need, our clinic is implementing secure web-based surveys that will allow the care partner to confidentially report neurobehavioural symptoms, function, and caregiver burden, using validated scales, with separate telemedicine appointments with the care partner as necessary. this work leverages data systems employed to capture patient data in the prompt registry, demonstrating another use of clinical patient registries for meaningful patient engagement and service improvement. previous work has shown that neurological and psychiatric patient populations do not see registry participation as burdensome, but as an altruistic way to contribute to research that may or may not also provide personal benefit (lee et al., 2019) . enhancing communication and preparation for clinic appointments has been shown to improve health outcomes in non-pandemic times (entwisthle & watt, 2006; street et al., 2009) and we can reasonably extrapolate that this would be true during times of social and physical distancing, as experienced during the covid-19 pandemic.strengths of the study include that it was embedded in a prospective clinic registry which enabled us to quickly contact people living with dementia and their care partners during the covid-19 pandemic, and link their data to physician collected information on cognitive assessment and disease diagnosis. the main limitation is that the study was conducted in a single setting, a specialty outpatient dementia clinic, in an urban location with universal healthcare. it may not be wholly applicable to persons receiving care in family practices or with limited access all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 /2020 to care. in future work we will also work to include more people living with dementia in the interviews, and perhaps the necessity of remote interviewing in this study presented a barrier to communication. however, the themes that emerged from our work accord with the concerns expressed by multiple advocacy groups, expert opinion (brown et al., 2020) , and the early observations of dementia specialists in wuhan province (wang et al., 2020) ; therefore, we expect that most of the themes are universal and not idiosyncratic to our practice setting. by design, we did not include persons living with dementia who are residing in care homes or who are hospitalized in acute care; additional research is needed on these important populations. this work is limited to the impacts of the initial public health response to the covid-19 pandemic, and it will be useful to continue additional qualitative work to better understand the impact on different groups over time as the public health response evolves and society adapts to the changes.this in-depth understanding of the lived impact of decreased social engagement and healthcare access on personal well-being can inform future health and social policy and health service provision. this knowledge may be useful for future pandemics (including the possibility of a resurgence of covid-19 in the fall); extreme weather phenomenon; outbreaks of other disease or isolation in supportive living or long term care facilities; or other emergencies where social distancing/isolation/virtual care may be required. the reported increase in neuropsychiatric symptoms is also important for treatment planning and support in times of social distancing. improved and innovate approaches to remote care and virtual medicine, including flexible mental and social supports for families, and the ability to provide information to clinical care teams prior to remote medical appointments has the potential to facilitate high-quality patient care that meets the needs of families and patients. 202003). direct and in-kind funding was also provided by the brain and mental health research clinics, a part of hotchkiss brain institute (https://brainandmentalhealthclinics.ca/).a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was detected in late 2019. it has been identified as the cause of covid-19, a respiratory illness of varying severity. on , with covid-19 affecting 113 countries or territories, the world health organization (who) declared covid-19 to be a pandemic of -alarming levels of spread and severity‖. 1 while the situation is rapidly evolving, this pandemic has already disrupted the world in three major ways due its direct health impact, its impact on the health care system, and the social and economic consequences of the response to the pandemic. during normal times, individuals with alzheimer's disease and related dementias (adrd) are among the most vulnerable persons in society, depending on family or professional caregivers for their day to day survival. this pandemic exacerbates further their vulnerability, due to both the morbidity and mortality from covid-19 and the indirect effects of the pandemic on the social supports and the health care system on which they depend.an understanding and appreciation of the current and potential impact of the pandemic on individuals with adrd can help in their care. these considerations can also influence the decisions of caregivers, health professionals, institutions, and policymakers. thus, in the context of a rapidly evolving situation, this special article discusses and proposes mitigation strategies for six major issues: (1) why individuals with adrd are at high risk for covid-19 and its associated morbidity and mortality; (2) how covid-19 will impact the diagnosis and clinical several features of adrd may increase the risk of contracting covid-19. some individuals with adrd may be unable to follow the recommendations from public health authorities to reduce the transmission of covid-19: hand hygiene; covering one's mouth and nose when coughing; monitoring for and reporting symptoms of covid-19; maintaining physical distance from others; and self-isolating by remaining alone at home. 2 some with mci or milder dementias may be unwilling or unable to comply due to apathy or depression. those with more severe dementias will not be able to understand, appreciate, or remember most of these recommendations due to the severity of their short-term memory loss and overall cognitive impairment. finally, behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (bpsd), such as motor agitation, intrusiveness, or wandering, may undermine efforts to maintain isolation.despite considerable uncertainty and variability in estimates of covid-19 outcomes, age and comorbid medical conditions have consistently been the most significant factors associated with a poor prognosis including hospitalization and death. [2] [3] [4] age is the best established risk factor both for adrd and for symptomatic and severe illness and mortality from this is illustrated by the situation in italy where over a third of confirmed cases and approximately 9 of 10 deaths are occurring in individuals 70 years and older. 3 precise estimates of outcomes will only be known in time, but they seem to depend on local circumstances such as demographics and resources, in particular the ability of the health care system to cope.beyond age, increased morbidity and mortality is expected in patients with adrd due to the association of adrd with physical comorbidities and other features of adrd. individuals with dementia are more likely to have cardiovascular disease, diabetes and pneumonia compared to individuals of the same age without dementia. 5 these conditions have been associated with poorer outcomes including death, in individuals with covid-19. 6 among 1099 cases of laboratory-confirmed covid-19 in china, pneumonia occurred in over 90% of cases. 7 absent the pandemic, mortality from pneumonia has been reported to be twice higher in individuals with dementia compared to those without dementia. 8a rapid increase in the number of covid-19 cases is adversely affecting health systems and is causing a shortage of hospital beds and a strain on health care providers. 9 increased demand on health systems may also result in the diversion of resources away from patients with chronic diseases, including those with adrd.the suspension of elective and non-urgent care is occurring in many affected areas. the availability of urgent and intensive care resources becomes compromised when the prevalence of severe cases of covid-19 exceeds local resources. 10 individual with adrd may suffer disproportionally from constraints in resources due to the chronic nature of their illness and their specific care needs.the workup and diagnosis of adrd is vulnerable to disruption in several ways. as primary care providers and specialists are being redeployed to address medical emergencies, these physicians are not available to work up neurocognitive disorders. attending a clinic for one or more appointments and visits for blood work and neuroimaging expose frail individuals to risks that may exceed the benefits of timely evaluation and regular monitoring.in many jurisdictions, outpatient physicians have transitioned to providing virtual care, completing assessments and follow-ups by telephone or videoconferencing. these modalities may not be adequate to perform the physical and neurological examinations or some of the cognitive tests required when diagnosing mci or dementia or monitoring their progression. in some cases, it may be possible to provide an initial visit in person and follow-ups remotely.otherwise, diagnosis and care may have to be deferred or limited.the use of anticholinesterase inhibitors and memantine is common in patients with adrd. medications frequently used for the treatment of bpsd include antipsychotic, antidepressant, antiepileptic and other psychotropic medications. 11 patients who are stable on medications may be impacted if the supply of their medication is disrupted due to missed visits, disruption of pharmacy pickup or delivery, or supply chain problems.initiating a new medication during the pandemic may be associated with higher risk, particularly if components of routine screening are disrupted such as in-person clinical assessments, blood work, or electrocardiogram, or the ability to follow up on adverse events in a timely manner. rare but serious adverse events associated with mediations used in the treatment of adrd and bpsd-e.g., bradycardia, gastrointestinal symptoms, falls, fractures, cardiovascular events, or strokes-carry higher morbidity and mortality if access to urgent care is impeded. in the context of social isolation, individuals with adrd who rely on family or health professionals for reminders or assistance with taking their medications are at risk for sudden discontinuation of medications. the risk-benefit ratio of some medications in dementia may shift towards harm if adequate prescribing and monitoring is not possible.common non-pharmacologic interventions for adrd in general, and bpsd in particular, involve social and physical contact such as social groups, exercise groups, and pet therapy. a limitation on resources and a need for physical distancing will not merely suspend these interventions, it will also result in increased isolation, a lack of physical exercise, decreased social engagement, and a suspension of purposeful activity. while confined at home, many people are now using technology to socialize and even exercise in group; individuals with adrd may not be able to use electronic tools and software (see below).resolution of the pandemic may be associated with an increased demand for care that was deferred. individuals with adrd and their family may also need assistance to resume care and address complications that arose from the lack of follow-up and monitoring or from the disruption in health-promoting interventions.the societal response to the pandemic includes travel restrictions and home confinement (-lockdowns‖). people are encouraged or required to isolate socially and not to leave their home.non-essential businesses are shut down. the extent and duration of these social distancing measures is uncertain, but it may be significant and prolonged in some jurisdictions. in this context, many resources upon which patients with adrd depend may become unavailable.depending on the severity of their illness, individuals with adrd live in various settings and rely on the availability and accessibility of various resources. in the context of the covid-19 pandemic, these settings may influence both the risk and impact of societal consequences of covid-19.most individuals with milder adrd have minimal care needs and live in the community where they may have established robust supports. however, their ability to live in the community may be threatened if it depends on services that are disrupted by the pandemic. delivery services such as meals on wheels may be delayed or disrupted due to increased demand, closures, or supply chain failures. family or professional caregivers (e.g., home health care workers) providing in-home support for activities of daily living can also become unavailable due to increased demand, workers' illness, or required isolation due to exposure; some workers may also be prevented by their employer from working in multiple settings. individuals with adrd living in the community may be particularly vulnerable if they are unable to seek help should they fall ill. covid-19 can be associated with a sudden deterioration of respiratory status and cardiac complications. 12 thus, symptomatic patients require frequent check-ins, while maintaining physical distance.many individuals with adrd who rely on personal savings and investments are also at risk of financial adversity due to the economic consequences of the pandemic. as younger people, they may need to access government programs for financial support. also, they are less likely to drive a personal vehicle, 13 instead relying on mass transit or transportation services that increase their exposure and risk of infection. they may benefit from assistance in identifying safe means of transportation, and in reducing their need to leave home by facilitating deliveries and deferring non-essential travel.those living alone in the community may also suffer from loneliness due to increased isolation and disruption of group activities. creative ideas to incorporate alternative social physical activities safely within the home are needed. whereas people are turning to technology to stay socially connected and access services including health care, some individuals with adrd may have trouble using technology due to cognitive impairment. they need instruction and support to use of these tools.as with any disaster, individuals with adrd and their family need to make contingency plans for the provision of essential services. families' and caregivers' awareness of the potential risks and disruptions described above for patients with adrd living in the community may help mitigate their impact. potential mitigation strategies include increased support in the form of more frequent contact by telephone or video chat, problem solving to maintain delivery and caregivers' services, planning for potential disruption, or temporarily moving to a location where the required supports can be provided. paradoxically, some families may be able to temporarily provide support at home because they are unable to work due to lockdowns or other restrictions.many of the issues faced by individuals with adrd in the community also apply to those living in group and assisted living environments. in some cases, the increased risk of infection associated with large groups may shift the risk-benefit ratio towards returning to one's home, if it is an option. however, many individuals with adrd require a supportive living environment because of a decreased level of functioning. in these settings, physical touching and toileting, crowding and shared rooms, and staff working in multiple settings may further increase the risk of covid-19 transmission. as discussed above, features of moderate to severe dementia such as severe memory impairment, and bpsd such as wandering, and agitation may thwart attempts to promote the actions recommended to reduce risk of transmission. in the other direction, imposition of increased hand hygiene, isolation, or restriction of visitors and activities may worsen cognitive symptoms or bpsd, increasing further care needs and risks.individuals with adrd living in long term care (ltc) (-nursing homes‖) face all the challenges of those in supportive living environments, and additional risks. their higher dependence on caregivers and health care providers eliminates the possibility of physical distancing. in these settings, personal protective equipment (ppe) may be rationed for confirmed or suspected cases or even become unavailable. 9 when covid-19 affects ltc homes, it can have a high attack rate and case fatality rate-for example, a case fatality rate of 33.7%-34 fatalities among 101 affected residents-has been reported in a washington state ltc. 14 this home also experienced a significant disruption to staffing, with 50 health care workers reported to be infected. 14 many staff of ltc work at multiple facilities or in private homes increasing the risk of transmission and disruption of care beyond an impacted facility.patients with adrd are hospitalized due to bpsd, comorbid illness, or inability to care for themselves and lack of access to supportive services or ltc. 15 hospitals present the same risks as ltc, with additional risks. hospital staff and physicians are highly vulnerable to contracting covid-19: of the first 48,548 confirmed cases in china (as of february 14, 2020), 1,716 (3.7%) were health care workers and professionals, 2 as were 2,026 (9.0%) of the first 22,512 confirmed cases in italy (as of march 15, 2020) . 3 the risk of covid-19 nosocomial infection is high due to high staff ratios and turnover, high patient volumes, crowded rooms, rapid inflow of detected and undetected cases of covid-19, and constrained supply of ppe. for reasons discussed above (age, comorbidities, behavioral and cognitive problems), individuals with adrd are among those at highest risk of nosocomial infection. in many communities affected by covid-19, hospitals get strained or overwhelmed. 9 hospitalized individuals with adrd may be particularly affected because they are less able to monitor their care or advocate for themselves. decreased nursing time has been shown to be associated with increased medical errors and adverse events in dementia. 16 the need for hospitalization implies a more severe illness. patients with severe bpsd may be at even higher risk for the behaviours discussed above that elevate transmission of infection. on a south korean psychiatric ward, 101 of 103 inpatients were infected and 7 died during a covid19 outbreak. 17 upon admission, hospitals need to evaluate the risk to individuals with adrd and the risk to others, in the context of potential, suspected, or confirmed cases of covid-19. planning for these situations is needed to clarify the ethical issues, local legal framework, and institutional policies that impact a decision with respect to the need for and use of locked seclusion, chemical and physical restraints, and end of life or palliative care in high risk situations. 18 regardless of choices made by patients with adrd or their family members, health care interventions taken for granted may have to be rationed in some jurisdictions affected by the pandemic (see below).in addition to the usual settings in which patients with adrd receive care, the pandemic will force some patients into unexpected and suboptimal environments with their own challenges. hospitals dealing with or preparing for a surge in covid-19 patients are discharging or diverting some patients with milder cases to hotels, convention centres, tents, and shipping containers. 19 while the physical needs of some medically stable patients with adrd may be met in these alternative settings, their cognitive and behavioral needs may not. during the pandemic, the perennial lack of availability of safe and adequate housing options for individuals with adrd, combined with an unprecedented strain on medical and social resources, could create its own crisis, leading to unprecedented levels of morbidity and mortality in this frail population.as most patients with adrd depend on caregivers, the impact of the pandemic on formal and informal caregivers need to be considered. in the best of time, the physical and mental health of some caregivers is precarious. 20 during this pandemic, some caregivers may become ill, they may need to isolate and be unavailable, or they may develop anxiety and other mental health issues. as discussed above, due to the sudden unavailability of established services, family members may have to become caregivers for a relative with adrd. grief and its consequences are likely in family caregivers who have lost a loved one 21 and in professional caregivers who have lost a patient. 22 all of the above will lead to exhaustion and burnout.as discussed above, specific aspects of caring for individuals with adrd are incompatible with physical distancing. inadequate or unavailable ppe or training related to its use sets the stage for viral transmission. responding to agitation and threats of violence typically requires urgent interventions that impede proper ppe use and increase further the risk of viral exposure. 23 many patients with adrd have -do not resuscitate‖ status, including advanced directives not to transfer them to an acute medical floor. as a result, in some settings, if these patients develop covid-19, neurologists, geriatricians, geriatric psychiatrists, or primary care providers will have to practice out of their scope and care, managing the symptoms and distress associated with pneumonia. however, this issue goes beyond covid-19 and pneumonia. as discussed above, during this pandemic, many patients with adrd who want to receive the full spectrum of care, including intensive care and intubation, may not be able to access optimal acute care for any medical issue, not just covid-19. all physicians may have to treat a variety of medical issues that would have otherwise been treated by specialists. preparatory discussions with patients and family members are needed to clarify the goals of care should these dire circumstances arise; they are particularly crucial if advance discussion of code status have not yet occurred or are not clearly documented.health care workers involved in adrd care are already exposed to suffering and deaths. 14 their stress and anxiety may be further increased by the current risk to their own safety.the number of cases, deaths and societal impact of covid-19 has already exceeded those observed during the 2003 epidemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). as following sars, we need to be prepared to address the serious and long-term mental effects of covid-19 on health care workers, including post-traumatic stress disorder and depression. 24the covid-19 pandemic threatens to disrupt not the active care of individuals of adrd, but also the basic routines that promote their mental health. the pandemic and its social consequences may cause fear, anxiety, and anger. they will disrupt all forms of social interaction, possibly for a prolonged period of time. a lack of physical closeness may lead to increased loneliness and sadness. exercise is recommended generally and specifically for individuals with adrd, and confinement reduces access to exercise. sleep disturbances is common in adrd and sleep may be further disrupted due to anxiety and loss of social rhythms (-zeitgeists‖). 25 in turn, lack of activities and sleep loss and stimulation may cause delirium in individuals with adrd, contributing further to morbidity and mortality. 26 like health care workers, individuals with adrd may experience the loss of friends and family due to covid-19. these losses may lead to grief, bereavement, or frank depression, a common feature of adrd. 27 the pandemic and its consequences may also be experienced as a trauma, followed by post-traumatic stress disorder. in turn, stress and trauma can accelerate cognitive decline. 28 age, illness, depression, trauma, and dementia are all risk factors for suicide. 29 during the pandemic, individuals with adrd may be doubly stigmatized. stigma is already a pervasive issue in adrd. 30 individuals with, or at risk of exposure to, covid-19 have been stigmatized. 31 risks of stigma include ostracization and denial of health and social services, 31 which comes at time of potential scarcity of resources to be allocated. 32 rationing raises triage issues beyond some of the logistical issues discussed above. will older individuals with mild adrd be able to access intensive care beds? if they are already on a ventilator, will they be taken off to reallocate these scarce resources to younger patients? how will these decisions be made ethically? what will be the psychological impact of triage on health professionals? a response to these complex questions is beyond the scope of this paper.however, some ethicists have proposed a framework to address these issues in the unprecedented context of the covid-19 pandemic. 32the discussion above has focused exclusively on the immediate risks and impact of the as per the declaration of helsinki, -concern for the interests of the subject must always prevail over the interest of science and society.‖ 36 therefore, all research activities such as observational studies in which participants are exposed a potentially lethal infection (e.g., through face-to-face contact with research staff) without the possibility of any direct benefit should be suspended unless they can be continued entirely remotely. 33 when participation in a study entails provision of essential medical care (e.g., an intervention that is only available through a research trial), continuation of the study should be considered with the maximum possible mitigation of the risk of infection. 34 the us food and drug administration (fda) has issued some guidance regarding continuation of research participation for intervention studies and how to mitigate the risks to participants and to the integrity of the research studies during the pandemic. 37 adapting and protecting the integrity of research activities during a pandemic research activities have been and remain critical in advancing medical knowledge and alleviating the suffering for millions of future patients, 34 particularly in the field of adrd, for which no new medication has been approved since 2003. clinical investigators can explore creative ways to continue their studies while mitigating the risk of covid-19 infection both for research participants and staff. this may require modification of study protocols to collect safety and endpoint assessments remotely. some assessments (e.g., follow-up neuroimaging for a secondary outcome) may need to be deferred or missed. challenges in terms of selective retention, measurement errors, data missing not at random, and other confounds will need to be addressed in the analyses and reporting of the results.when a study cannot be done entirely remotely because it requires in-person visits (e.g., a trial requiring regular monitoring of safety lab tests), the increased risk of participation associated with in-person visits needs to be discussed explicitly with participants-or, in the cases of most studies involving participants with moderate to severe adrd, their substitute decision maker (sdm). the established relationship between participants (or their sdms) and the research staff will facilitate these discussions. institutional review boards (irbs) and data and safety management boards (dsmbs) would also need to be involved in reassessing the risk/benefit ratio of continuing participation in these studies. a few clinical trials may consider not just to continue following and monitoring current participants, but also to recruit new participants. except for some rare trials of purely psychosocial interventions, baseline assessments and safety lab tests would require in-person visits. again, this would require the involvement of the irb and dsmb and careful discussion with possible participants or their sdm and documentation of this consent process.as with any major crisis, the covid-19 pandemic will have a lasting impact on the way all clinical research, including adrd research, is carried out. the current challenging situation is forcing researchers to think how they could conduct most research procedures remotely. it will accelerate the adoption of technologies and tools that permit remote assessments. [38] [39] [40] in the field of adrd research, we believe it will impact most the traditional neuropsychological and functional assessments on which most primary outcomes for adrd interventions trials are based. 41 in the long term, adrd research will also benefit from these technological innovations because they should allow the recruitment and follow-up of much larger samples at reduced costs. finally, the covid-19 crisis may expedite the development of non-pharmacological interventions that can be delivered the home of participant, e.g., homebased cognitive training or physical exercise, or that use small portable devices that can be easily used in private homes, e.g., transcranial direct current stimulation and similar devices. 40the covid-19 pandemic is disrupting the world and its health care systems in unprecedented ways. this pandemic also threatens the integrity and viability of current and future adrd research. local impact will vary and evolve depending on specific factors, including the incidence of covid-19, the associated death rates, the availability of resources, and the societal changes implemented to control the pandemic. these local variations combined with the heterogeneity of adrd make simple generic recommendations ineffectual. however, awareness of this possible impact and mitigation strategies adapted to individual and local circumstances may prevent or reduce the harm of this pandemic and its consequences for persons with adrd and their caregivers.eric brown: substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work and the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work; drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content; final approval of the version to be published; and agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.sanjeev kumar: substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work; the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work; drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and final approval of the version to be published bruce g. pollock: substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work; and final approval of the version to be published. tark k. rajji: substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work; and final approval of the version to be published.benoit h. mulsant: substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work and the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work; drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content; final approval of the version to be published; and agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.the emergence and global spread of the novel coronavirus disease , caused by the sars-cov-2 virus, will have a lasting impact on human life. in late 2019, the disease was identified in wuhan, china and quickly spread across the globe [1] . nations responded in a variety of ways as cases of the disease increased dramatically within their populations. some governments responded immediately, severely restricting residents' mobility and pausing most economic activity [2] while others chose to implement less restrictive policies [3] . across the globe, borders began to close and many national governments chose to close schools and businesses, essentially shutting down local economies, while others limited their response to simple physical distancing practices [4] . the speed at which countries responded to this pandemic also varied drastically with some governments taking action within days of their first confirmed cases, and others waiting to implement public health policies until a pattern could be identified. still other governments have yet to instrument meaningful covid-19-related policy choosing instead to make an argument for "herd immunity" [5] .at the heart of the pandemic, however, are the inhabitants of these different countries. people look to their government for information on the severity and spread of the disease and rely on what they are told to make informed decisions on how to act. for most, government enacted policies dictate how they will conduct their daily affairs during a global health emergency. as officials around the world began to cancel public events and limit public transit options, inhabitants were forced to respond by limiting their mobility and changing their activity behavior. a decade ago, this change in community mobility would have been measured at a large scale through survey samples of the population. today, however, this change in activity behavior is being monitored and recorded in real-time through context-aware technology. the ubiquity of location-enabled mobile devices means that mobile device manufacturers (e.g., apple, google) and data providers (e.g., verizon, deutsche telekom) have unlocked access to the mobility activity of people around the planet to a degree previously unattainable.during this crisis, a few of these companies have offered limited public access to anonymized aggregations of this data. apple, for example, is reporting a decrease in human mobility globally based on route searches performed by users of their maps platform over the past few month [6] . in some instances route queries have dropped below 80% of their baseline suggesting that a significant amount of users have reduced their mobility due to the pandemic. similar results have been released by the descartes lab, an analytics company, for counties in the united states [7] . aside from purely spatial movement data, other companies have focused on discrete places, using location-enabled mobile device data to identify the types of places (e.g., bank, grocery store, restaurant) people visit, and how their visiting behavior has changed over the past few months. for instance, foursquare [8] has demonstrated the impact of covid-19 on place-based social media check-ins within the united states 1 and safegraph [9] is publishing similar data based on a panel of location-based mobile surveys.aside from the apple maps data, however, the vast majority of data published on changes in human activity behavior has focused exclusively on the united states. in this work, we are interested in how the residents of different countries respond to their government's policies related to covid-19, therefore identifying the place-based activity responses of people from a range of countries is essential. with this goal in mind, we make use of the google community mobility dataset. this dataset is an aggregate of the place-based activity behavior of millions of individuals as collected through their location-enabled mobile devices. if a mobile device user has google location services enabled (required when using the google maps application), their location data is anonymously collected, aggregated with other users across a region (e.g., country or district), and reported in one of six place type categories. further information on these categories is discussed in section 3.1. not only are these data based on one of the most widely used location-based services on the planet, but the data is also passively collected thus reducing the bias of the mobility patterns, as compared to active collection such as surveys or "check-ins" [10] . for the purposes of this research, this data is an ideal representation of activity response to the covid-19 pandemic and forms the foundation on which we conduct our analysis.as of early may 2020 (time of writing) most governments have responded to the crisis to the degree they are likely to, and we are currently observing many governments announce plans to lift lock-downs, relax mobility restrictions, and re-open their economies. now is an opportune time to examine the relationship between government action and resident response with respect to place-based activities. understanding how residents of certain countries responded to their government in a time of crisis is essential for predicting how people may react in future crises and exposing the dynamic between politicians and their constituents in difficult times. it also 1 https://visitdata.org/index.html helps us to identify which countries respond to crises in similar (or different) ways. with these objectives in mind, our analysis focuses on developing three assessment measures on which to compare and contrast countries through their response to the covid-19 pandemic. these assessment measures will be developed by addressing the following five research questions (rq).is there a quantifiable relationship between the policies enacted by a country's government and the place-based activity response from their inhabitants? for instance, is the magnitude of policy action mirrored by the magnitude of activity response? do countries differ in their responses? this question helps us understand whether the changes in activity patterns that we see world-wide are actually due to the imposition of government policies, or perhaps due to some other reason, e.g., international media. the differences between countries give insight into differences among governments in their ability to enact the envisioned policies.rq2 which of the six place-based activity categories, as reported by google, are most affected by policy action? do these remain consistent between countries? this helps us to identify which policies are most effective for influencing human behavior in order to limit the spread of covid-19, and also which policies are less effective. since limiting different kinds of activities will lead to different economic outcomes, better understanding this relationship helps us optimize our responses for the desired outcome.rq3 is there a measurable temporal lag between policy enactment and activity response? if so, does this lag vary between countries? during an exponential growth phase of a disease such as covid-19 a delay of just a few days can make a large difference in the outcome. understanding temporal lags between policy enactment and activity response is critical to inform policy-makers who are trying to quickly enact social distancing policies.rq4 does an increase in activity pattern variability within a country (at the subnational level) correlate with a decrease in similarity to government response (rq1)? this helps us to understand whether a unified, national response is more or less effective than one that is managed by regional and local governments.rq5 how does the relationship between government policy action and place-based activity response correlate with global indices (such as the development index or corruption perception index)? this last research question gives some insight into whether there are distal causes based on the socio-economic and political conditions within countries that influence how place-based activity manifests under government imposed lockdown conditions.the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. in section 2 we discuss existing work on this topic and related topics. an overview of the data used in this analysis is presented in section 3. section 4 presents the methodology used in developing the assessment measures and showcases how these measures can be applied to compare and contrast nations. this is followed by section 5 where we compare our three assessment measures with existing global indices. finally, our findings are discussed in section 6 and future work and conclusions are presented to the reader.we are still in the early days of the covid-19 pandemic. a burgeoning domain of biomedical research has developed around the virus itself with many researchers just now beginning 3to study the global societal impacts of the disease. much of the emerging peer-reviewed work has focused on the regions with early outbreaks. one such study by kraemer et al. [11] studied the correlation between real-time mobility data from the internet service company baidu and the spread of the disease in wuhan, china. the authors found that once the national government established control measures, the correlation decreased substantially. further work on the transmission rate of the disease found that travel restrictions enacted by the government delayed the epidemic progression by 3-5 days within china, but significantly slowed the spread elsewhere in the world [12] pointing to the global impacts of the policy actions taken by a single country. much of the response research being conducted on covid-19 is still in its infancy, but we can look to other recent global events to understand how nations and their people respond. there is an existing body of literature exploring the impact of natural disasters [13] , terrorism [14] , and economic crises [15] on human mobility and activity patterns. most of these studies define human mobility at the scale of migration between localized regions and little research has explored the day-to-day impact on the mobility of individuals or groups at a multi-national level, brought about by a global crisis.in attempting to find parallels to the current pandemic, we turn to research on the response to previous global pandemics. there have been a series of studies that explore the impact of human movement on the spread of diseases including influenza [16] , ebola [17, 18] , and infectious diseases in general [19] . many of these studies make use of local population datasets including mobile device call detail records (cdrs), location histories, and the results of travel/mobility surveys. for instance, dallatomasina et al. [20] used cellphone records to track the transmission of ebola in rural west africa with some success. early research out of brazil has shown this methodology to be useful in tracking the spread of covid-19 [21] . much of this work is a precursor to mobile device-based contact tracing applications that are currently in the works [22] . few studies, however, have had access to the breadth or volume of data now being collected and published by private technology companies as a response to this specific pandemic.as companies release their data to researchers, a growing body of work is emerging related to covid-19 mobility response. the vast majority of this work is focused in the united states with very limited work concentrated at the global scale. visualization tools for supporting analytics have been a target for many researchers [23, 24] . other efforts have investigated the relationship between political views and compliance with government policy [25, 26] . u.s.-focused research has also demonstrated that government policy that limits every day life has been shown to be having an impact on many sectors of the economy [27] . a recent study of high school students suggested that school closures and concerns over covid-19 are significantly impacting performance of students in their subject areas [28] and will continue to have a lasting impact on our education system. while limited data is available, similar educational and economic impacts are also being found outside of the united states [29] .similar work to what we present here has investigated certain economic factors that contribute to a change in place-based activity patterns (also using google community mobility patterns) [30, 31] . these efforts, however, did not look at government policy as a whole or the correlation of response over time. other researchers have used this data to predict specific countrylevel responses in the future [32, 33] . to the best of our knowledge, no research has investigated the relationship between government policy action and place-based activity response at the scale we present here, or using the range of methods we propose.the data used in these analyses are publicly available. for reproducibility, links to data sources have been provided as footnotes where appropriate. data produced from our analysis are available at https://platial.science/covid19code.in early april 2020 google began publishing static reports showing daily change in activity patterns starting from february 15th [34] . these reports, which google call their community mobility reports, 2 present plots containing daily percentage change from baseline (baseline being january 3-february 6, 2020) for six activity categories in 129 countries. the place types that contribute to these activity categories were determined by google and labeled as grocery & pharmacy, parks, transit stations, retail & recreation, residential, workplaces. brief descriptions of these categories are available in the google community mobility documentation. 3 in late april, google began providing the raw values for these data along side the original pdf reports. for this study, we are using activity reports that cover an eight week time period from february 15 to april 11, 2020. the maximum baseline change in the negative direction was 100% and 497% in the positive direction (an outlier due to a country-wide festival). an example of these activity patterns are shown in figure 1 along with the stringency index for the country (introduced in the next section). as nations around the world were faced with the spreading covid-19 pandemic, their governments responded with a range of measures and policy decisions. a team of researchers at the blavatnik school of government, university of oxford developed a tool to track these measures and produce a response dataset 4 that allows national policy responses to be compared across a range of measures. the key product of this coronavirus government response tracker is the stringency index. this index is made of up 13 indicators of government response, recorded daily for 149 countries. nine of these indicators assign an ordinal value to policy action related to school closures, travel bans, public event cancellations, etc. the other three focus on financial or monetary measures. the stringency index is calculated through a weighted combination of these indicators with a minimum value of 0 and maximum of 100. the index was calculated back to january 1, 2020 and through to at least april 11 (the end of our temporal analysis window). the full methodology for how this stringency index was developed is available at [35] . the dataset is currently being used in a range of preliminary covid-19 related analysis [36, 37, 38] .finally, we compare the results of our analysis to a number of other country-specific attributes and global indices. the latest population counts, areas, and population densities for each country were accessed from geonames.org. 5 the number of confirmed cases and deaths due to covid-19 were downloaded from the world health organization coronavirus dashboard. 6 two indices of global development were used, the united nations human development index [39] and the world bank world development indicators. 7 finally, the results of our analysis were compared against the corruption perception index [40] and the world press freedom index published by reporters without borders. 8 in this section we discuss the methodology used to assess the relationship between the stringency index, representing a country's government policy action, and the place-based activity patterns recorded via mobile devices, representing inhabitant response. we establish three methods of assessing the response: similarity in magnitude of response, lag response time, and subregional variability of the response.two different methods, cosine similarity and pearson correlation, were initially used in addressing rq1-assessment of the similarities between the stringency index and activity patterns. the cosine similarity approach views both sets of data as a set of vectors, measuring the cosine of the angle between each pair and producing a similarity value bounded between 0 and 1. while both cosine similarity and pearson's correlation are fundamentally variations on the inner product, they vary based on centering. for our purposes, cosine similarity is the most appropriate method for comparing activity patterns to government policy over time due to the fact that it is not invariant to shifts, a feature that is not true for pearson's correlation. we will use both of these approaches, however, for assessing similarity and report later on the correlation.given our hypothesis that activity patterns decrease over time in response to an increase in the stringency index, we first inverted five of the six mobility patterns, namely retail & recreation, grocery & pharmacy, workplace, transit stations, and parks in order to conduct similarity assessment (as opposed to dissimilarity). these five activity patterns are expected to decrease with an increase in government policy. the residential pattern, on the other hand, is expected to increase as government restrictions increase, so this was not inverted.after flipping five of the activity patterns, cosine similarity and pearson's correlation were calculated between each of the six categories and the stringency index for each country. averaging across all countries, the cosine similarities are shown in table 1 . the results of this analysis identify differences in the relationship of each activity pattern to the stringency index (rq2). three categories, transit stations, residential, and retail & recreation, all report relatively high similarity and low standard deviations suggesting that these similarities are relatively consistent across all countries. the workplace activity category clearly aligns with the stringency index though not to the same degree as the previously mentioned three. some potential reasons for this are explored in section 6. as expected, parks are least similar to the stringency index, and with a high standard deviation, which indicates there is considerable variation in this mobility pattern across countries. the grocery & pharmacy category is not as close to the stringency index with a larger standard deviation across countries than one might expect. again, some potential reasons for this are discussed in section 6. notably, the ranked order similarity for activity categories based on averaged pearson correlation is the same as that of cosine similarity.the previous section focused on the six categories and averaged across countries, here we average across activity patterns and compare individual country responses. we calculated the mean of the cosine similarity between each activity pattern and the stringency index for all activity categories excluding parks (due to the volatility and weather dependency of this category). this resulted in a single similarity value for each country. we also calculated the average pearson's correlation coefficient value in a similar manner. provided a cosine similarity and pearson's correlation for each country, we computed kendall's τ to measure concordance between the two measures. this produced a τ correlation coefficient of 0.602 (p < 0.01), indicating a high level of concordance between these two approaches.countries were then ranked based on their average activity pattern to stringency index similarity. in essence, this similarity value provides a relative indication of how a population responds to covid-19-related policy enacted by its government. a high average similarity suggests that an increase in government policy leads to a decrease in overall place-based activity. plots for three of the countries with the highest average similarity are shown in figure 2 with three of the least similar shown in figure 3 . the full rank of countries is available in the project data directory at https://platial.science/covid19code. visually we see a high degree of similarity in the magnitude and absolute slope of the lines in these figures, representing the actions taken by the government and the response from residents. exploring the countries with the least similar patterns, the country with the lowest value was south korea. further investigation found that this is solely due to the time window of our analysis. the peak of new cases in south korea occurred on february 29, 2020 and local health officials started testing airport staff on january 21, 2020. this is supported by the high stringency index value of 60 as it enters our analysis window on february 15th. similarly, japan, taiwan, mongolia, and hong kong all show high stringency indices entering our analysis window suggesting that if a substantial decrease in residents' place-based activity occurred, it likely took place prior to february 15th and adjustments from the baseline (the previous months as mentioned in the data section) would be quite small. the first country that entered our time analysis window with a relatively stable stringency index near zero was sweden followed closely by all other scandinavian countries. this supports reporting by journalists and policy risk analysts that scandinavian governments, specifically sweden, are approaching the pandemic differently than most other countries [41, 42] . tanzania (figure 3c ) is the country with the lowest cosine similarity between citizen activity response and government stringency index outside of asia or europe.the previous assessment method reported the similarity between the stringency index and the activity patterns overall without explicitly focusing on any one aspect of the curves. in some instances, however, there is a delay effect between the policy enactment and the response. we might see that the slope of the stringency index suddenly increases and three days later that change is mirrored by the activity patterns. in addressing rq3 we must first test to determine if there is a quantifiable temporal lag between government action and population response. if a lag response exists, we can then identify which countries demonstrate the smallest or largest response lags. the lag response analysis was done using a signal processing approach, calculating the crosscorrelation as a measure of displacement similarity between each place-based activity pattern and the stringency index for each country. the result is a vector containing the cross-correlation of the input vector based on lag. for example, if there is no significant lag between the stringency index and an activity pattern, the highest cross-correlation would be found at lag zero and diminish as lag increases and decrease. should a larger number of high cross-correlation values appear in negative lag positions, this indicates that a significant change in the stringency index occurred before a significant change in the activity pattern. given that our units are days, the lag steps are also days.rather than focus purely on the single lag value with the peak cross-correlation value, we instead calculate the number of lag days with cross-correlation values above a significance alpha value of 0.5 and split them into lag days above and below zero. we then subtract the number of remaining negative lag days from the number of positive lag days to produce our average lag for that activity pattern-stringency index pair. this approach is intended to be more robust than looking for the single highest cross-correlation value as it considers skewness in the lag distribution. this is a weighted approach to identifying the peak lag day as a function of all lags above the threshold avoiding an approach that ignores neighboring lag values in favor of a single peak.similar to our previous analysis, cross-correlation analysis was done between each activity pattern and the stringency index for each country and then averaged across all five activity patterns (excluding parks) producing an average, signed lag response in days. the countries were then ranked based on the lag response. three countries with the largest lag-as reported by a significant change in the stringency index occurring well before or after the citizen activity response-are shown in figure 4 . the vast majority of countries reported a negative lag response with a mean of -2.4 days. in a select few instances the lag response was positive. most of these could be explained by significant non-covid-19 related events. for instance, egypt's positive lag is due to a severe weather event on march 12, 2020. removing this event results in a lag of -4.0. the average lag time for each activity pattern was calculated across all countries and is shown in table 2 . the high standard deviation for each of these categories speaks to the high degree of global variability in this assessment measure. the grocery & pharmacy category reports the highest average lag time including the largest standard deviation. as many grocery stores were labeled essential services in many countries, and therefore not mandated to close, people could choose to go to a grocery store immediately, or a few days after, to stock up on supplies in response to an increase in government covid-19 related restrictions. of the 108 countries with suitable place-based activity data for our analysis, 46 of them also contain sub national regions (e.g., provinces or states) with their own activity patterns. while the stringency index is only reported at the national level, we thought it important to investigate the variation in place-based activity responses between subregions in the same country.to accomplish this task we extracted all subregional activity data and again split them by category. cosine similarity was computed for each subregion to each other subregion for each 10 category producing six matrices per country. the standard deviation were taken for each category matrix in each country. finally, we calculated the mean standard deviation across all categories in a country to produce a single "within country" variation value on which to compare nations. the purpose of this analysis was to determine the degree to which countries vary in their response to government action, within their own borders. the results speak to the power afforded national governments during crises. a low standard deviation indicates that communities within the same country responded similarly. a high standard deviation implies that communities in different subnational regions responded differently, possibly heeding advice from local governments instead of at the national level.the results of this subregional similarity analysis were compared to the results of our first cosine similarity assessment approach, namely the stringency index to country level activity average similarities, using kendall's τ method. the resulting concordance coefficient was 0.41 (p < 0.01) indicating that there is reasonably high positive correlation between the two results (rq4). this indicates that countries whose residents respond to national government policy actions by reducing activities are also more likely to respond consistently across subnational regions.to this point, two countries that exemplify this difference are the united states and new zealand. the united states ranked as having one of the highest sub-national region standard deviations, which is to be expected given the authority placed on state governors during the covid-19 pandemic and the hands-off approach of the federal government [43] . the similarity of the united states' country-level activity response to the stringency index was in the lower 30th percentile of all countries in our dataset. in contrast, new zealand ranked quite high in both measures reflecting the perceived authority of the national government and commonality of the response from residents across subregions within the country. overall the countries with the highest variation in subregional response were nigeria, uruguay, australia, usa, and canada. the countries with the least variation were clustered predominantly in europe with france, italy, and spain topping the list.next, we investigate how our three measures (cosine similarity, lag response, subregional variation) align with the spatial relationships of the countries themselves. first, we take a high level approach by calculating the euclidean distance between each pair of country response vectors. each vector is comprised of the six activity categories in each country. three response similarity distances are computed for each pair of country vectors. we then calculate the shortest geographic distance between each pair of countries in our dataset. 9 using the rank correlation approach, we computed the degree to which the geometric distance correlates with each of the response similarity distances. given the non-normal spatial distribution and size of countries, it is not surprising that the results, while significant, reported very low positive kendall's τ values for all three measures (cosine similarity, lag time, subregion variability).we then explore countries based on the continent to which they belong. the average similarity distance values for each of our three measures are reported in table 3 . these values are split by continent and also reported overall within the same continent and between countries from different continents. in general, there is a slight difference between the average similarity distance between countries within the same continent and those between continents. the difference, however, is less than one might expect implying, as reported by the previous correlation values, 9 using the postgis st distancesphere function that the spatial distribution explains little of the variability in country responses. there are, however, substantial differences between continents. for instance, the cosine similarity distance of countries within south america is quite low indicating a high degree of similarity between countries within this continent, at least as reported by their response to government policy actions. the number increases for lag response suggesting that though they responded similarly, there was greater variety in the lag response time than in europe, for example. this pattern is repeated for africa. the reverse, however, is true for oceania though it must be noted that data for only three countries were used in this analysis and papua new guinea had a significantly different cosine similarity response than australia and new zealand. these numbers should be interpreted relative to one another within the same measure, not as absolute values or compared across measures. taking a multidimensional scaling approach, we compress the cosine similarity and lag response distances (again based on vector similarity) into two dimensions in order to visually represent the similarities and differences between the countries in a 2d plot. figure 5 shows the results of this approach with countries assigned colors based on continent. this figure nicely visualizes a few important findings. the first is that there is a large cluster of countries that are all quite similar in their place-based activity response to covid-19 policy changes. it is difficult to single out any one specific country but we do see a mix of countries from different continents. second, we can identify a number of countries that exist outside of the main cluster and many of these countries are from the same continent, and in some cases, the same subregion within the continent, namely scandinavia. last, we can observe the outliers. our previous analysis indicated that south korea and japan responded very differently from many other countries, likely due to the fact that their governments responded before the temporal analysis window of our activity dataset. we also see that south africa and egypt presented very different responses, both of which have been mentioned in previous sections. while multidimensional scaling is a good visualization tool for displaying similarity between entities such as these, we acknowledge that it is a dimension reduction technique and so does not fully represent the nuances within the data.increasing the spatial resolution of our analysis, we assess the similarities in mobility responses between countries that share a border with those that do not. for our cosine similarity measure, those countries that shared a border reported a mean similarity distance of 0.378. those that do not share a border reported a mean distance of 0.589. a similar difference in mean distance was found for the lag response and the subregion variation measures. in pulling apart these distance values for each country pair, we found this to be the case in most countries but with a few notable exceptions. for instance, through this approach, germany is shown to be quite dissimilar from its neighbors based on cosine similarity, which mirrors what has been reported in the media [44, 45] . the united states and mexico were also quite dissimilar in their responses, considerably different than the united states and canada. the most similar countries that shared a border according to our cosine similarity measure are on the continent of south america, namely columbia and venezuela, ecuador and peru. the largest lag difference in neighboring countries was also identified in south america in columbia and panama, as well as central american honduras and el salvador. the neighboring countries that were most similar with respect to lag response time are india and bangladesh, with hungary and romania also being quite close. with respect to the subregion variation analysis, the most similar neighboring countries were italy and france (also highly similar for cosine similarity) followed by the czechia and slovakia. the largest variance was also found in europe between italy and slovenia as well as switzerland and france. figure 6 presents a visual representation of these similarities and differences through a dendrogram based on subregional variability. again, this is a subset of all countries where google published subregional activity patterns. one of the interesting things that this visualization shows is the degree to which kenya and nigeria (bottom two countries) are dissimilar from all other countries. this hierarchical clustering approach suggests that should all the countries be clustered into two groups based on their subregional variation, that kenya and nigeria would make up one cluster while all other countries would be in the second cluster. the analysis thus far has focused on the relationships between government policy action, as proxied by the stringency index, and the place-based activity response, as proxied by google's location services-based community mobility patterns. in this section, we explore the relationships between the findings of our analyses, country-specific attributes, and third-party global indices (rq5).one possible reason for the differences we see between countries could simply be attributed to basic information about the country such as size and population. to further investigate this we compute kendall's τ and find no significant rank correlation between our mean cosine similarities 14 and population, area, or population density. similarly, there is no significant rank correlation between response lag and these three variables. turning to the variation within country results, we do find a significant negative correlation between population and subregional variation (τ=-0.243; p<0.05) indicating that as the population of a country increases the variability of activity between regions decreases. no significant correlation was found with area or population density. turning our attention to the immediate discussion of covid-19, we investigated the relationship between our computed similarity values, the number of confirmed covid-19 cases per capita, and number of deaths due to covid-19 per capita, by country. these values were taken on the last date of our time window april 11, 2020. there was a positive correlation for each of these variables with our cosine similarity measure, τ=0.181 (p<0.01) and τ=0.160 (p<0.05), respectively. similarly, there was a negative correlation with response time lag, τ=-0.177 (p<0.01) and τ=-0.145 (p<0.05), respectively. finally, variation between subregions shows no significant concordance with number of confirmed cases, but slight negative correlation (τ=0.165; p<0.1) with number of deaths.on this, one might reasonably ask whether the changes in people's place-based activity were due to increases in confirmed cases or deaths rather than government policy responses to the disease. to address this we return to the stringency index and compare this index to the number of confirmed cases and deaths over time by country. given the difference in magnitude (stringency index is out of 100, while number of cases and deaths are limited only by the population of a country), we chose to measure the rank correlation of the variables rather than the cosine similarity. as was reported in [35] , there is a strong positive correlation between cases, deaths, and the stringency index. for our purpose, however, we find that the rank correlation between the average activity pattern and either confirmed cases (τ=0.610) or deaths (τ=0.569), by country, is lower on average than the correlation between activity patterns and the stringency index (τ=0.631). this slightly larger τ value suggests that a change in place-based activity patterns is more likely a response to government intervention than to reported numbers of cases or deaths, though the three are obviously highly correlated.next we compared the results of our three different similarity measures with the united nations human development index (hdi). this index consists of a large, and broad range of indicators but we restricted our analysis to the top five as identified by the un, namely hdi rank, life expectancy at birth, expected years of schooling, mean years of schooling, and gross national income per capita.we found no significant correlations between the cosine similarity and any of the top hdi indicators including overall rank. there was, however, positive correlation (τ=0.156 (p < 0.05)) between the hdi rank and our response lag measure suggesting that countries with a lower hdi rank demonstrated a greater lag response time to government policy action. three of the hdi indicators also correlated significantly with lag response time, namely life expectancy at birth (τ=-0.191; p <0.01), expected years of schooling (τ=-0.145; p<0.05), and gross national income per capita (τ=-0.126; p<0.1). comparing hdi to our standard deviation of similarity between subregions, we discovered no significant correlation with overall hdi rank or any contributing indicators.we next looked at a series of world development indicators (wdi) from the world bank. of the 284 indicators that were reported by the world bank, only five of them resulted in significant (p<0.1) correlation with our cosine similarity approach. they are financing through local equity market, quality of land administration, pupil to teacher ratio in primary education, diversity of workforce, hiring and firing practices. all τ values were quite low with the first three indicators showing positive correlation and the last two being negative.by comparison, 97 of the wdi significantly (p<0.1) correlated with our computed response lag with 25 of them reporting high rank correlation significance (p<0.01). of these, the most interesting, and highest correlation coefficients were found in life expectancy and infant mortality deaths, findings that reflect those of our comparison with the united nations hdi indicators. additionally, cases of tuberculosis and hiv/aids also positively correlated with lag time indicating that an increase in lag response occurred in countries with high numbers of these diseases.comparing wdi to our standard deviation of similarity between subregions, 53 of the wdi significantly (p<0.1) correlated with our measure with 10 of them reporting high rank correlation significance (p<0.01). the highest positive rank correlations were computed for gross domestic product (gdp), and foreign and domestic market size indicating that the larger the variance in activity responses within a country, the larger the gdp and market sizes of the country.finally, we looked at three different indices broadly related to the topic of transparency. the first of these indices, the corruption perception index, did not significantly correlate with any of our three computed measures. similarly, there were no significant relationships between the world press freedom index published by reporters without borders. lastly, we revisit one of the indices published by the world bank, namely public trust in politicians. as was reported by omission in the world bank section, this indicator did not significantly correlate with any of our three measures. these findings broadly suggest that overall, trust in government and transparency did not play a substantive role in people's reaction to government policy.the purpose of the research presented in this paper is to identify the similarities and differences in how the inhabitants of different countries responded to government policies enacted during the spread of the covid-19 pandemic. in this section we discuss the findings as well as the limitations in our approach and future work. we also describe an online tool for researchers and the public to further explore these data themselves.in addressing our first research question, rq1, we investigated the relationship between the policy actions taken by national governments and the place-based activity response from people living the countries. through our analysis we found that there is indeed a quantifiable correlation between the two. using two different measures, we demonstrated that an increase in the covid-19-related policies introduced by governments lead to a decrease in the mobility and activity of their population. we further demonstrated that the correlation between these two are greater than the correlations with the underlying causes of the policies, namely confirmed covid-19 cases, and deaths. investigating the countries themselves we found there to be significant variability in responses from country to country suggesting that some countries have a greater ability to actually enact envisioned policies than others.in comparing the six different place-type activity categories (e.g., grocery & pharmacy), we discovered that some types of activities were more responsive to policy changes than others (rq2). transit and residential-based activities were most responsive while grocery & pharmacy and parks showed the highest degree of variability between countries. these results were supported by the findings from rq3, namely that there is a measurable lag between policy action and activity response. on average the lag response equated to approximately 2.4 days across countries and activity categories, but again the grocery & pharmacy category demonstrated the highest degree of variability between countries. that this activity category would be the most volatile is reasonable in that groceries and pharmacies provide essential food and medication. while many of the activities related to the other categories could be lawfully enforced through closures, establishments offering access to essential supplies remained open, thus permitting visits and reflected through increased activity. the workplace category, while not as volatile as the grocery & pharmacy category also varied a bit between countries. in some countries we noticed weekly patterns in the data indicating that people were still going to work in some countries, even while the transit category remained low and residential was high. this requires further investigation but points towards the variability between country responses, equity issues, and enforcement of policies. we also identified considerable differences in lag time from country to country. some countries, such as new zealand reported virtually no lag between government policy and community response, whereas others, e.g., south africa, demonstrated a substantial lag (mean 8.5 days). of our three similarity measures, lag response time demonstrated the highest correlation with global indices including development indicators such as life expectancy, gdp, and market size.further to our goal of understanding the relationship between government policy and activity response, we investigated the variability of responses between subregions within countries. using a subset of countries for which google reports subnational activity patterns, we calculated the variability of responses for each subregion to the national government policies. we answered rq4 by showing that there are quantifiable differences in the variability of activity responses within a country. the ranking of these countries correlated with country-level cosine similarity and lag response values suggesting that countries who's residents responded quickly and with a similar degree of magnitude to the policy actions, were also more likely to respond similarly across subregions.in addressing our final research question, rq5, we compared our list of countries, ordered by our three assessment measures to a range of global indices developed and curated by leading multi-national organizations. a country's gross domestic product, life expectancy, and infant mortality deaths showed the highest correlations and suggest that there is a link between peoples' activity responses and a country's level of development. surprisingly, none of the transparency indices correlated with our assessment measures indicating that public trust or perceived corruption in government had little impact on whether or not residents of a country followed their government's advice.this work is not without limitations. the most notable limitation is the lack of transparency in how the google community mobility dataset was created. while this is a fantastic resource for researchers, very little is known about the data collection methodology, sample sizes, geolocation accuracy, etc. as researchers we are working under the assumption that the data released publicly is valid and is a representative sample of mobile device users around the world. this is a large assumption, but one we must live with given the limited availability of covid-19 related activity data. additional contextual factors may have played a role in assessing the similarity of activity responses as well. we know weather, for instance, affects mobility and place-based activity. as the covid-19 pandemic spread, northern hemisphere countries were just beginning to enter spring which itself causes a change in activity behavior. parks are likely the category most impacted by this, but other activity categories may have been impacted. similarly, the par-tisan politics surrounding government policies and activity responses were largely ignored in this analysis. a wide range of political hierarchies exist with many governments wielding most of the control at the national level and others delegating health-related policy to local districts and municipalities. indices that report on the political underpinnings of a country would be useful to include in future work.as we are currently in the midst of this pandemic, there are a lot of unknowns and it is not yet clear what the outcomes of covid-19-related government policies, nor activity reductions will be. future work on this topic will extend to analyzing people's response to relaxation of restrictive government policies and re-opening of economies. it would be interesting to determine if residents respond to policy relaxation in similar ways. additional datasets are being made available everyday and many of these datasets could be used in future analysis. while we compared activity response to three different measures, namely stringency index, confirmed cases, and deaths, more government-related response indices would be worth investigation should they become available.during our analyses, we developed a visual analytics platform for quickly comparing country responses across the range of activity categories (figure 7) . we decided to share this platform publicly with the goal of allowing the public and researchers to explore these data and relationships. the platform ingests all place-based activity data as reported by google, at the country level (and subnational level when available). users are encouraged to toggle between the different categories and regions to compare activity responses. the platform was built using javascript and the d3 framework 10 and is freely available to explore at https://platial.science/ covid19.the covid-19 pandemic will undoubtedly have a lasting impact on the global economy and society at large. while we are racing to coming to terms with the global impact of this crisis, it is important to investigate the early patterns emerging from the spread of this pandemic in order to help us plan for future crises or a potential second wave of this current disease. our focus in this paper was on gaining a better understanding of the relationship between the actions taken by national governments, with respect to covid-19-related policy, and the response of their inhabitants, specifically as it relates to their activities. we showed considerable differences exist between countries. three approaches were used to quantify the relationship between policy and response. though countries varied between measure, commonalities emerged. a number of the similarities and differences between countries can be explained through correlations with global indices such as market size, or life expectancy. not surprisingly, countries that share a border were also more similar in their activity responses. as this pandemic continues to spread and we look towards an uncertain future, understanding how people respond to their government is an important step in combating this crisis.the novel coronavirus, covid-19, was first detected in wuhan, china in late 2019 and within months had upended much of the normative activities of daily economic, social, and governmental life. the criminal justice system was not spared as virtually all aspects of the american legal system were faced with increased logistical and public health concerns overnight. the strain on criminal justice was felt perhaps nowhere as acutely as in new york city, the epicenter of the outbreak, where the nypd to date (may 25, 2020) has lost 43 officers with another 5793 testing positive for covid-19. police and correctional officers have become front-line workers during the pandemic with heightened exposure to high-risk situations and locations, often lacking the requisite personal protective equipment (ppe) necessary to reduce potential exposure. contact with the public combined with the health dangers posed by correctional and detention facilities generally have placed these workers squarely in the midst of a system-wide crisis. in a may 2020 survey of 32 state health departments, the cdc reports that at least 4893 inmates and 2778 staff have been diagnosed with covid-19, while 88 and 15, respectively, have been lost to the virus across 420 separate prisons and jails (cdc 2020) . the numbers are almost certainly higher.the immigration system similarly has been impacted by covid-19; this is especially true given the criminalization of immigration processes more generally in recent years. nowhere is this more so the case than in immigrant detention policies and practices. immigrant detention, a practice rarely utilized during most of the twentieth century, has increased since the 1980s and reached its peak during the trump administration. tens of thousands of immigrants are currently being held in detention facilities and local jails on any given day, far exceeding the number of beds reported by the department of homeland security (dhs). these conditions are ripe for spread of communicable diseases, and indeed, early reports indicate that these detention facilities may be hidden covid-19 hotspots.legal activity related to immigration policy and practice, if anything, has increased during the pandemic, with lawsuits being filed by detainees, staff, and legal organizations on behalf of immigrants. the aclu alone has filed 90 legal actions regarding covid-19, including state and city chapters that have filed lawsuits against u.s. immigration and customs enforcement (ice) detention centers and processing centers in california, maryland, massachusetts, michigan, ohio, pennsylvania, texas, and washington (aclu 2020a, 2020b) . as early as march 2020, a federal court in harrisburg, pa ruled that ice must release 10 individuals who had sued on the basis of being at high risk of contracting coronavirus (aclu-pa, 2020); similar decisions were handed down in new jersey and massachusetts. in april 2020, a federal judge in california ordered an ice detention facility to release detainees and facilitate social distancing (kopetman 2020), a ruling followed by a federal judge in miami who ordered three ice facilities in south florida to release detainees due to the pandemic (madan 2020a) . most recently, another federal judge ordered the government to better explain why it had yet to release more than 350 parents and children from three family detention centers (merchant 2020) .on march 15, a coalition of immigration system functionaries including judges, attorneys, and ice officers sent a letter to the u.s. department of justice requesting an emergency closure of the nation's immigration courts (brennan center, 2020 ).subsequently, a lawsuit was brought to suspend in-person immigration court processing during the outbreak, a petition denied by a federal judge in washington, dc (kruzel 2020) . the judge ruled that since the immigration system writ large had already modified its practices and protocols in light of covid-19, no sweeping stoppage of cases was warranted.the coronavirus outbreak has also provided the trump administration with a pretext for alterations to existing immigration policies. early on in the outbreak, dhs moved to close the southern border, immediately removing any migrants encountered by cbp by sending them back to mexico or central america within about two hours. those from other nations are transferred to ice for rapid deportation, including those potentially seeking asylum and children (associated press 2020). this order was first issued in march and has since been renewed in april and may, the latter of which notably had no end date. on may 19, 2020, the doj asked the 9th circuit court of appeals to "replace" the flores agreement, which would allow the administration to modify the rules governing the detention of migrant children and families in dhs facilities. though this too was predicated on stopping the spread of the coronavirus, the administration announced as early as 2019 its desire to modify the court settlement; flores was what also was used to justify family separation policies in 2018 (stracqualursi et al. 2019) . due to the public health and economic threat posed by the virus, the administration has also suspended immigration to the u.s. for at least 60 days beginning in april to limit competition for jobs (associated press 2020).the legal issues discussed above are myriad and dynamic, impacting various aspects of the immigration system, from lawful immigration to asylum seekers and refugees to unaccompanied children and detention center conditions. while each of these deserve full empirical attention, this paper focuses on three particular areas of immigration policy and practice during covid: ice enforcement actions, immigrant detention, and deportations. we summarize the current state of extant data and evidence on each of these and examine questions that remain for further research.on march 18th, 2020, ice announced that it would cease enforcement actions during covid-19, except for individuals who have committed crimes or pose a threat to public safety in an effort to decrease the spread of the virus and to encourage those who need medical attention to seek it. specifically, ice stated that "…during the covid-19 crisis, ice will not carry out enforcement operations at or near health care facilities, such as hospitals, doctors' offices, accredited health clinics, and emergent or urgent care facilities, except in the most extraordinary of circumstances…individuals should not avoid seeking medical care because they fear civil immigration enforcement" (ice, 2020) . ice also temporarily suspended in-person reporting requirements as well as home visitations. despite this announcement, ice conducted immigration raids in states such as california even after the governor had declared a state of emergency and issued a stay at home order (los angeles times, 2020). though it did make fewer arrests in april compared to march, ice still conducted operations leading to the arrest of at least 80 people in the los angeles area alone (perrett 2020) .other ice enforcement actions since the start of the coronavirus pandemic have taken place as well, including an arrest of an 18-year-old on his birthday residing in an office of refugee resettlement shelter in westchester, ny (sidahmed 2020) . this individual was then transferred to immigrant detention at a nearby county correctional facility at the height of new york's coronavirus surge. residents in san diego and riverside counties in southern california report increased border patrol checkpoints along i-15, a major throughway running north through the state from the mexican border, as well as checkpoints along state roads. increased use of "roving patrols" and at least four arrests since march 23 have also been reported to the media (srikrishnan 2020) .in the weeks prior to the march 18th announcement, reports surfaced that immigrants were being targeted at hospitals, courthouses, and their children's school (burness and hindi 2020; lanard 2020) . the miami herald reported that new arrests continued throughout the end of march including for those with non-criminal offenses (madan 2020b) . these arrests were particularly notable as these individuals were then detained in several south florida detention facilities which have since become plagued with coronavirus. these facilities have also been the target of legal action and ordered by the federal courts to release detainees due to unsafe conditions (madan 2020a ).though ice pledged to limit enforcement actions during the pandemic, the current situation in its detention facilities are significantly impacted by the administration's immigration crackdown in early 2020 when new york, for example, saw initial court appearances double in february and march compared to the december and january. in the weeks prior to the march 18th announcement, ice ramped up enforcement actions, including a march 6 raid in new rochelle, ny, just hours before the area being designated a "containment zone" by governor andrew cuomo (devereaux 2020) . major ice operations were also carried out in michigan and ohio in early february, well after coronavirus had gotten a foothold in the u.s. (warikoo 2020) .are u.s. immigration dentition centers a shrouded hotspot for covid-19?prior to covid −19, a growing body of evidence was accumulating that immigrants are exposed to dangerously poor health conditions and services within ice detention centers. immigrant adults and children in detention centers experience detrimental physical and mental health outcomes, as do family units and households outside the immigration detention centers (long 2018; ornelas et al. 2020) . for example, detained immigrants have increased levels of musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, respiratory, and neurologic symptoms while being detained and also commonly experienced anxiety, depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, difficulty with relationships, and self-harming behavior. immigration detention itself undermines family authority and ability to respond to their children's needs; this difficulty is complicated by parental mental health problems. in more extreme cases, immigrants' mortality and death have been associated with being detained (long 2018; ornelas et al. 2020) .a 2018 report titled "code red: the fatal consequences of dangerously substandard medical care in immigration detention" reviewed fifteen deaths that occurred in ice detention between december 2015 and april 2017 (long 2018) . with the help of medical experts, the report concludes that in more than half of those cases, substandard medical care including unreasonable delays, botched emergency responses, and poor practitioner care contributed to the deaths. many have argued that because immigration detention centers are private, the lack of transparent policy health procedures and practices contribute to poor health conditions and services common in these detention centers (ackerman and furman 2013; hernández et al. 2018) . others suggest that poor health conditions and services are common in immigration detention centers because of the social, political, and cultural construction as undocumented or "illegal" immigrants are inherently "criminal" who do not warrant public healthcare, attention, and care (ackerman and furman 2013; miller and peguero 2018; zarrugh 2020) . this leads us to our question for this section: are immigration dentition centers a shrouded hotspot for covid-19?although the situation changes on a daily basis, ongoing reports indicate that this system of inadequate medical access care and resulting poor health conditions and outcomes has only been exacerbated by covid-19. because the demand for medical needs are greater for everyone generally, the gap between need and supply has only become more apparent in detention centers. it is especially dire for people in such facilities, given that exposure to the virus can lead to relatively quick and lifethreatening consequences. like many facilities tasked with providing medical care, these detention facilities must now concern themselves with need for covid tests, personal protective equipment like gloves and masks, and increased access to medical treatments such as oxygen and ventilators.due to the highly contagious nature of covid-19, the crowded conditions of detention centers exacerbates the situation, placing those held in these facilities at greater risk for contracting and spreading the virus. this is true for those who are detained, as well as employees at these facilities. as of this article's writing, ice's website reports that: as of may 11, 2020, there are 29,675 people being detained, with 869 confirmed covid-19 cases, with 1686 having been tested. the website states that 42 ice employees working at detention centers have confirmed cases. numbers are updated on ice's website under the tab, "confirmed cases" (https://www.ice. gov/coronavirus).the heightened risk at detention centers can be evaluated in more concrete terms against cdc guidelines. in short, detention centers cannot meet those basic, general guidelines. social distancing of an ideal six feet is impossible to implement within detention centers given the spatial and physical limitations. this inability also means that if someone at a detention center (an employee or a detainee) contracts the virus, the likelihood of spread is increased, along with the potential speed and magnitude of spread. the danger of the situation is intensified in that many people may be asymptomatic carriers and spread the virus without knowing (johns hopkins university 2020); in cramped quarters, by the time symptoms start to show, many may have already been infected. additionally, people who are detained have limited ability to use disease prevention measures like hand-washing, both due to access and supplies; it is harder to practice medical isolation, which the cdc defines as: "confining a confirmed or suspected covid-19 case (ideally to a single cell with solid walls and a solid door that closes), to prevent contact with others and to reduce the risk of transmission" (ncird, 2020); and it is more difficult to institute a quarantine, which the cdc defines as "the practice of confining individuals who have had close contact with a covid-19 case to determine whether they develop symptoms of the disease" (ncird, 2020).acknowledging that facilities like jails, prisons, and detention centers possess significant impediments to these recommendations, the cdc has produced the article, "interim guidance on management of coronavirus disease 2019 in correctional and detention facilities" (ncird, 2020). in it, guidance for correctional and detention facilities is organized into three sections: (1) operational preparedness, which aims to prepare a facility for the situation of transmission of covid-19 into the facility, (2) prevention, which concerns preventing the spread from outside to inside of the facility, and (3) management of covid-19, which describes how to manage confirmed and suspected cases.yet still, numerous reports, internal strikes, and resulting lawsuits indicate that many facilities fail to meet these guidelines. per the lancet, "ice facilities do not have the staffing capacity or facilities to screen, quarantine to monitor for symptoms, isolate infected individuals, or deliver medical management in a setting with high rate of infection" (meyer et al. 2020 ). other reports have found a lack of needed supplies and ppe such as cleaning supplies, masks, gloves (trevizo 2020) , and some have noted that detainees are not being given ppe nor are they being tested, even when they are sick and showing symptoms of covid-19 (lippa 2020) . detainees have reported that "access to soap, hand sanitizer, and disinfecting equipment is very limited or nonexistent" (montoya-galvez 2020d).as a result of these conditions, detainees at facilities across the country have organized related strikes and protests. some examples include hunger strikes that have been organized across california, including a 200 person strike at otay mesa detention center in san diego (where, at the time, 120 detainees had confirmed cases) (plevin 2020) and a strike at adelanto ice processing center prompted by staff's failure to provide detainees ppe including masks, gloves, and cleaning supplies (castillo 2020) . protests have also been organized in detention centers in louisiana (montoya-galvez 2020d), and at least five hunger strikes have taken place at an ice processing center in pearsall, texas alonesome because detainees are asking for information (as detainees have reported being given false information about numbers and not being told about who has the virus), and some for greater testing after positive cases (trevizo 2020) .since the spatial parameters of detention centers precludes the cdc guidelines of medical isolation and quarantining, many are instead using a practice of cohorting, which refers to isolating cases in groups and quarantining groups of people together who have possibly been exposed. while the cdc outlines this practice in its guidelines for detention centers, it is intended as a last resort. one federal lawsuit has already been filed which "alleges immigration officials are violating cdc guidelines by using cohorting instead of releasing immigrant detainees where possible" (joffe-block and fernández 2020a). since immigration detention is a civil, and not criminal matter, "ice has the broad authority to release its detainees, including by placing them in programs in which officials monitor them through ankle bracelets or check-ins" (montoya-galvez 2020f), and many similar lawsuits have been filed pushing for releases.as of may 15, 2020, the aclu website states that it has filed 90 legal actions regarding covid-19 (www.aclu.org). these include state and city chapters that have filed lawsuits against ice detention centers and processing centers in california, maryland, massachusetts, michigan, ohio, pennsylvania, texas, and washington (american civil liberties union 2020a; american civil liberties union 2020b; aclu massachusetts 2020; aclu pennsylvania 2020; carmody 2020; coleman 2020; hancock 2020; morrissey 2020.) an ongoing list of other organizations also filing lawsuits includes the university of miami school of law's immigration clinic, the southern poverty law center, rapid defense network, legal aid service of broward county, and the law firm of prada urizar, pllc (splc, 2020). many of these lawsuits are seeking the release of detainees, some with focus on high risk groups. other groups, like the new york lawyers for public interest (nylpi), have published reports documenting the poor conditions of detention centers and the increased urgency of these conditions in this era of covid-19. the nylpi report, "still detained and denied," found "serious, often life-threatening deficiencies in the medical care provided to new yorkers in area immigration detention centers" (nylpi, 2020). federal judges in some states have allowed for the release of small numbers of detainees who are at high risk for contracting the virus, but many advocacy groups and lawmakers say it is not enough to address the dangerous conditions in which detainees are being forced to exist (montoya-galvez 2020c). at the end april, a group of 26 senators signed a letter calling on the department of homeland security to investigate ice detention facilities to assess whether they have adopted necessary guidelines in regard to covid-19 (u.s. sentator d. feinstein, 2020).reports suggest a lack of transparency when it comes to number of confirmed cases. some inaccuracy comes from the testing rate; only about 5% of the population of people detained have been tested (trevizo 2020) . some reports note ice's initial unwillingness to share numbers about cases and that it took lawsuits to prompt ice to share this information (splc, 2020). other reports highlight instances in which ice has released information that is later contradicted, thus leading to questions about the accuracy of information provided (joffe-block and fernández 2020b). lack of transparency is a similar issue for employee cases. while ice reports numbers of confirmed cases among its employees at detention centers, this does not include the many other employees at these facilities who are not directly employed by ice (those who work for the county, or private health care companies, etc.) (gomez et al. 2020) .detainees are also facing greater impediments to having their concerns heard and their experiences during the pandemic shared. some detention centers are requiring lawyers to bring their own ppe to meet detainees (gomez et al. 2020) , and many facilities do not have teleconferencing that allows for confidentiality due to unsecure connections or having to have conversations in earshot of employees (gomez et al. 2020) . reports have also been surfacing about liability waivers: detainees being required to sign liability waivers in exchange for ppe (democracy now! 2020; proctor 2020; rivlin-nadler 2020) and detainees "being coerced into signing a paperwork that provides a positive evaluation of conditions in the detention center" (acevedo 2020). ice has also been minimizing and in cases outright denying some of the aforementioned strikes and protests in detention centers, despite reports and evidence otherwise (brown 2020; castillo 2020) .beginning in the 1980s, immigration law reforms merged practices from criminal law and justice with immigration law and enforcement, the cumulative effect of which was to create a murky area in which immigration policing practices and court processes are not regulated by the constitutional protections afforded to individuals within the criminal justice system (garcía hernández 2013); namely the 4th (search and seizure), 5th (due process), and 6th (right to counsel) amendments. individuals within 100 miles of u.s. international borders may be subjected to warrantless searches (chacón 2010) . noncitizens can legally be deported without judicial review (menjívar et al. 2018.) . though immigrants appearing in immigration court technically have a right to counsel, the immigration courts are in no way obligated to provide them with counsel if they do not provide their own; most are unable (eagly and shafer 2015) .this trend towards the tightening of immigration allowances while limiting protections increased under the obama administration as was evidenced through an upsurge in detention and deportation (miller and peguero 2018; ricciardelli et al. 2019 ). yet, under the trump administration the rate of detentions and deportations has escalated to unprecedented levels. policies enacted in the past three years that have contributed to this increase include: promotion of a u.s. southern border wall; implementation of zero-tolerance which ordered the separation of children from their families and their subsequent detainment without a clear means to facilitate reunion; deployment of 5000 u.s. soldiers to the southern border and sanctioned use of teargas on children and families trying to cross; and industrial tent facilities that housed over 3000 separated children adolescents without due process (hernández et al. 2018; van hook and glick 2020; zarrugh 2020) . it is important to note these policies and lack of protections for context as we move into our final considerations: first, how immigration policies both prior to covid-19 and under its guise are accelerating the u.s. towards a near total dismantling of protections for immigrant men, women, children, and families. second, through implementation of these policies, is the u.s. government spreading and deporting covid-19?since march 21, 2020, the southern border of the united states has been, in effect, sealed. the day before, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) had "issued a largely unnoticed but sweeping order authorizing the summary expulsion of noncitizens arriving at the border without valid documents" (guttentag 2020) . by application of a medical quarantine authorization, the order supersedes "the protections of the immigration and refugee laws through the use of an unreviewable border patrol health 'expulsion' mechanism unrelated to any finding of disease or contagion" (guttentag 2020) . in the six weeks between the order and the beginning of may, the u.s. expelled over 20,000 migrants (montoya-galvez 2020a) through either deportation to their country of citizenship or, for cross-border migrants, by processing and then returning them to mexico or canada (montoya-galvez 2020b); a process that takes, on average, 96 min (hernández and miroff 2020) . access to u.s. immigration courts is denied as is the opportunity to file a claim for humanitarian protection (montoya-galvez 2020a). individuals seeking refuge through asylum and unaccompanied children, groups that are normally protected by both u.s. and international law, have been pointedly targeted in the enforcement of this measure.between 2016 and 2018 the u.s. government initiated two immigration policies that were designed to function as barriers specifically to migrants seeking asylum: metering and the migrant protection protocols (mpp). according to the immigration and nationality act (ina), "any alien who is physically present in the united states or who arrives in the united states (whether or not at a designated port of arrival and including an alien who is brought to the united states after having been interdicted in international or united states waters), irrespective of such alien's status, may apply for asylum" (immigration and nationality act 1952). the practice of metering, contrary to the ina, works by requiring all requests for asylum to cross the border at a port of entry, and then limiting the number of people who are able to access asylum at each port of entry (frederick 2019; american immigration council 2020a) . guards at these border crossings direct individuals who are barred from the process to a point-person on the mexican side of the border where his or her name is placed on a waiting list, the backlog of which can require days or months of waiting in mexico with daily check-ins regarding an individual's list status (lu and watkins 2019) . under mpp, or the "remain in mexico" program, if access to make a claim of asylum is granted, the individual is given notice to appear in immigration court and then, as the program title suggests, returned to mexico to await the court date (american immigration council 2020a).in 2019, over 60,000 people were returned to mexico under mpp (miroff 2020) . as a result, improvised camps have sprung up along the border in mexico outside of ports of entry; camps that are lacking in basic sanitation, reliable access to medical services, food or water sources, and security (glass et al. 2019). the united nations high commissioner for refugees (unhcr) has issued a statement that they are prepared to fold them under their protection and management as refugee camps (van fossen 2020), and yet the u.s. and mexico have both been unwilling to declare the situation on the border officially "an emergency", the mechanism required for the unhcr to take over (van fossen 2020). unhcr refugee status would allow for three broad protections: 1) basic needs in the form of shelter and security; 2) the implementation of infrastructure necessary to support large-scale health initiatives; and 3) access to a lawyer (van fossen 2020). mexico's stated reasoning for denying the unhcr is they do not want permanent settlements (glass et al. 2019). the united states' logic is less well-defined, unless juxtaposed next to the goal of ending asylum along the southern border. according to elora mukherjee, professor of law and director of the immigrants' rights clinic at columbia law school, "given the complexity of immigration law and language and cultural barriers, the process of seeking asylum when someone is in the united states is hard enough. requiring asylum seekers to remain in mexico makes navigating the process virtually impossible" as it severely limits migrant's access to legal counsel (mukherjee 2020) . only 4% of those who "remain in mexico" under mpp have been able to access a lawyer (mukherjee 2020) . in 2018, the year before mpp was enacted, the u.s. granted asylum to 13,248 people (miroff 2020) . as of december of 2019, one year after mpp began, 29,309 cases had been processed, and 187 people were granted asylum (mukherjee 2020) .until the public health order of march 20th 2020, one group that was exempt from the asylum processes discussed above was that of unaccompanied minors, defined by u.s. law to be a child who is under the age of 18, has no lawful immigration status, and either does not have a parent or legal guardian in the united states or that parent/legal guardian is unable to care for them (homeland security act of 2002). resulting from the u.s. supreme court decision reno v flores, the flores agreement set standards of legal protections for unaccompanied minors in the custody of u.s. immigration agencies (wu 2018). these standards were codified by the william wilberforce trafficking victims protection reauthorization acts of 2000 (tvpra, reauthorized in 2003 (tvpra, reauthorized in , 2005 (tvpra, reauthorized in , 2008 (tvpra, reauthorized in , and 2013 . under tvpra, unaccompanied minors from non-contiguous countries must be transferred from cbp/ice custody to health and human services (hhs) office of refugee resettlement (orr) within three days (montoya-galvez 2020b). orr is mandated to keep the minors in the "least restrictive setting" until they can be released to either family members or approved sponsors while they wait for their immigration court proceedings (cheatham 2020) . under tvpra, dhs is mandated "'to the greatest extent practicable' that unaccompanied children in hhs custody have counsel. .. not only "to represent them in legal proceedings," but to "protect them from mistreatment, exploitation, and trafficking'" (american immigration council 2020b). in march of 2020, orr received 1852 from cbp custody. in april, that number fell to just 58 (montoya-galvez 2020g). understanding the scope of this issue is challenging due to the same transparency issues discussed previously in the section on detention under covid-19. the number of children, specifically unaccompanied minors, who have been 'expelled' under cdc order is not reported by the dhs, though multiple news sources have put that number, for the month of april, between 400 and 700 children (montoya-galvez 2020a; guttentag and bertozzi 2020), though immigration officials in guatemala have reported receiving 417 minors alone from u.s. custody since march (o'toole and carcamo 2020a).now, under the covid-19 public health order, the asylum system is, in effect, shut down for both accompanied minors and adults. the mpp courts have been closed through june 19, 2020, though that date could easily be pushed back (u.s. department of justice 2020). many of those awaiting asylum hearings are forced to continue to wait in the border camps discussed above, without access to basic needs or medical services. like the detention centers, the camp conditions are primed for the proliferation and rampant spread of the virus. the legality of such a closure has been questioned by immigrant rights groups and legal experts (guttentag 2020) . the one avenue to protection that remains open is through the convention against torture (cat) (miroff 2020) , a form of relief for which the barriers to attainment are higher than those of asylum but with fewer the protections granted (american immigration council 2020a). limitations of cat that are allowed through asylum status include the inability to apply for a green card, to bring family members to the united states, and ever leave u.s. soil without losing their cat status (american immigration council 2020a). between march 21 and the beginning of may 2020, 59 screening interviews were conducted by uscis, 54 applicants were rejected, and three cases were pending. only two people had been granted cat protections (miroff 2020) .although it is under the auspices of a public health emergency that the united states has temporarily stopped processes for the issuing of green cards and asylum claims, limited access to immigration courts, prevented the placement of children with "foster families", and turned away hundreds of unaccompanied minors at the border, ice air, the transportation arm of immigration and customs enforcement (ice) responsible for arranging transportation and deportation of immigrants by air, is part of the precoronavirus system that has continued to function with efficiency since march. these deportations are pulling individuals from detention facilities where, as discussed previously, both physical structures and covid-19 cohorting policies provide a perfect storm for rapid spread of the disease, and the scope of disease incidence is not well known due to limited testing. thus far, one out of every two people who have been tested had positive results, though as of this writing that accounts for less than 5.7% of detainees (ice, 2020) . since president trump declared covid-19 a national emergency on march 13, 2020 (united states government 2020), a good deal of evidence exists to suggest that the united states, the epicenter for coronavirus, is actively exporting the disease, particularly to central america and the caribbean.while statistics on the number of detainees who have been deported through ice air since the u.s. declaration of a national emergency are not publicly available, an analysis conducted by the center for economic policy and research determined that between march 15th and april 24th, ice air made 71 flights, collectively, to guatemala, honduras, el salvador, brazil, nicaragua, ecuador, haiti, and the dominican republic (johnston 2020) . as of april 17, 2020, the ice screening process for detainees boarding ice air flights consisted of a temperature check in the flight line. those with a fever above 99 degrees are removed for medical evaluation (u.s. immigration and customs enforcement 2020). according to an ice spokesperson, they lack capacity to administer tests to all passengers on ice air flights. prioritizing who gets tested depends on "evolving operational considerations" (montoya-galvez 2020e).deportees to haiti, mexico, jamaica, guatemala, and columbia have all tested positive for the virus upon arrival in their home countries (mohammed et al. 2020) . twenty-percent of guatemala's covid-19 cases have been traced directly to the covid-positive status of returned detainees (montoya-galvez 2020e). haiti, already on the edge of famine, has only 62 ventilators for a population of over 11 million people (sieff and miroff 2020) . its capacity for quarantine exists within four hotels with 111 beds. since april, all 111 have been designated to migrants returned on ice deportation flights (charles 2020) . in recognition of this, the governments of both guatemala and haiti have repeatedly asked the u.s. to temporarily cease ice air flights o'toole and carcamo 2020b) . guatemala has gone so far as to stop deportations from the u.s. three times, first on march 17th, by suspending all incoming flights in order to create the space and time for both their government and the u.s. government to establish health protocols to help them address the covid-19 deportation crisis (mcdonnell et al. 2020; madan and charles 2020) . as of late april, the u.s. began testing immigrants prior to deportation (narea 2020); but, as noted above, the testing is in no way comprehensive. the danger covid-19 poses to health systems in countries with already vulnerable public health infrastructure is both direct and potentially catastrophic. it will overwhelm marginal economic systems, further exacerbating living conditions that demand of many that they must migrate in order to survive.the issues examined here confirm three realities for the u.s. immigration system. first, despite a stated moratorium on ice enforcement (i.e., police) actions issued in march, agents continue to conduct immigration raids, set up checkpoints, and make arrests. while ice cautioned that it would continue to take action against undocumented immigrants that pose a public safety risk, the criminal records of many of those targeted are hardly what one might expect to justify police raids during a pandemic (e.g., drunk driving, drug possession). there are also reports of ice detaining other immigrants along with the original targets of the raids including family members or associates that are simply nearby. these anecdotes, coupled with a distrust of ice more generally, has reportedly led to widespread fear that these continued enforcement actions may prevent the sick from seeking medical treatment if they are undocumented.evidence to date also indicates that ice detention facilities are likely shrouded covid-19 hotspots. insofar as detention facilities generally are unable to adhere to cdc guidelines and testing is limited and sporadic, it is improbable that these locations can effectively detect and control the virus when it is present. indeed, a litany of legal actions have been undertaken to remedy some of the most obvious problems and facilities in the ice detention system, though the agency generally has been slow to respond to these directives. moreover, there is evidence that instead of releasing detainees, many are simply shuffled around to other facilities with more space available; in some cases, such as in south florida, these receiving facilities have already experienced a covid outbreak.finally, data gathered to date indicate that deportations have continued during the pandemic and the asylum system has been, in effect, dismantled by the administration's response. these deportations are concerning for at least two main reasons; first, that the u.s. continues to violate its own, and international, law regarding asylum claims; second, that u.s. policy is contributing to the spread of coronavirus throughout latin america and the caribbean. as noted above, deportees to haiti, mexico, jamaica, guatemala, and columbia have already tested positive for the virus upon arrival in their home countries (mohammed et al. 2020 ) and 23% of guatemala's coronavirus cases have been traced directly to the covid-positive status of returned detainees (montoya-galvez 2020e). as additional data are gathered, there are sure to be further cases linked to the u.s. immigration system.though the production and acquisition of empirical data related to covid-19 and the immigration system are in its infancy, this paper sought to highlight how covid-19 global pandemic has changed our current understanding of the relationships between immigration policy and justice in the u.s. it is also important to note that we are only in the initial stages and logically the beginning of even understanding or hypothesizing how covid-19 will impact u.s. immigration policy and justice as well as how other nations attempt to grapple with the complexities of immigration and justice during a pandemic. the emerging reports, arguments, and conceptualizations of u.s. immigration and justice discussed here only highlights the important advances to be made towards better understanding the correlates, contexts, and interactions of u.s. immigration policy and justice during a global pandemic. we encourage future research to further expand our evidence-based understanding of how covid-19 has impacted u.s. immigration policies and practices, particularly in regard to the pursuit of justice. but, more importantly, it is vital to utilize evidence-based research to pursue just u.s. immigration policies and practices in this covid-19 era.around the same time, g20 energy ministers promised to work together to stabilize oil prices, but did not make any specific commitments on production restrictionsleaving the cuts to market forces, which could take out well over 5 mn bpd (see non-opec-plus supply cut section below), according to latest (late april) estimates.the opec-plus decision to cut came after a supply free-for-all in march, in which saudi arabia saw an opportunity to gain market share at the expense of lower cost producers after russia failed to go along with cuts to balance the initial impact of covid-19. but pressure from the united states (which still has considerable clout in saudi arabia due to the strong military support it provides), and the sheer scale of the collapse in demand, persuaded the saudis and russians back to the table.but the pullback and attempt to balance the market were insufficient, even before the issue of compliance. this is partly due to the earlier supply surge, but mostly it is the dramatic crash in demand-which, with over a third of the global population under some form of lockdown, has fallen more sharply than ever before (see demand section below). the degree to which crude prices fall and their duration at low levels will be key in determining how much additional production gets shut in for commercial reasons. high-cost, unhedged output will be first to go, or that without easy access to storage or wider markets, with the atlantic basin likely to be worst affected.the split of state-imposed cuts to cuts made on commercial/logistical grounds is not yet clear, but likely to end up around 60:40. the united states is expected to see a sharp fall, along with high-cost production in the canadian tar sands, the north sea (see non-opec supply section below) and even in countries like india, where cairn has said it will cut expenditure and output. even some opec members will see commercially driven cuts of this sort. nigeria, for example, appears to be having problems selling march and april loadings, leaving multiple vessels without buyers, making shut-ins inevitable.because of high freight rates (due to a ballooning of floating storage and recent supply surge) and limited options to market, it is us onshore shale output, along with light sweet grades in the atlantic basin that are being hit hardest-as illustrated by the weakness of wti and nigerian situation-along with any other grades that compete with saudi supply. saudi arabia remains the world's lowest cost producer (at about $8/bbl) and has aggressively cut official selling prices (osps) in key markets in asia and europe in order to displace competing grades, such as russian urals in europe and us light sweet shale oil and other atlantic basin grades (including nigerian and angolan) in asia.with saudi arabia committing to the largest share of the opec-plus cuts (alongside russia) through may and june (see opec-plus supply cut section below), its subsequent price discounts into asia and europe are intended to put pressure on other suppliers to cut prices and/or volumes further, pushing them to the limit and hopefully knocking out some higher-cost production, from which it can absorb market share once demand recovers.saudi crude flows to the united states are also up sharply, provoking calls for import bans or tariffs on crude imported into the united states to protect local producers. refiners only have room for reduced deliveries, so some imported or local supply is having to be canceled or deferred. if too many us companies go under as a result of this saudi competition, those arguing in washington for a reduced military presence in the gulf, largely in support of saudi arabia, will gain groundsomething saudi wants to avoid while still recovering market share it has lost since 2017; so it is still a balancing act for them. whiting petroleum, a major oil and gas producer in the bakken shale and denver-julesburg basin, was the first us independent to file for bankruptcy in late april, and more are expected.saudi arabia should be able to maintain this pressure for a while, given its low-cost production. however, it also requires among the highest oil prices to balance its books (about $80/bbl) and has few alternative sources of revenue. russia requires a lower price of around $40/bbl but has been hard hit as prices fall below $25/bblespecially in key markets where saudi osps have been most heavily discounted. non-opec producers, on the other hand, do not rely on oil revenue, and may be willing to support the sector temporarily during the downturn-and there have been indications to this effect in asia and the united states. this could prevent much of the high cost oil being lost, leaving the market unable to clear without deeper cuts from opec-plus or less resilient/interventionist non-opec sources.one support option being considered in the united states is a lending program for oil companies, which could provide essential cash to as many as 50% of the largest 60 independent us oil producers, which are likely to need it need it in order to stave off bankruptcy, according to lawyers haynes and boone. major oil companies, on the other hand, remain relatively cash-rich, sheltered by their extensive mid and downstream sectors. they are likely to absorb the impact of low prices through capex and probably dividend cuts. for example, exxon has reduced capex by 30%, similar to other majors, and equinor cut its q1 dividend by two-thirds (bp has not cut; others yet to announce).there has even been pressure in the united states to join opec-plus in its top-down cuts. but while united states cuts were implicit in the mid-april deal, us president trump did not say whether washington would impose any on us producers, beyond those they are imposing on themselves for commercial/logistical reasons. at a state level, the texas railroad commission (trc) is still considering a top-down approach, encouraged by larger permian basin players such as pioneer natural resources and parsley energy, although the majors and many other companies are against it, and there are considerations around us anti-trust laws that raise questions over the legality of such a move. the trc used to enforce cuts and acted as an opec-style market f i g u r e 1 june brent futures (intercontinental exchange) balancer until the 1970s. a ban on flaring was another suggested way to cut us output, as was a closure of us gulf production (around 2 mn bpd), which also fitted in with covid-19 quarantine proposals, although neither of these options looks likely.in its monthly oil market report on 15 april, the international energy agency said the opec-plus and other cuts were "unlikely to be enough to rebalance the market in the near-term but could aid a quicker recovery in the second half of 2020, helped by consumer countries topping up their strategic reserves."the imf, which predicts the world is set for the worst recession this year since the great depression, said: "the [opec-plus cuts] complemented by further production cuts by oil exporting g20 economies, could provide some support to oil prices, particularly if global demand increases." the imf is assuming oil prices of $35.61/bbl on average in 2020 and $37.87/bbl in 2021, which combined with the output cuts could cost middle east and north africa oil exporters more than $230 bn in crude revenue this year, while their breakeven oil prices are set to rise.if enough supply in taken offline, there could be a rebound in prices as demand recovers later this year and into 2021, because once capacity is damaged, it is expensive and often technically difficult to re-instate.the scale of the demand decline due to the lockdowns and travel bans is so far difficult to quantify, with estimates ranging from 16 mn bpd to over 25 mn bpd through q2 and dropping back to differing degrees after that.fact global energy said it sees global oil demand down by 7.9 mn bpd in 2020. the iea expects global oil demand to collapse by 9.3 mn bpd over the year and said that 2020 would be "worst year" in history of global oil market. it expects non-opec supply will fall permanently by at least 2.3 mn bpd. by mid-april, rystad energy said global oil demand was on track to collapse by 9.4 mn bpd in 2020, or 9.4%, due to the lockdown measures-which it revised up to 10.3 mn bpd at the end of the month.the worst month is expected to be april. rystad said global fuel consumption is expected to drop almost 28 mn bpd in april to 72.6 mn bpd, and 21 mn bpd in may as a result of covid-19 lockdowns and restrictions on travel. goldman sachs put the april number slightly lower at 26 mn bpd due to "lockdowns affecting over 90% of global gdp." fact put the april fall at 24 mn bpd year on year. earlier in april, platts said it expected oil demand to shrink by a record 16 mn bpd in april and may, with year-on-year demand falling at least 4.5 mn bpd in 2020the lowest of the forecasters reviewed.there are some signs of recovery already, with china slowly ending its lockdown and parts of europe beginning to loosen restrictions. in fact, china has maintained strong demand for crude throughout the epidemic, although much of this went to storage (see below). there were moderate falls in consumption and refinery throughput in february and march, but that has now reversed. this is not yet the case in the united states and europe, where demand remains (at end april) sharply down alongside refinery throughput.demand is projected to rebound sharply later this year and into 2021, although there are questions over whether it will ever return to the 100 mn bpd level, with key consuming sectors such as aviation and other travel likely to see long term impact from covid-19. longer term, the cheap oil could offset any virus-related decline by improving its competitive position relative to alternatives.rystad said it saw jet fuel being hit the hardest this year with global demand falling 31% year on year, or by at least 2.2 mn bpd. total demand for road fuels will fall by 9.4%, or by 4.5 mn bpd, from estimated 2019 levels of 47.7 mn bpd.in the united states, total product demand fell for six consecutive weeks by a total of 37% from early march amid widespread state and local stay-at-home orders (see figure 2 ), although there was a rise in the week to 17 april of 306 000 bpd, putting consumption at just 14.10 mn bpd-the lowest on record, according to the eia. the most recent value is 31% lower than the 2020 average from january through 13 march, or before many of the travel restrictions began.in europe, the demand situation appears even worse. the uk's car use rate sank to about 20% or less in many places through april, with the country's biggest fuel retailer, supermarket giant tesco, reporting fuel sales down by 70%. in france, the demand drop is estimated between 70% and 90% for road fuels and 95% for jet fuel, according to fge. italy and spain have been particularly badly hit, with demand slashed by up to 80% for gasoline.indian demand for refined products fell 17.8% year on year in march to 4.07 mn bpd, according to provisional data from the petroleum planning and analysis cell, due to a lockdown lasting 6 weeks, which was implemented 25 march; so the effect in april is likely to be much more severe. diesel was down 24.2% year on year in march and gasoline down 16.4%. jet fuel demand slumped 32.4% year on year as flights were grounded. lpg demand however increased as more turned to home cooking.the middle east faces an economic downturn due to low oil prices, as well as the impact of the virus, so while it has yet to be as severe in this region, the drop in consumption of oil products could last longer. after being a driven of global demand growth for many years, demand for oil products there is expected to drop by 2.9% this year, with jet fuel/kerosene consumption down 15% and gasoline 6%, according to platts mid-april.china, on the other hand, has already begun to ramp up oil purchases due to the low prices. imports rose 4.5% in march year on year to 9.68 mn bpd, according to china's general administration of customs data. 2 china's january and february oil imports averaged 10.47 mn bpd, while its q1 imports averaged some 10.2 mn bpd-a 5% year on year rise. this was despite a fall of 6.9% in gdp for the first quarter, indicating a high level of stock build-driven by the eagerness of chinese buyers to snap up cheap cargoes, further enhanced by the saudi osp discounts.opec's 13 members, along with their 10 partners in the larger opec-plus group, have agreed to reduce their supply by 9.7 mn bpd in may and june. there will be the normal caution over compliance levels, although given the weakness in demand, it may be difficult even to sell the allocated volumes. the cuts will then be eased to 7.7 mn bpd between july and december 2020, and then 5.8 mn bpd between january 2021 and april 2022, according to the agreement.russia and saudi arabia will use 11 mn bpd as a baseline for the reductions, which they will split evenlyunlike previous opec-plus deals, where saudi arabia has born the bulk of cuts and russia very little. for other producers, the baseline will be their output in october 2018 (the basis for previous cuts), which is seen as an advantage for the world's two biggest exporters, as the 11 mn bpd baseline is up on both saudi arabia's october 2018 production of 10.63 mn bpd, and russia's 10.75 mn bpd.the split of the cuts from the 11 mn bpd baseline includes 2.5 mn bpd for saudi arabia and russia, which will bring their output down to 8.5 mn bpd each in may and june. both countries will then ramp up output to 8.99 mn bpd for the second half of 2020, and then to 9.5 mn bpd for all of 2021 through to april 2022. it may be more difficult for russia to control output to this extent for technical and commercial reasons, and a key challenge will be to ensure higher-cost, mature fields do not end up closing permanently.however, currently (end-april) saudi output is running well above both target and baseline. according to mees, saudi arabia managed to reach its promised 12 mn bpd production figure (a target following the breakdown of opec-plus on 6 march) in early april, and is likely to average its highest ever of 12.3 mn bpd for the month as a whole-so the actual cut for may will have to be close to 4 mn bpd if the kingdom is to meet its deal commitment. aramco confirmed on 17 april that this was its intent.on the other hand, production in russia, iraq, and venezuela had already been hit by the price collapse (and competition from discounted saudi barrels) by mid-april-including falls of 300 000 bpd in iraq and 235 000 bpd in venezuela. russia produced 11.25 mn bpd liquids in march, with 10.60 mn bpd of this being crude, and this is expected to be lower in april-so the actual cut it will need to make in may will probably be <2 mn bpd. another sharp cut amounting to almost 1.5 mn bpd has been pledged by the uae, which also ramped up production heavily after the 6 march opec-plus breakdown, to a record 3.42 mn bpd in march, reaching over 4 mn bpd at the beginning of april. this will have to come down to below 2.5 mn bpd. iraq also has a big cut of about 1.06 mn bpd (around a quarter) to make in may and june, with kuwait and other opec members cutting a similar proportion.nigeria has to cut from around 2 to 1.4 mn bpd under the deal but may go lower still as it struggles to sell its oil. up to 50 mn bbl of unsold nigerian cargoes remained on the water in mid-april-this was not a deliberate cut by nigeria, but a simple lack of demand for its crudepartly due to its high jet and gasoline yields and discounts among competing saudi grades, as well as run cuts in europe and asia, and high freight rates on what is a long-haul route to market. so, nigeria may have fulfilled its entire commitment under the deal without acting and before saudi arabia has even started reining in record export levels.altogether, increases in output from saudi arabia, uae, and kuwaiti saw opec output at a 3-month high of 28.97 mn bpd in march, according to platts, with compliance among the 10 opec countries with quotas collapsing to 13% from 120% in february. this was despite sharp declines among the three members exempt from quotas (iran, libya, and venezuela), where production continues to fall, particularly in libya due to civil war (see looking ahead).other countries not in opec that are cutting include kazakhstan and azerbaijan, where government-imposed cuts are being made to large projects operated by oil majors for the first time. these include the azeri-chirag-guneshli project, which is led by bp alongside partners, exxon mobil, equinor, inpex, and mol. azerbaijan will need to cut its production for 2 months starting in may by 75 to 80 000 bpd, or about 15% of its output.the april deal also includes norway, canada, united kingdom, mexico, and the united states, although most of the commitments here are likely to come as a result of commercial decisions to shut-in high-cost crude due to low prices or for logistical reasons, rather than governmentimposed cuts; and the lower prices go, the more will be shut-in.energy intelligence group believes up to 7 mn bpd could be shut in for commercial/logistical reasons by june. citi estimates that such supply curtailments because of logistical bottlenecks and low prices could force 10 mn bpd offline temporarily in april. goldman sachs put the figure at 5 mn bpd. the greatest impact will be in the atlantic basin, where low prices, high stocks and the longest travel time to customers will likely lead to production curtailments in the united states, canada, brazil, and west africa.in mexico's case, after initially not agreeing to formal opec-plus cuts (only offset when president trump offered to cut on mexico's behalf), mexico said later in april that it would shut down new wells because of low prices. "now that oil has no value, we can shut down the valves," said mexico's president obrador. 3 argentina, which has long forced producers to sell domestically at discounted prices, plans to protect its producers including those in the vaca muerta shale patch, with a rise in domestic crude prices to $45/bbl.the biggest falls outside opec-plus are expected to come from the united states and canada, where wti prices of $20/bbl puts roughly 5 mn bpd of high cost crude production at risk of being shut in, according to experts. in the united states, strong output growth reversed in march and will continue to fall sharply in april and for the rest of this year and into next. by july it will be declining at a rate of over 200 000 bpd per month, according to the eia, and recent falls in wti prices may accelerate this.the falls will come from output declines as fresh drilling stops and from actual well closures. rig numbers in the us shale sector have already tumbled (to 438 in the third week of april according to baker hughes 4 ; down almost 50% on april 2019), indicating a sharp reduction in fresh drilling, which, given the rapid decline rates at us shale wells, will see output falling quickly. a halving of rig numbers is expected to see output down by about 700 000 b/d by december 2020 and around 2 mn bpd by december 2021. the canadian rig count has also dropped, reaching its lowest level since 2000.the volume of us well closures is so far unclear, but the eia expects an overall decline of 2 mn bpd by the end of the year, so that suggests the actual closure of about 1.3 mn bpd in output remaining to be cut after natural decline. more than 10% of us crude production comes from extremely low production stripper wells, which can come offline relatively quickly. operator cash position, hedging, quality, access to markets, storage options and operating costs are between them likely to determine where the rest of the closures occur. examples of companies cutting output include continental resources, which plans to curtail 30% in april and may, largely from its bakken production. similarly, parsley energy has begun shutting in about 400 of its less productive wells in the permian.in canada a number of major closures have already been announced in the high cost tar sands in alberta, while canada's western canada select oil, a heavy, acidic crude grade, is under particular pressure as it trades at a discount to benchmarks and has few outlets. tudor pickering holt estimates that as much as 20% or some 340 000 bpd of thermal oil sands production could be shut down due to the oil price slump, and by mid-april the country had already shut-in about 325 000 bpd.brazil and norway were also on the way to cutting their share by mid-april, with brazil down 200 000 bpd from mature fields onshore and in shallow waters, according to petrobras. the uk has also made a commitment to cut, although reduced output due to staffing issues around the corona virus and upcoming maintenance may be enough.most of the commercial and logistical shut-ins will come from independents and majors, with some non-opec-plus asian nocs (pttep, for example) saying they will continue with existing output and spending plans unchanged. majors are also exposed to quota-linked reductions among opec-plus members, with compulsory cuts being imposed at equity production, including in iraq, uae, oman and azerbaijan. longer term, reductions of up to 30% in upstream capex announced by majors will have a significant impact on output from these big producers, putting upward pressure on prices and expanding opec market share in future years.the collapse in global demand and surge in april supply is rapidly filling up the world's spare storage capacityencouraged by a steepening market contango, where future oil prices are higher than prompt.the iea's fatih birol said the filling of strategic stocks by countries would provide some relief to the oil market but would not be able to absorb all the supply surplus. "at least four countries, namely china, india, south korea and the united states, have either offered their storage capacity to industry to store their barrels or are increasing their strategic stocks to take advantage of lower prices," said mr birol in mid-april."this will provide greater headroom for the surplus supply peak in the coming weeks," estimating these efforts could take out 200 mn bbl. "assuming they happen in the next three months this could represent as much as 2 mn bpd of supply withdrawn from the market," he said.the us spr looks likely to be filled by private companies leasing storage, rather than government purchases, with congress not making public funds available. by mid-april, at least nine us oil producers were talking with the government over storing 23 mn bbl in the spr, according to the us doe. most of the deliveries will be received at the four main spr storage sites on the gulf coast in may and june. the spr would still have about 55 mn bls of capacity.commercial us reserves are also on the rise. as of 20 april, they rose to 503.6 mn bbl, or about 6% above the 5-year average for this time of year, with further sharp rises to tank-top anticipated for both crude and products over coming months.china and india are also filling their strategic reserves with cheap oil. india only has about 12 to 13 mn bls of spare capacity out of a total spr of 39 mn bbl. china has a great deal more, with strategic reserves expected to reach 1.15 billion barrels this year, as the second phase of its strategic reserve development is completed. chinese inventory levels have been rising at 2 mn bpd since the beginning of the year.floating storage is also a viable option. by mid-april, estimates suggested over 200 mn bbl of oil was already held in floating storage, including on 50 to 60 very large crude carriers (vlccs) and smaller tankers typically found in the us gulf of mexico and singapore. 5 in theory, the global crude oil tanker fleet can carry up to 3 bn bbl, but realistically, only 300 to 500 mn bbl are available, according to eig.some vessels have been booked to store crude for up to 3 years, potentially the longest ever duration for floating storage. storage costs have surged, supported by the steepening market contango. this has put upward pressure on freight rates generally, making it more expensive to move oil around the world, which is adding to market access problems for crudes with long haul routes to market, such as united states flows to asian refiners.russia's storage facilities are limited, and are not designed for long-term storage. russia's state pipeline and storage operator, transneft, is thought to have 422 000 bpd of capacity both for crude and products, including in the pipeline system, trans-shipment points and storage, according to platts. russia's four key export outlets on the baltic, black sea, and sea of okhotsk can store up to 55 000 bpd.refiners are responding to lower demand with run cuts. by 10 april, global refinery runs were down by about 14 mn bpd according to platts, with european outages at record highs and us refiners considering further cuts-although some cuts in asia were already beginning to be reversed by end-april. platts expects overall second quarter runs to be 10 mn bpd lower in 2020 than in 2019.in the united states alone, run cuts peaked at 4.77 mn bpd of crude distillation capacity in mid-april, and are expected to hit 5 mn bpd by the end of the month; and continue to decline beyond that. bp's us refineries were reported to be running at between 10% and 30% below normal in mid-april.asian refiners cut runs by 2.7 mn bpd in the first quarter of 2020 and are expected to cut throughput by at least 4 mn bpd in the second quarter, although they are likely to recover by june. china's state oil companies began raising refinery utilization rates mid-april due to recovering demand as industrial production and transportation resume. sinopec raised its run rates to 72% in march from a historical low of 64% in february and will further increase throughput in april, according to platts. petrochina's refineries, most of which are in northern china and inland, have cut their average throughput plan from 78% in january to 66% in february to 64% in march.refiners elsewhere in asia, including japan, are considering more cuts. japan is already facing excess crude supply of about 16 mn bls in june, as storage fills up and refinery runs are cut 14% to 20% (500 000 bpd and over) to balance reduced demand, leading refiners to delay term crude deliveries. indian refiners have also declared force majeure on some crude imports due to the lockdown there, with state-indian oil corp cutting throughput at most of its refineries by 25% to 30%. lockdowns in malaysia, thailand, and pakistan have also led to sharp run cuts there.south korea has also cut, but has seen less impact on demand, although stocks are filling. some of the cuts here will come from delayed commissioning and expanded maintenance. for example, sk energy has delayed commercial production from its new 40 000 bpd vacuum residue desulfurization unit. gs caltex has brought forward regular maintenance. european refining outages were around 2 mn bpd mid-month, with as much as 50% of downtime (about 600 000 bpd) linked to tanktop storage, despite strong margins as crude slumped.the steep saudi crude osp discounts to asian refiners mean they are likely to be protected to some extent compared to other regions, as well as ensuring saudi grades retain market share among asian refiners, at the expense of competing grades. saudi arabia has also left may 2020 osps to us refiners at relatively low levels, resulting in at least 20 saudi vlccs heading to the gulf coast, putting further pressure on us producers. for europe and the mediterranean, april's osp cuts have been maintained, continuing the discounts against russian urals' pricing, and making it difficult for russia to compete for sales.however the eventual supply cuts pan out, the industry is unlikely to ever be the same again, and covid-19 may have further, as yet unforeseen implications for demand-although there is the possibility that supply adjustment will enable a fresh balance in the market by later in the year, and some price recovery from there on.insertion-deletion systems, or ins-del systems for short, are well established as computational devices and as a research topic within formal languages throughout the past nearly 30 years, starting off with the phd thesis of kari [3] .however, from its very beginning, papers highlighting the potential use of such systems in modelling dna computing also discussed the replacement of single letters (possibly within some context) by other letters, an operation called substitution in [2, 4] . interestingly, all theoretical studies on grammatical mechanisms involving insertions and deletions omitted including the substitution operation in their studies. with this paper, we are stepping into this gap by studying ins-del systems with substitutions, or ins-del-sub systems for short.we put special emphasis on extending context-free ins-del systems with substitutions. we observe quite diverse effects, depending on whether the substitutions are context-free, one-sided or two-sided. we can characterize the contextsensitive languages by extending context-free insertion systems with substitutions, which can be seen as a new normal form for monotone chomsky grammars. for omitted proofs and further results, see [13] .an ins-del system is a 5-tuple id = (v, t, a, i, d), consisting of two alphabets v and t with t ⊆ v , a finite language a over v , a set of insertion rules i and a set of deletion rules d. both sets of rules are formally defined as sets of triples of the form (u, a, v) with a, u, v ∈ v * and a = λ. we call elements occurring in t terminal symbols, while referring to elements of v \t as nonterminals. elements of a are called axioms.let w 1 uvw 2 , with w 1 , u, v, w 2 ∈ v * , be a string. applying the insertion rule (u, a, v) ∈ i inserts the string a ∈ v * between u and v, which results in the string w 1 uavw 2 .the application of a deletion rule (u, a, v) ∈ d results in the removal of an substring a from the context (u, v). more formally let w 1 uavw 2 ∈ v * be a string. then, applying (u, a, v) ∈ d results in the string w 1 uvw 2 .we define the relation =⇒ as follows: let x, y ∈ v * . then we write x =⇒ ins y if y can be obtained by applying an insertion or deletion rule to x. we also write (u, a, v) ins or (u, a, v) del to specify whether the applied rule has been an insertion or a deletion rule. consider (u, a, v) ins or (u, a, v) del . then we refer to u as the left context and to v as the right context of (u, a, v) ins /(u, a, v) del .let id = (v, t, a, i, d) be an ins-del system. the language generated by id is defined by l(id) = {w ∈ t * | α =⇒ * w, α ∈ a}.the size of id describes its descriptional complexity and is defined by a tuple (n, m, m ; p, q, q ), whereby ins m,m n del q,q p we denote the family of all ins-del systems of size (n, m, m ; p, q, q ) [1, 12] . depending on the context, we also denote the family of languages characterized by ins-del systems of size (n, m, m ; p, q, q ) by ins m,m n del q,q p . we call a family ins 0,0 n del 0,0 p a family of context-free ins-del systems, while we call a family ins m,m n del q,q p with m + m > 0 ∧ mm = 0 or (q + q > 0 ∧ qq = 0) a family of one-sided ins-del systems. according to [1] , an ins-del systemof size (n, m, m ; p, q, q ) is said to be in normal form if -for any (u, a, v) ∈ i , it holds that |a| = n, |u| = m and |v| = m , and -for any (u, a, v) ∈ d , it holds that |a| = p, |u| = q and |v| = q .alhazov et al. [1, 12] have shown the following auxiliary result: theorem 1. for every ins-del system id, one can construct an insertiondeletion system id in normal form of the same size with l(id ) = l(id).in the following sections, we use a modified normal form for ins-del systems of size (1, 1, 1; 1, 1, 1). given an arbitrary ins-del system of size (1, 1, 1; 1, 1, 1), the construction of this modified normal form is as follows: construction 1. let id = (v, t, a, i, d) be an ins-del system of size (1, 1, 1; 1, 1, 1). without loss of generality, we assume {$, x} ∩ v = ∅ and $ = x. we construct id = (v ∪ {$, x}, t, a , i , d ) as follows:the basic idea of construction 1 is the same as in the usual normal form constructions (see theorem 1): the symbol $ is used as a padding symbol to ensure that the left and right contexts of all rules are of the required size. we can show that construction 1 is equivalent to the usual normal form construction. unlike the usual normal form construction, context-free deletions can only occur at the beginning and the end of a sentential form in the case of construction 1. this fact will prove useful below.ins-del systems have been extensively studied regarding the question if they can describe all of the recursively enumerable languages. let us summarize these results first by listing the classes of languages known to be equal to re: ins [6] . we define substitution rules to be of the form (u, a → b, v); u, v ∈ v * ; a, b ∈ v . let w 1 uavw 2 ; w 1 , w 2 ∈ v * be a string over v . then applying the substitution rule (u, a → b, v) allows us to substitute a single letter a with another letter b in the context of u and v, resulting in the string w 1 ubvw 2 . formally, we define an ins-del-sub system to be a 6-tuple id r = (v, t, a, i, d, s), where v, t, a, i and d are defined as in the case of usual ins-del systems and s is a set of substitution rules. substitution rules define a relation =⇒ sub : let x = w 1 uavw 2 and y = w 1 ubvw 2 be strings over v . we write x =⇒ sub y iff there is a substitution rule (u, a → b, v). in the context of ins-del-sub systems, we write= ⇒ to denote any of the relations =⇒ ins , =⇒ del or =⇒ sub . we define the closures= ⇒ * and= ⇒ + as usual. the language generated by an ins-del-sub system id r is defined as l(id r ) = {w ∈ t * | α= ⇒ * w, α ∈ a}.as with usual ins-del system, we measure the complexity of an ins-delsub system id r = (v, t, a, i, d, s) via its size, which is defined as a tuple (n, m, m ; p, q, q ; r, r ), where n, m, m , p, q and q are defined as in the case of usual ins-del systems, while r and r limit the maximal length of the left and right context of a substitution rule, respectively, i.e., r = max{|u| | (u, a → b, v) ∈ s}, r = max{|v| | (u, a → b, v) ∈ s}. ins m,m n del q,q p sub r,r denotes the family of all ins-del-sub systems of size (n, m, m ; p, q, q ; r, r ). note that, as only one letter is replaced by any substitution rule, there is no subscript below sub. depending on the context, we also refer to the family of languages generated by ins-del-sub systems of size (n, m, m ; p, q, q ; r, r ) by ins m,m n del q,q p sub r,r . expanding our previous terminology, we call substitution rules of the form (λ, a → b, λ) contextfree, while substitution rules of the form (u,let r be the the reversal (mirror) operator. for a language l and its mirror l r the following lemma holds.we will now define the term resolve. let id r = (v, t, a, i, d, s) be an insdel-sub system. we say that a nonterminal x of id r is resolved if x is either deleted or substituted. it is easy to see that in any terminal derivation of id r all nonterminals must be resolved at some point of the derivation. we remark that a nonterminal x may be resolved by being substituted with a nonterminal y , which in turn must be resolved.as in the case of ins-del systems without substitution rules, we define a normal form for ins-del-sub systems. an ins-del-sub systemof size (n, m, m ; p, q, q ; r, r ) is said to be in normal form if -for any (u, a, v) ∈ i, it holds that |a| = n, |u| = m and |v| = m ; -for any (u, a, v) ∈ d, it holds that |a| = p, |u| = q and |v| = q ; -for any (u, a → b, v) ∈ s, it holds that |u| = r and |v| = r .for every ins-del-sub system id r of size (n, m, m ; p, q, q ; r, r ), one can construct an ins-del-sub system id r of the same size in normal form, with l(id r ) = l(id r ).proof. let id r = (v, t, a, i, d, s) be an ins-del-sub system of size (n, m, m ; p, q, q ; r, r ). the basic idea is similar to the normal form construction for insdel systems in [1, 12] . in fact, the sets of insertion and deletion rules of id r = (v ∪ {$}, t, a , i , d ∪ {(λ, $, λ)}, s ) are constructed as in the ins-del system normal form construction. s and a are defined as follows:as in theorem 1, $ is a new symbol, that is, $ / ∈ v , which is introduced to be the padding symbol.letshown by induction. while the only-if part follows easily, consider the following for the if part. we can assume that in any derivation of id r the first i and the last j letters of the axiom are not deleted until the very end of derivation. hence, insertion rules of the form (z 1 , $ n , z 2 ) with z 1 ∈ ($ ∪ v ) m , z 2 ∈ ($ ∪ v ) m are applicable until the very end. it is clear that due to insertion rules of the form (z 1 , $ n , z 2 ) and the deletion rule (λ, $, λ) it is possible to generate an arbitrary number of $ at an arbitrary position of a sentential form of id r .the following result will be useful in subsequent proofs; compare to lemma 1.let l be a family of languages that is closed under reversal. then:due to the definition of ins-del-sub systems, the following result is clear.whether this inclusion is proper, is the question, that will be addressed in the following sections. we will see that while in some cases an arbitrary system of size (n, m, m ; p, q, q , r, r ) can be simulated by a system of size (n, m, m ; p, q, q ), this is not the general case. furthermore, we will see that families ins m,m n del q,q p , which are not computationally complete, may reach computational completeness via an extension with substitution rules. additionally, we will see below that families of ins-del systems which are equally powerful may no longer be after being extended with the same class of substitution rules, i.e., we havedel q2,q 2 p2 sub r,r . the reverse case might occur, as well.because the application of an insertion rule (u, x, v) corresponds to the application of the monotone rewriting rule uv → uav and the application of a substitution rule (u, a → b, v) corresponds to the application of the monotone rewriting rule uav → ubv, a monotone grammar can simulate derivations of an insertion-substitution system. (more technically speaking, we have to do the replacements on the level of pseudo-terminals n a for each terminal a and also add rules n a → a, but these are minor details.) hence, we can conclude: we will focus on context-free ins-del systems, which are extended with substitution rules. more precisely, we will analyze the computational power of the family of systems ins 0,0 n del 0,0 p sub r,r .we are going to analyze substitution rules of the form (λ, a → b, λ), which means that letters may be substituted regardless of any context. we will show that extending context-free ins-del systems with context-free substitution rules does not result in a more powerful system. in fact, a context-free ins-del-sub system of size (n, 0, 0; p, 0, 0; 0, 0) can be simulated by an ins-del system of size (n, 0, 0; p, 0, 0). (λ, a → b, λ) , has been introduced by either an insertion rule (λ, w 1 aw 2 , λ) or as part of an axiom w 1 aw 2 at some point before executing the substitution. as a serves no purpose other than to be replaced (i.e., it is not used as a context), the basic idea is to skip introducing a altogether and introduce b instead. more formally: instead of applying an insertion rule (λ, w 1 aw 2 , λ)/an axiom w 1 aw 2 and replacing a via (λ, a → b, λ) at a later point, we introduce a new insertion rule (λ, w 1 bw 2 , λ)/a new axiom w 1 bw 2 , which we apply instead of (λ, w 1 aw 2 , λ)/w 1 aw 2 . this idea can be cast into an algorithm to produce an ins-del system id = (v, t, a , i , d) with l(id r ) = l(id). as only context-free insertion rules of size maximum (n, 0, 0) are added to i , it is clear thatconsidering the question about the generative power of context-free ins-del systems with context-free substitution rules compared to usual context-free insdel systems, theorem 5 and lemma 3 together yield: the language generated by id r is l(id r ) = {w | w ∈ {a, b, c} * , |w| = 3n, n ∈ n}. using the construction introduced in theorem 5 yields the ins-del system id = ({a, b, c}, {a, b, c}, {λ}, i, ∅) ,while it is clear that l(id) = l(id r ), we remark that this example shows that the construction method of theorem 5 may yield an ins-del system whose number of rules is exponentially greater than the number of rules of the system with substitutions.now, we will analyze the effect of one-sided substitution rules if used to extend a context-free ins-del system. we will show that using one-sided substitution rules can greatly increase the computational power of context-free insertion and deletion rules. in some cases, we even get computationally completeness results.we will now construct an ins-del-sub system id r of size (1, 0, 0; 1, 0, 0; 1, 0) which simulates id r of size (1, 1, 0; 1, 1, 0; 1, 0). the system id r is constructed in the following manner: construction 2. we assume the system id r = (v, t, a, i, d, s) to be in normal form and any rule of id r to be labelled in a one-to-one manner, i.e., there is a bijection between a set of labels and the rule set. let $ be the padding symbol used in the construction of the normal form of id r . the system id r = (v , t, a, i , d , s ∪ s ) is constructed as follows. for each rule of id r , we introduce a new nonterminal x i and definethe set i of insertion rules of id r contains all (λ, x i , λ), where i is the label of an insertion rule of id r , while the set d of deletion rules as contains (λ, $, λ) and all (λ, x i , λ), where i is the label of a deletion rule of id r . furthermore, we define the set of substitution rules s = s 1 ∪ s 2 , witheach deletion rule (u, a, λ) ∈ d of id r , where i is the label of (u, a, λ), corresponds to a deletion rule (λ, x i , λ) ∈ d and a substitution rule (u, a → x i , λ) ∈ s 2 of id r . the basic idea of the construction is to simulate a deletion rule (u, a, λ) ∈ d by substituting the letter a with left context u via (u, a → x i , v) ∈ s 2 . the introduced nonterminal x i is then deleted at some point by the deletion rule (λ, x i , λ) ∈ d . it is clear that a derivation of the formin which the application of (λ, x i , λ) ∈ d succeeds an application of (u, a → x i , λ) ∈ s 2 immediately, is equivalent to the application of a deletion rule (u, a, v) ∈ d. it needs much more care to prove the following converse: proposition 1. let α ∈ a. consider a derivation α= ⇒ * w ∈ t * of id r . then, there is an alternative derivation of id r , leading from α to w, in which all nonterminals x i ∈ v \v are resolved immediately after being introduced.this allows us to state: {(b, x 1 → a, λ), (a, x 2 → b, λ), (b, x 3 → a, λ) }. the generated language is l(id s ) = (ba) + , as we can easily see that any generated word begins with a letter b and ends with a letter a. furthermore, any word generated by id s is not of the form w 1 bbw 2 , as the only way to introduce the terminal symbol b (except for the b introduced via the axiom) is by substituting a nonterminal x 2 with b. however, this substitution requires a left context a, which means that at some point the letter to the left of any b has been a. there are no insertion rules which can insert an additional b or x 2 between a and b. furthermore, there are no deletion rules at all, which means that no a can be deleted. therefore, the letter to the left of any b cannot be another b. using the same argumentation, we can see, that any word generated by id s is not of the form w 1 aaw 2 , either.it is easy to see that a result identical to theorem 6 can be shown analogously for the mirrors of ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 1 sub 1,0 and ins 1,0 1 del 1,0 1 sub 1,0 . therefore:we now analyze the computational power of ins-del-sub systems of size (2, 0, 0; 2, 0, 0; 0, 1). while the family of ins-del systems of size (2, 0, 0; 2, 0, 0) is known to be a proper subset of cf, see [11, 12] , we will show that an extension with substitution rules of the form (λ, a → b, c) results in a significant increase in computational power. more precisely, by simulating an ins-del systems of size (2, 0, 1; 2, 0, 0), we will show that ins 0,0 2 del 0,0 2 sub 0,1 = re holds. the basic idea of construction 3 is essentially the same as in construction 2: as context-free insertion rules cannot scan for contexts (by definition), this task is handled by the corresponding substitution rules. consider an insertion rule (λ, n i,2 n i,1 , λ) of id r where i is the label of an insertion rule (λ, ab, c) ∈ i. then the substitution rules, corresponding to this rule, are (λ, n i,1 → b, c) and (λ, n i,2 → a, b) . this idea leads us to:as ins 0,1 2 del 0,0 2 = re holds according to [8, theorem 5] , we conclude:this is an interesting result as the families of ins-del systems of size (2, 0, 0; 2, 0, 0) and of size (2, 0, 0; 0, 0, 0) are known to be equal [12, theorem 4.7 ], yet both classes extended with the same class of substitution rules differ in computational power. as re and cs are closed under reversal, the next corollary follows with lemma 2 and theorem 4. after analyzing the effect of context-free and one-sided substitution rules on context-free ins-del systems, we will now proceed to two-sided substitution rules, i.e., substitution rules with left and right context. somehow surprisingly, this lifts the computational power of even the 'weakest' ins-del systems, that is, systems of size (1, 0, 0; 1, 0, 0), up to the level of re. let id ∈ ins 1,1 1 del 1,1 1 . we will show that there is a system id r ∈ ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 1 sub 1,1 capable of simulating id. the basic idea is that the context checks, necessary for simulating rules with left and right context, are performed by the substitution rules. the system id r is constructed in the following manner: the basic idea is similar to construction 2. each deletion rule (u, a, v) ∈ d of id, where i is the label of (u, a, v), corresponds to a deletion rule (λ, x i , λ) ∈ d and a substitution rule (u, a → x i , v) ∈ s 2 . we leave the context checks to the substitution rules. the same idea is applied to the insertion rules. with some technical effort, we can prove the following result.let α ∈ a. consider a derivation α= ⇒ * w ∈ t * . then, there is an alternative derivation, leading from α to w, in which all nonterminals x i ∈ v \v are resolved immediately after being introduced.this property is the key to show that for a system id r of size (1, 0, 0; 1, 0, 0; 1, 1) constructed from a given ins-del system id of size (1, 1, 1; 1, 1, 1) in normal form according to construction 4, we find l(id) = l(id r ). as such ins-del systems are known to be computational complete, we conclude:we now analyze the power of ins-del-sub systems of size (1, 0, 0; 0, 0, 0; 1, 1). by definition, it is clear that ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 0 sub 1,1 ⊆ ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 1 sub 1,1 holds. in the following, we will show that this inclusion is proper. to be more precise, we will show that ins-del-sub systems of size (1, 0, 0; 0, 0, 0; 1, 1) characterize the context-sensitive languages. by theorem 4, we are left to prove cs ⊆ ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 0 sub 1,1 . for every context-sensitive language l, there is a linear bounded automaton (lba) lb = (q, t, γ, q 0 , δ, , f ) accepting l. we are going to construct an insdel-sub system of size (1, 0, 0; 0, 0, 0; 1, 1) to simulate lb. we first give a brief sketch of the basic idea behind this simulation in the following paragraph. the simulation evolves around strings of the formwith u 1 , . . . , u n ∈ t ; q j ∈ q and v 1 , . . . , v n ∈ γ . the concatenation of the first component of each tuple, that is, u 1 . . . u n , is the input word of the linear bounded automaton lb, while the concatenation of the second component of each tuple, that is, an accepting configuration, i.e., q i ∈ f , we substitute all tuples with their respective first component. for instance (u k , v k ) is substituted with u k . in short, this means that if (the simulation of) lb running on u 1 . . . u n halts in an accepting configuration, we generate the word u 1 . . . u n . more details follow: ,qibr) ,r , x (a,lqib),l | a ∈ t, b ∈ γ, q i ∈ q, r ∈ r, l ∈ l} generates the language l by simulating lb. strings of the formconsist of symbols in v 2 , while the symbols in v 1 are auxiliary symbols used to generate such strings. the symbols in v 3 are used to simulate lb's transitions. we define a = {x 0 (a, a#) | a ∈ t } ∪ {a | a ∈ l ∩ t } and i = {(λ, x a , λ) | a ∈ t }. if λ ∈ l, we add λ to the axiom. the set of substitution rules is defined aswe collect substitution rules used to initialize the simulation. the substitution rules in the set s n are used to simulate the application of a transition δ(q i , b) (q j , c, n) . s n consists of substitution rules of the form c, n) .the substitution rules in the set s l are used to simulate left moves. for each transition δ(q i , b) (q j , c, l) of lb, we add substitution rules (λ, (a, q i br) → x (a,cr);qj ;l , λ), (λ, (d, le) → x (d,lqj e),l , x (a,cr);qj ;l ), (x (d,lqj e),l , x (a,cr);qj ;l → (a, cr), λ), (λ, x (d,lqj e),l → (d, lq j e), (a, cr)) to s l with a, d ∈ t, b, c, e ∈ γ, q i , q j ∈ q, l ∈ l, r ∈ r. similarly, the substitution rules in s r can simulate right moves δ(q i , b) (q j , c, r) with:(λ, (a, lq i b) → x (a,lc);qj ;r , λ), (x (a,lc);qj ;r , (d, er) → x (d,qj er),r , λ) (λ, x (a,lc);qj ;r → (a, lc), x (d,qj er),r ), ((a, lc), x (d,qj er),r → (d, q j er), λ) .the set s endmarker,l consists of substitution rules of the formwith a ∈ t, b, c ∈ γ, q i , q j ∈ q, δ(q i , b) (q j , c, l) and δ(q i , $) (q j , $, r). the set s endmarker,r consists of substitution rules of the form (λ, (a, q i b#) → (a, cq j #), λ), (λ, (a, bq i #) → (a, q j b#), λ) with a ∈ t, b, c ∈ γ, q i , q j ∈ q, δ(q i , b) (q j , c, r) and δ(q i , #) (q j , #, l). both sets are used for the simulation of δ(q i , b) (q j , c, l) and δ(q i , b) (q j , c, r) as well, in the case the read/write head moves to/from an endmarker. the set s final = s f1 ∪ s f2 is used to generate a word w ∈ t * if w has been accepted by the simulated linear bounded automaton lb. s f1 consists of the substitutions (λ, (a, q f b) → a, λ), (λ, (a, $q f b) → a, λ), (λ, (a, q f $b) → a, λ), (λ, (a, q f b#) → a, λ), (λ, (a, bq f #) → a, λ) and s f2 consists of (λ, (a, b) → a, c), (c, (a, b) → a, λ), (λ, (a, $b) → a, c), (c, (a, b#) → a, λ) with a, c ∈ t, b ∈ γ, q f ∈ f .working out the correctness of this construction, we can show: theorem 8. ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 0 sub 1,1 = cs. as a consequence of theorem 8, we can formulate the following penttonenstyle normal form theorem for context-sensitive languages. we believe that this could be useful in particular when dealing with variations of insertion systems. allowing erasing productions on top, we also arrive at a new characterization of the family of recursively enumerable languages. by different methods, we could even prove that either of the two non-context-free forms suffices to achieve re.we have shown that the addition of substitution rules to ins-del systems yields new characterizations of re and cs. in particular we have shown the following equalities: ins 0,0 2 del 0,0 2 sub 1,0 = re, ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 1 sub 1,1 = re and ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 0 sub 1,1 = cs. additionally we have shown ins 1,0 1 del 1,0 1 sub 1,0 = ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 1 sub 1,0 . while in the above cases an extension with (non-contextfree) substitution rules leads to an increase in computational power, we have also shown that the addition of context-free substitution rules to context-free ins-del systems does not affect the computational power.the main open question is if ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 1 sub 1,0 is computationally complete. we conjecture this not to be the case, as with only left context rules, information can only be propagated in one direction. yet, should ins 0,0 1 del 0,0 1 sub 1,0 equal re, this would provide an interesting new normal form. a minor open question is the strictness of the inclusion ins 0,0 2 del 0,0 0 sub 0,1 ⊆ cs.chronic hcv-infection (chc) may induce cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc), but also b-cell dysregulations such as autoimmune type ii mixed cryoglobulinemia syndrome (mcs) and b-cell non-hodgkin lymphoma (nhl) [1] [2] [3] . the mechanisms whereby hcv establishes hepatic or lymphoproliferative diseases are still poorly understood.innate immune response relies on recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (pamp) through pattern recognition receptors (prrs) that include the tolllike receptors (tlrs). tlr2, tlr3, tlr7 and tlr9 have a crucial role in host defense against hcv infection and hcv liver diseases [4] [5] [6] [7] . like other tlrs (tlr1, tlr4, tlr5, tlr6 and tlr10), tlr2 is predominantly expressed on the cell surface to sense extracellular pamps. in contrast, tlr3, tlr7, tlr8 and tlr9 are located in intracellular compartments and recognize viral nucleotides. tlr2 has been associated with hepatocarcinogenesis and is known to be triggered by the core-protein of the hcv nucleocapsid [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . intriguingly, specific tlr polymorphisms, mainly the tlr2 -196 to -174 ins/del, influence the extent of tlr2 expression and have been associated with more advanced liver diseases [13, 14] . tlrs signal through specific downstream molecules that finally activate transcription factors driving the expression of different cytokines including interferons [15, 16] .inappropriate production of interferons has been associated to various hcv-related processes that may be the prelude to malignant complications [17, 18] . interferon-lamba (ifnλ) is a family of four genes: ifnλ1 (il29), ifnλ2 (il28a), ifnλ3 (il28b) and ifnλ4 (a frameshift variant of il28b) [19] . they target the il28rα and il10rb receptors resulting in the activation of janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (jak/stat) signaling with expression of interferonstimulated genes (isgs) and induction of an antiviral state. however, unlike type i ifn receptor, which was expressed on virtually all cell types, il28rα was only expressed on specific tissues such as epithelia [20] . a single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) in the promoter region of the il28b gene, the rs12979860, was originally associated with spontaneous and treatment-induced clearance of genotype 1 hcv infection [2, 17, [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] .we hypothesized that, if tlr2 and il28b were functionally interconnected in hcv diseases-specific networks, both tlr2 and il28b polymorphisms could have a critical role in the pathogenesis of hcv-related disorders.to test this hypothesis, we investigated tlr2 -196 to -174 ins/del and rs12979860 il28b polymorphisms in hcv-related liver and lymphoproliferative diseases in an italian population.patient characteristics and group distribution were shown in table 1 . gender and hcv genotypes were found differentially distributed among hcv-related disease groups. male gender was preferentially found associated with liver diseases (cir and hcc; 67 to 71%), while female gender was more frequent in patients with lymphoproliferative disorders (mcs and nhl; 63 and 61%). hcv genotype 1 was the most frequent genotype found in our population (53 to 82%). no association between hcv genotypes and hcv viral load was observed. figure 1 shows the genotype frequencies of tlr2 ins/del (-196 to -174) polymorphism in patients with hcv, hcv-related diseases and blood donors (bd). distribution of bd tlr2 ins/del genotype frequencies in our case series was similar to that reported in the literature [13] . carriers of wild-type tlr2 (ins/ins) genotype represented 71.6 % of all hcv-positive patients, with a frequency of 70% to 77% in the different hcv-related diseases, and 75% in bd ( figure 1 ). data indicated a slight association between tlr2-del allelic variant with hcv infection, but the difference was not significant when polymorphism frequencies of all hcv-positive patients were compared to those of bd (dominant tlr2 ins/ins vs tlr2 ins/del + tlr2 del/del, or = 1.20, table 2 ). however, patients and compared with chronic hcv (chc) infection. analysis of tlr2-il28b haplotypes showed an association of wild type haplotype with the lymphoproliferative diseases (or 1.77, p = 0.029) and a slight increase in hcv viral load (hr 1.38, p = 0.054). wild type haplotype (tlr2 ins/ins-il28b c/c) was also found associated with older age in patients with an hepatic diseases (in cir and in hcc p = 0.038 and p = 0.020, respectively) supporting an effect of innate immunity in the liver disease progression. tlr2 and il28b polymorphisms in combination showed a role in the control of hcv viral load and different hcv disease progression.oncotarget 37489 www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget represented as mean with standard error of measurement (±sem). only statistically significant comparisons were illustrated. the del/del tlr2 genotype was significantly higher in patients with hcv-related hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc) compared to all the other groups (p = 0.004) (**). patients with hcv-related liver damage showed a higher il28b t allele mean value than blood donors (bd) (p = 0.001, chc reference group) and patients with lymphoproliferative diseases (msc and nhl, p = 0.012, chc reference group).oncotarget 37490 www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget carrying tlr2 del/del genotype showed an increased risk for hcc compared with all other groups of patients and bds by using pair wise comparison test (one-way analysis of variance hcc vs nhl p = 0.004; figure  2 ). in particular, a positive trend between tlr2 del/ del genotype and an increasing risk for hcc (i.e chc: 4.3%; cir: 4.9%; hcc: 10.3%) was found; by contrast, the tlr2 del/del prevalence in nhl patients (0.9%) was similar to that found in bds (1.3%). thus, findings indicated that tlr2 del/del genotype condition correlate with primary liver cancer rather than hcv-positive malignant lymphoproliferation. no additional significant differences was observed for tlr2 ins/del genotype or allele frequencies.the results of il28b genotyping in patients with hcv-related diseases and bds were shown in figure 1 . distribution of rs12979860 genotype frequencies found in our series was similar to those reported in the literature [17, 21, 22] . results of previous studies where il28b c/c genotype enhanced the spontaneous resolution of hcv infection indirectly support a possible role for the il28b c allele in the control of hcv infection. in keeping with these observations, we found a negative trend for cc genotype frequencies, balanced by an increased trend in tt genotype, in hcv-positive patients compared with bds (il28b c/c dominant polymorphism vs il28b c/ t+ il28b t/t: or 0.46 p = 0.025, table 2 ). one-way test confirmed the significant positive trend for t allele in patients with chronic hcv-infection, which was more evident in patients with liver damage instead of a lymphoproliferative disorder ( figure 2 ). thus, the analysis indicated a t allele gradient able to discriminate a chronic status more prone to evolve into liver injury from a condition more likely developing a lymphoproliferative dysfunction (p = 0.001, figure 2 ).the frequency of il28b t allele in chc, cir , hcc was 43.7%, in mcs, nhl was 35.1% in bds was 27.2%.no linkage disequilibrium between tlr2 and il28b polymorphisms was found as the test for correlation resulted not significant (862 data pairs tested; coefficient of correlation 0.03). the tlr2-il28b polymorphisms formed several haplotypes, whose frequency was reported on table 3 . the distribution analysis of haplotypes confirmed that specific haplotypes discriminated between hcv-positive patients more likely evolving towards liver damage and those instead evolving towards a lymphoproliferative disorder. indeed, a significant lack of the tlr2-ins/ins il28b-c/c haplotype was not only associated with a chronic hcv status (p = 0.007, or 2.94, table 4 ) but closely correlated with a liver damage, rather than a lymphoproliferative-disease progression (p = ns, or 1.05; p = 0.029, or 1.77, respectively, table 4 ).hcv viral load was assessed in serum samples for 197 patients at diagnosis. a higher hcv viral load was mainly associated with the presence of il28b c/c rather than that of il28b t/t genotype (il28b additive 2, p = 0.005, hr 1.68, 95% ci 1.02-2.75, table 5 ) and tlr2 ins/del genotype than homozygous (tlr2 additive 1, p = 0.026, hr 1.30, 95%ci 0.96-1.73). multivariate regression analysis indicated that il28b t/t recessive genotype was independent of hcv genotype, age, patient gender and tlr2 variables and it was associated with a lower hcv viral load (p = 0.044, exp 1.52 95% ci 1.01-2.27).given the potential role of host immunity in the control of hcv-infected tumor cells and the potential of age-related influences on tumor progression, we also looked for a liver disease age-related trend and tlr2-il28b haplotype. continuous age variable was analyzed between liver and lymphoproliferative groups with respect to the dominant wild-type tlr2-il28b haplotype, and a significant association was found with bds and patients with a lymphoproliferative disease. a significant difference was found in the mean age between patients having a dominant haplotype and a liver disease compared to those having a different haplotype (cir patients: 68.9 vs 62.0 mean age, p = 0.038; hcc: 72.4 vs 67.7 mean age, p = 0.02; figure 3 ).immunogenetic profile may play an important role in determining the progression of chronic hcv infections to different diseases [1-3, 5, 27] . we confirmed the role of rs12979860 il28b-c allele-carrier as a protective factor for chc [2, 17, [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] . in addition, we highlighted that the il28b c/c genotype correlates with lymphoproliferative disease when associated with a tlr2-ins allele in homozygosity (table 4) . on the contrary, homozygous tlr2-del allele (tlr2-del/ del) exhibits a significantly higher threshold for hcc development (figure 2) . overall, the present results were consistent with an interlocked role between tlr2 and il28b (ifn-λ3) gene variants in directing hcv-related reference category: chc, chronic hcv-positive patients abbreviations: or, odds ratio; ci, confidential interval.oncotarget 37493 www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget diseases progression. indeed, it has been shown that tlr2 was able to activate transcription factors that drive the expression of antiviral genes and different cytokines, such as interferons [15, 16] . several studies have indicated a relation among rs12979860 il28b gene, spontaneous clearance of hcv and therapeutic outcomes of genotype 1 hcv-positive patients treated with ifn-based therapies [2, [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] . in 2013 a new interferon, the ifn-λ4, was identified. the rs368234815 polymorphism originating the ifn-λ4 by creation of a new open reading frame [19, 28] was found in strong linkage disequilibrium with the rs12979860 il28b so much it has been described as the functional variant of the rs12979860 il28b [19, 29] . thus, spontaneous and treatment-induced clearance of hcv resulted equally dependent on rs12979860 or rs368234815 polymorphisms and combined assessment of these gene polymorphisms did not increase the predictive value of il28b polymorphisms in hcv-positive patients [19, 29] . more recently, it was found that y93h, a variant present in the ns5a region of hcv, was significantly associated with the beneficial rs12979860 polymorphism confirming the functional role of ifn-λ4 snp in hcv-infection [30] . the haplotype data presented herein (table 4 ) provided evidence supporting a role for il28b in relation with tlr2 polymorphism to predict progression to different hcv-related diseases. recent functional studies have demonstrated that il28b t/t genotype was associated with a higher production of ifn-λ3 and higher isgs gene expression in hcv-infected liver tissue, and that this higher baseline level of isgs expression may contribute to an interferon-refractory state in the liver [31] . thus, it has been hypothesized that the high baseline isg levels found in il28b t/t carriers can lead to a poor response to inf-based therapy due to an exhaustion of the interferonresponse pathway [32] . in keeping with this model, a satisfactory treatment response could be associated with a il28 c/c genotype, a lower levels of isgs expression and thus a higher levels of circulating hcv rna [33] . our findings about higher viral load in patients having il28b c/c genotype may support this hypothesis. a higher viral load was associated with hcv genotype 1, but difference among genotypes did not reach a statistical significance in our series. the observed broader frequency of il28-t allele in patients with hepatic rather than lymphoproliferative disorders can be explained by the fact that the il28-r/il-10r receptor complex was expressed only in restricted cell types, like hepatocytes, epithelial cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cells [34] . considering that hcv was primarily hepatotropic, it is reasonable to assume that il28b-t allele could likely contribute to an ifn-refractory state mostly in the liver. in this regard, it has been observed that the expression levels of isgs were differentially regulated in the liver and peripheral blood [35, 36] . in addition, higher level of hcv infection in hepatocytes induced higher level of endoplasmatic reticulum stress and caused hcc carcinogenesis [37] . in this scenario, tlr2-del variant, which was related to a diminished expression of tlr2 level, and secretion abbreviations: hr. hazard ratio; ci. confidential interval. hazard ratio; ci. confidential interval. hazard ratio; ci. confidential interval. wt: wild type is the most frequent polymorphism found in the general population. for the tlr2 snp indicated like ins and del variant; a single band at 286 bp was judged as wt, while heterozygous type revealed two bands of 286 bp and 264 bp (del variant). genotypes of each polymorphism were assessed according to dominant (1 wild-type homozygote; 0 heterozygote and variant homozygote), recessive (0 wild-type homozygote and heterozygote; 1 variant homozygote) and additive genetic models. additive models comprised additive 1 (1 heterozygotes versus 0 wild-type homozygotes) and additive 2 (1 variant homozygotes versus 0 wild-type homozygotes) models. dominant indicated homozygous wt alleles, which was for the tlr2 the ins/ins genotype and for the il28b the c/c genotype. multivariate stepwise tested for age, sex, hcv genotype, tlr2 and il28b variables. www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget of immunosuppressive cytokines, increased the hepatic inflammatory microenvironment and the risk of hcc development [8, 13, 38] . consistently, tlr2 knockdown (tlr2 -/-) mice showed enhanced inflammation, hepatic lesions and hcc progression after carcinogenic diethylnitrosamine exposure [9, 39] . moreover, the tlr2 del/del condition resulted more frequently detected in our hcc patients than in other hcv-related diseases ( figure  2 ). data were in agreement with those observed in the hcv german population with an increased risk of hcc associated with the tlr2-del variant [13] . on the other hand, our multivariate analysis showed that il28b c/c genotype was associated with a higher viral load (table 5) and that the dominant wild-type haplotype (tlr2 ins/ins-il28b c/c) correlated with lymphoproliferative diseases but also with bds (table 4) . likewise, previous studies have shown that hcv-core protein triggering tlr2 leaded to an increased in b-cell proliferation in vitro [18] . thus, considering that hcv is also a lymphotropic virus, our haplotype analysis pointed out that in the presence of a hcv chronic persistence, the tlr2 ins/ins-il28b-c/c arrangement could increase the susceptibility to lymphoproliferative complications, including mixed cryoglobulinemia and b-cell nhl (p = 0.029, or 1.77, table 4 ). in addition, the tlr2 ins/ins-il28b-c/c haplotype not only showed a potential protective effect against hcv infection but also an association with older patients having a liver diseases (cir and hcc, figure 3) , thus, suggesting that the protective effect associated with this haplotype decreased with age.in conclusion, our study emphasizes that both tlr2 and il28b polymorphisms may have a role in directing hcv-progression towards hepatic or lymphoproliferative diseases. thus, the analysis of our hcv-positive population stratified by the two immunological variables indicated a potential protective effect of the il28b-c figure 3 : boxplot describing the relationship of tlr2-il28b haplotype with the patient disease stratified by the median age at diagnosis. boxes range from the 25th to the 75th percentile with a horizontal black line at the median and vertical lines extending to the 10th and 90th percentiles. the wild type tlr2-il28b haplotype showed an association with the older patients having a liver disease (patients with hcv-related cirrhosis (cir)(*)(p = 0.038) and patients with hcv-related hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc)(*)(p = 0.02). we found no difference in the median age at diagnosis in patients with lymphoproliferative diseases.oncotarget 37495 www.impactjournals.com/oncotarget allele in homozygosity (il28b-c/c) towards chronic infection and liver diseases, and that the simultaneous presence of at least one tlr2-del allele abolished this effect. in accordance with this result, the tlr2-del/ del state appeared closely linked with hcc condition. conversely, the dominant wild-type haplotype (tlr2 ins/ins-il28b c/c) associated with a better spontaneous resolution of the infection was also found more frequently in both bds as well as in hcv-related lymphoproliferative disorders compared to chc, suggesting that, in patients with a lymphoproliferative disease, additional factors may be involved that obstacle the elimination of the virus. therefore, our findings shed new light on the mechanisms underlying the persistence of hcv infection and hcvrelated disease progression. a deeper understanding of these processes may lead to development of strategies based on the combination of conventional therapies with immune-mediated strategies for the treatment of hcvrelated diseases.we considered 862 patients with chronic hcvinfection and 77 healthy blood donors. the ethnic background of patients was caucasic, without hbv or hiv infection. among hcv-positive patients, 230 had a chronic hcv infection (chc n = 230), 123 patients had cirrhosis (cir n = 123), 175 patients had hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc), and 334 patients had a lymphoproliferative disease including: 205 a cryoglobulinemic syndrome (mcs) defined according to previously described criteria [3] and 129 an overt b-cell non-hodgkin's lymphoma (nhl). demographic and clinical characteristics of each groups were reported on table 1 . patients had been recruited from: the masve center, university of florence, azienda ospedaliera santa maria degli angeli, pordenone, national cancer institute "fondazione pascale", naples, departement of biomedical sciences and human oncology, university of bari medical school, policlinico universitario di udine and centro di riferimento oncologico di aviano, italy. the diagnosis of chronic hcv infection was based on anti-hcv, elevated alt serum levels and hcv rna positivity of at least 6 months duration. an immunoassay test (iii-generation eia) against hcv-core and hcvnon structural antigens were used. hcv genotype was determined by a commercial, certified, diagnostic test (versant hcv genotype 2.0, siemens healthcare diagnostics, deerfield, il). quantitative determination of hcv loads (rna ui/ml) was done by branched dna technology (chiron, emeryville, ca). the diagnosis of hcc was based on the standard criteria listed in the european association for the study of the liver (easl) that incorporate both invasive and noninvasive measures. noninvasive criteria include two imaging techniques, both demonstrating a focal lesion > 2 cm in diameter with features of arterial hypervascularization. detection and immunochemical characterization of cryoglobulins were performed according to consensus protocol proposed by a.l.cri (associazione italiana per la lotta alle crioglobulinemie). nhl in the course of hcv infection has been histopathologically confirmed based on who classification [3] . the study was conformed to the ethical guidelines of the helsinki declaration and all subjects provided informed consent. study was approved by independent local and independent ethics committees since this was a multicenter study.genomic dna was extracted from whole blood using the ez1 qiagen blood kit and protocols recommended by the manufacturer (qiagen inc., valencia, ca). determination of tlr2 -196 to -174 ins/ del polymorphism was performed by polymerase chain reaction (pcr) using the 5'-ctcggaggcagcgagaaa-3' and 5'-ctgggccgtgcaaagaag-3' primers (10 pmol) in a reaction volume of 25 μl including 200 ng dntps and 0.5 u of gotaq dna polymerase (promega corporation, madison, wi). cycling conditions were: initial denaturation at 95 °c for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles at 95 °c for 30 sec, at 60°c for 40 sec and at 72 °c for 40 sec and then 72 °c for 7 min. fragments of different length (264 bp and 286 bp), depending on the presence or absence of the deletion mutation were visualized by electrophoresis on a 3.5% agarose gel staining with ethidium bromide. il28b genotyping was performed using a specific custom taqman snp-genotyping assay (snp rs12979860; applied biosystem, foster city, ca, usa) based on allele-specific dual-labelled probes on a 7900ht fast real-time pcr system (applied biosystem, foster city, ca, usa). amplicon sequencing was used to validate the genotyping techniques.specific tests including fisher's exact test and one or two-way analysis of variance were used to compare the patient groups regarding allele and genotype frequencies of tlr2 and il28b polymorphisms, by direct counting of the positive individuals for a specific allele/genotype polymorphism. multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed with diagnosis as a dependent variable and independent variables, including age, gender (0 female; 1 male), and each genotype were also considered. p-value, odds ratio and 95% confidence interval were calculated. genotypes of each polymorphism weresevere acute respiratory syndrome (sars) is a newly recognized infectious disease caused by a novel sarscoronavirus (cov). the disease initially started in november 2002 in the guangdong province of china and subsequently spread to 29 countries. a hallmark of sars is its predilection for nosocomial transmission, notably to health care workers and to a lesser extent patients and visitors. of the 8422 persons infected worldwide, 1725 (20%) of them were health care workers. 1 in areas most badly affected by sars, the proportion of health care worker to all cases was highest in vietnam (57%), followed by canada (43%), singapore (41%), hong kong, china (22%), mainland china (19%) and taiwan, china (13%). 1 in hong kong, among 156 persons affected in a major nosocomial outbreak of sars, 53 (34%) were patients initially hospitalized for other reasons, and visitors. 2 of the 128 identified cases in a nosocomial outbreak in toronto, 14% were visitors and another 14% were hospital patients. 3 in hospital settings, the majority of these transmissions occurred when infection control precautions either had not been adequately instituted or had been instituted but were not meticulously complied with. 2, 4 there is no doubt that early isolation of patients with probable or suspected sars is important to prevent nosocomial spread of the disease. 5 however, a difficulty for front-line clinicians in the months of living with sars, especially those in asia, was how to make a clinical diagnosis at the time of patient presentation. at this time, a point-of-care diagnostic tool for sars is still lacking, despite some early optimism on the molecular tests. 6, 7 in the first few days following onset of symptoms, nucleic acid detection by polymerase chain reaction only has a limited sensitivity. 8 although it appears that most patients with sars will mount an antibody response to sars-cov, less than half of the patients will have detectable antibody response in the first week of illness. in most patients, the sars illness begins with a non-specific prodrome of fever, chills, myalgia and cough. 9 after 3-7 days, the disease evolves into a form of rapidly progressive atypical pneumonia. unless there is a history of close contact with a person having suspected or probable sars, it is virtually impossible to be sure whether one is dealing with sars or an ordinary form of respiratory tract infection.the strategy for admission and triage of patients with respiratory symptoms at the queen mary hospital during the months of sars is depicted in fig. 1 . the system was put into effect on 15 march, three days after an outbreak of sars was found in hong kong. as with most public hospitals in this region, there are only a few private rooms for isolation of patients with communicable disease. hence, one patient floor including five wards was evacuated and designated as triage, sars and step-down areas. each of the wards was divided into four or six bays, separated by solid or glass partitions, extending on either side of a central nursing station. a dedicated team of physicians and nurses, led by experienced respiratory and infectious diseases doctors, was established to provide care to all patients admitted to the designated areas.at the emergency department, all new cases and transfer-ins from other hospitals were systematically evaluated and were admitted to the triage ward when predetermined criteria were met (table 1 ). in the triage ward, patients underwent evaluation for sars, including sars tests and repeat cxr or computer tomography. all patients with a clinical diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia were treated with a β -lactam and a macrolide in accordance with recommended guidelines. 10 to minimize the risk of cross transmission in the triage ward, the number of beds in each bay was reduced to allow for a minimum bedto-bed distance of 2 m. furthermore, patients were promptly moved to either the sars ward or the stepdown ward as soon as possible for continued care, observation and isolation. importantly, an active surveillance was implemented in the general wards to identify and promptly isolate any unrecognized cases of sars. in the emergency department, triage, stepdown and sars areas, stringent infection control measures recommended for sars were implemented. 11 standard, contact and droplet precautions were enforced in all other clinical areas in the hospital. where medically feasible, all admitted patients were instructed to wear a surgical mask. from 1 total number of patients admitted to triage, step-down or sars wards. number in brackets refers to number of patients subsequently identified as probable sars. 2 once a patient was identified as a suspected sars case, movement of all patients in the same cubicle were frozen (no new admission, no transfers-in and no transfers-out). this group of patients was be actively monitored for illness (fever and respiratory symptoms ± cxr), pending sars clarification in the index patient. if probable sars was confirmed in the index, active surveillance continued for 10 days. 3 patients were kept for a minimum of 3 days in the step-down ward before discharge. to prevent inadvertently sending an elderly person with incubating sars back to an institute, residents of old age homes were kept in the step-down ward or (after 3 days) in a cohorted area for 10 days before discharge. all patients discharged before the 10-day minimum period of surveillance were monitored daily (by phone calls) for illness (fever and respiratory symptoms).febrile pneumonia at this time, the transmission of sars appears to occur predominantly by large droplet, direct contact with infectious material or by contact with fomites contaminated by infectious material. 3, 12 in a study by seto et al . it was shown that practice of droplet and contact precautions is adequate in most clinical settings to significantly reduce the risk of infection after exposures to patients with sars. 4 of 69 staff who reported consistent use of all four measures including mask, gloves, gowns and hand-washing, none were infected, whereas all infected staff had omitted at least one measure. 4 however, uncertainties continue on whether the disease could be transmitted by the airborne route. in hospital settings, potential airborne transmissions were all reported in association with certain cough-inducing or aerosol-generating procedures. on two occasions, the use of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation and nebulised medications on patients unrecognized as having sars have been associated with nosocomial outbreaks. 2, 13 in one instance in association with drug nebulization, preliminary investigation indicated that airborne transmission is plausible although alternative explanations have been proposed and are being validated. concerns have also been raised over possible airborne transmission during cough-inducing procedures. in three instances of patient intubation, transmission to staff occurred when droplet and contact precautions were used. 3, 14 back to the basics one important lesson from sars concerns the need to enhance infection control programmes in hospitals. in the longer term, planning for sars should be put into a larger context, to include not only sars but also other emerging infections such as avian influenza, dengue and the results of bioterrorism. in asia, the state of development of infection control programmes varies among the countries. in some hospitals, the infrastructure for such programmes is still inadequate. the problem is not simply the lack of resources, as we have seen how countries could respond quickly by mobilizing and deploying means to contain sars. rather, it is a lack of awareness of the importance of preventing nosocomial infections and a lack of health care commitment to make such programmes an essential element of quality practice.the high nosocomial transmission rate of sars has highlighted the need for us to re-visit a few basic principles in the practice of infection control ( table 2 ). surveillance has been defined as the continuing scrutiny of all aspects of the occurrence and spread of disease that are pertinent to effective control. 15 it consists of data collection, analysis of the data and feedback of the results to staff and others involved in decision-making. a good programme is essential to recognise sars, detect disease trends, clarify rumours and to assess the efficacy of control measures. given the fact that clustering of respiratory tract illness among hospital staff is a prominent feature of sars, there is a need to enhance surveillance of infection in staff. before the era of sars, few hospital staff would bother to report minor respiratory illness; wear a mask or take a day off for what appears to be a common cold. this attitude will need careful reconsideration as taiwan's experience clearly demonstrated that a sars-cov infected staff member remaining on duty, while the disease was still mild and non-specific and couldn't be recognized as sars, could initiate a large healthcare outbreak. 16 the risk of nosocomial infections is increased if patient care procedures are not properly performed and notably if infection control measures are not adequately followed. the same probably holds for sars. 4 the importance of hand hygiene cannot be over-emphasized. yet, compliance with hand table 1 criteria for admission to triage ward two or more of the following fever (38 c or history of fever in the recent few days clinical or radiological evidence of consolidation history of close contact to patient with suspect or probable sars (i.e. having cared for or lived with or had direct contact with respiratory secretions or other body fluids of a person with sars) history of contact with a cluster ( ≥ 2) of persons with respiratory symptoms or fever hygiene has often been low, being practiced only 40-50% of the times when it is indicated. 17 in the context of sars, each institute should review their hand hygiene policies and introduce means to ensure a high compliance among staff. moreover, our experience with handling sars indicates that lesser informed staff can lapse into inappropriate practice when facing the unknown issues that surround sars. personal protective equipment should be properly worn and discarded carefully after use. gloves should not be washed and reused between patients. washing gloved hands is not effective for decontamination. 18 five to 50% of hands were contaminated after gloves were removed. hence, handwashing after glove removal is important. we consider a 'glove all the time' policy in providing care for probable sars case as suboptimal. if staff wear gloves all the time, they will wash their hands less often. instead, we have been recommending a 'gloves when needed but wash hands at every opportunity' policy. by putting emphasis on face-toface interactions with staff and with constant reinforcement, we are able to keep hand-washing compliance at high levels in our hospital, being 100% in the isolation wards throughout and 78% to 95% in the general wards (unpubl. data).most outbreaks of nosocomial sars have been associated with delays in recognizing the disease as sars, usually this occurred for the very first cases in a hospital. this provides a reminder of the need to be vigilant and that hand washing standards, either singularly or in combination with transmissionbased precautions, should be empirically implemented in the care of all patients. in areas where sars might re-emerge, contact and droplet precautions should be implemented for the care of all patients with undiagnosed upper and lower respiratory tract infections. patient care procedures, particularly those that might induce patient coughing or generate infectious aerosols should be carefully assessed and planned before implementation, and be evaluated afterwards. a good infection control programme should be supported by adequate staffing. according to the senic project, there should be at least one full-time infection control nurse for every 250 beds. 19 this standard, however, is still not reached in many asian countries. there is also a need to develop surge capacity for infection control within hospital, knowing that a nosocomial outbreak of sars could be explosive. for this purpose, one could build upon existing infection control liaison nurse programme in some hospitals. 20 many unanswered questions remain with respect to the mode of transmission, period of infectivity, effectiveness of and compliance with infection control practices. the rapid surge of sars cases made it impossible to conduct prospective studies to address many of the above questions. in hospital settings, it is at least known that heightened infection control precautions, empirical isolation of suspected cases, aggressive contact tracing and quarantine of the contacts are effective in halting even large outbreaks of nosocomial sars. 3 as sars might re-emerge, it is critical that hospital workers now review and repair deficiencies in their infection control programmes.the cost of development has had a major impact on the ecosystem balance. one major fallout is the jeopardized air environment (mage et al. 1996) . this is mainly due to a plethora of emission of pollutants such as pm 10 , pm 2.5 , no 2 , so 2 , etc. from various anthropogenic activities such as transportation, industrial processes, mining activities, waste burning, biomass burning, residential cooking, etc. gupta et al. 2020; humbal et al. 2019; bherwani et al. 2019; gautam et al. 2016) . deteriorated air causes long-and short-term health effects such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), asthma, respiratory mortality, cancer, cardiovascular mortality, etc. (kim et al. 2015; ghorani-azam et al. 2016; maji et al. 2017; cohen et al. 2017; landrigan et al. 2018) among humans. this global threat is considered as one the leading cause for mortality and accounts for 7 million lives every year, estimating a total cost of more than 4% of the gdp (who 2020). extensive studies have been carried out by various researchers (gulia et al. 2015; maji et al. 2017 & maji et al. 2018 in heavily polluted cities to quantify the healthrelated monetary burden upon the exposure of human in the deteriorated air environment.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) outbreak firstly identified in wuhan city, china (who 2020; gautam and hens 2020; gautam and trivedi 2020; gautam 2020a ) has now become a pandemic across the globe, resulting in about 3.5 million cases in just about 4 months who 2020) . the pandemic has declared global health emergency enforcing lockdown measures in activities (i.e., social contact, non-essential business, mobility, etc.) to flatten the epidemic curve. lockdown measures have shut down industries, halted vehicular traffic, and have had a huge impact on the daily routine of the people. due to this, considerable improvement in air quality levels of countries such as spain (tobias et al. 2020) , india (gautam 2020b) , brazil (nakada and urban 2020) , and china (sharma et al. 2020) ,and in cities such as bangkok, tokyo, paris, and new york (he et al. 2020) has been reported. the plummet in pollutant concentration is obvious due to the restriction in anthropogenic activities.the air quality during the lockdown period for majorly polluted cities (i.e., delhi, wuhan, paris, and london) is of high significance in determining the baseline pollution level and attributable health risk, to evaluate the potential fluctuation in monetary damages. assessment in terms of the number of lives affected is important, but a common baseline matrix such as "money" carries a much better message for the sake of understanding and decision making (gautam 2020a ). an unprecedented attempt has been made to quantify the economic benefit due to reduction in an excess number of health risk subject to mortality/morbidity attributable to lower air pollutant (pm 2.5 , pm 10 , no 2 , and so 2 ) concentration in wuhan, paris, london, and delhi. figure 1 indicates the geographical location of the cities.the monitored ground-based pollutant concentration are compared with who ambient air quality guidelines (who 2006) to evaluate the relative risk associated with each disease and thereby, the subsequent damage cost. the economic benefit/loss is calculated for each city based on the difference in excess number of health cases attributable to pollutant concentration during the lockdown period for 2020 and 2019. the study has also considered the overall benefit due to mass reduction in air pollutant level over the potential economic loss to the local and national government as an outcome of lockdown.population for the years of valuation is estimated to evaluate the extent of health damages due to ap in a particular city. population data is collected for 2019 and 2020 for calculating the number of people affected due to ap. the population of delhi, london, paris, and wuhan has increased from 185, 91.8, 109.6, and 82. 6 lakhs in 2019 to 195, 83.60, 93.00, and 110.2 lakhs in 2020, respectively (economic survey of delhi 2019).lockdown is imposed in many countries due to the outbreak of covid-19 (wang et al. 2020a; dutheil et al. 2020; gautam 2020b) . in delhi, the lockdown was imposed from march 22 (economic times 2020), in paris from march 18, 2020 (jon et al. 2020) , in london form march 23 (the hindu 2020), and in wuhan, it started from january 23. to analyze the ap levels, 31 days of lockdown is taken for the four cities and the respective data for ap as shown in table 1 along with dates of lockdown.average of 24-h mean data of pm 2.5 , pm 10 , so 2 , and no 2 values are taken in the period of lockdown that is 31 days for the four cities in 2020, and the same duration is taken in 2019 and values are shown in table 1 . number of people are affected by mortality and morbidity due to the exposure of harmful pollutant concentrations by taking the 24-h mean values for 31 days for these cities is evaluated. the values of people getting affected are calculated on the basis of daily data of pollutants in comparison to daily values of who guidelines. the daily values are averaged for month and shown here. so 2 has been found within limits throughout the study period for both the years.short-term health effects such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), asthma, respiratory mortality, cardiovascular mortality, and respiratory diseases due to excess pollution level during lockdown period (number of days (n) = 31) for the current and previous years were estimated using linear exposure-response curve (lerc) method.the assessment was carried considering various factors such as relative risk r r (m) due to mean pollutant concentration, population attributable to risk (par) due to exposure of pollutant, baseline incidence cases (i e ) per 10 5 population corresponding to mortality/morbidity health impacts, and the total population of the city (n). equations (1)-(3) are used for estimating earlier mentioned variables.where c m is monitored daily ambient air concentration of pollutant "k" (daily values of average pollutant loads given in table 1 ). c p is permissible standard for the pollutant "k" (who guideline values). the standards preferred are as put forth by who in 2006. rr is relative risk for the pollutant "k," and the values for r r and i e are discussed in table 2 . ρ(c) is the proportion of population being exposed to the pollutant "k" (100% exposure is considered in our study). i ne is the estimated number of cases.the monetary burden due to health risk is calculated using the methods of vsl, coi, and daly for mortality and morbidity endpoints. for valuation, morbidity and mortality are evaluated via separate methods. the valuation of mortality is done using vsl which is usually available for each country based on assessments done for either labor wages or insurance settlements. the data on vsl is inflated to the year 2019 (which is the base year of valuation for this research) in the native currency of the reference and is compiled in table 3 .the exchange rate/conversion factor is used for converting the native currency to usd while the inflation is carried out to bring the value to the base year of 2019. the formula for evaluation of monetary damages of mortality is given as follows: where er is the exchange rate (imf 2020) and ir is the inflation rate (the world bank 2019).on similar lines to mortality, morbidity is valued using cost of illness (coi) and daly and is added to get total morbidity-related damage assessment. the data related to daly is taken from the who database and is given for the select cities in table 4 .daly indicates the years of life lost and thus can be valued using the annual income of an individual. the per capita income (pci) of the selected cities with their referenced and converted values to usd ( 2019) is shown in table 5 . the formula related to daly-related morbidity damage valuation is given in eq. (5).another important related to morbidity is evaluated cost of treatment of the disease, which is done using coi. coi includes total cost incurred such as medicinal cost, travel cost, hospital admission, and lost day. cost of illness of morbidity of each city is shown in table 6 as compiled from the literature and converted to usd (2019). for the respiratory disease of paris, the literature was not available, and hence, the corresponding values in london are used. similarly, literature indicated very high costs for copd for wuhan, and hence, indian costs for copd are normalized with reference to asthma costs and used for valuation. the formula for evaluation of morbidity based on coi is given as follows:based on the above inputs, the valuations of morbidity-and mortality-related damages of ap are carried out and explained in the "results and discussion" section.in order to understand the true magnitude of the damages, it is compared to economic damages sustained during the lockdown. the prevention of ap provided a benefit at the cost of economic damage. for this, economic damage sustained by each city during the lockdown is calculated and compiled, as shown in table 7 . the gross domestic product (gdp) of the city is compared with the gdp of the country to understand the citywide damages as literature only reported country-level damages.ambient air quality for delhi, london, paris, and wuhan cities for the lockdown month with the number of days for the years 2019 and 2020 as shown in table 1 is considered for calculating the health damage cost due to air pollutants. during the lockdown days due to limited transportation and industrial output, air pollution is significantly reduced (wang et al. 2020b ). some of the air pollutants came within the world health organization (who) guidelines (jordan 2020) just a few days into the lockdown. no 2 concentration for all the cities during the lockdown is less than the who limit every day, whereas breach is observed for the year 2019. pollutant such as pm 2.5 , pm 10 , no x , and so 2 results in various health damages such as respiratory diseases, copd, cardiovascular diseases, and mortality. these pollutants are considered to calculate corresponding health damage cost. it can be observed that so 2 concentration was below the acceptable permissible limit set by international guidelines (who 2006) . hence, no health damage due to pollutant was considered. the daily mean of pm 2.5 , pm 10 and daily averages for no 2 during the month of lockdown days in 2020 and the same month for the previous year 2019 was found beyond the acceptable limit, thereby health damage assessment is carried out by certain set of formulas (eqs.(1)- (3)) (maji et al. 2017) .in order to quantify the impacts in monetary terms, it is essential to understand the mechanism by which the impact happens. the impact pathway approach (bherwani et al. 2019; ghorani-azam et al. 2016 ) reveals how emitted pollutants lead to different adverse outcomes on human wellbeing and other natural environments. in the current research, we are primarily focusing on human health impacts of ap, and the same is quantified in monetary terms. basic parameter of the number of people affected under morbidity and mortality are calculated using eqs. (1)-(3) using the available data. the factors for each of the pollutant parameter are taken from table 2 . the reference concentration for the pollutants is taken from the who guidelines. the cases of morbidity and mortality under each heading of disease for each city are summarized in table 8 .while standard deviations have been reported in pollutant concentration, relative risks, and baseline incidences, the resolution of calculation for multiplicative parameters using standard deviation may yield complex variations in the results. hence, the morbidity and mortality assessments have been done on average values. from table 8 , it can be seen that pm 2.5 is the most damaging parameter affecting many people in all cities. the highest cases are reported in delhi due to pm; however, no cases due to no 2 in 2019. since it has the highest number of cases to start with, the lockdown indicates the highest reduction as well. while this will hold true for monetary benefit as well or not is discussed later. wuhan indicates the second-highest number of people affected; however, reduction in 2020 appears to be low. london and paris show a similar size of cases. figure 2 indicates the morbidity and mortality between the two years 2019 and 2020.the valuation of morbidity is carried out for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, including general respiratory ailments, asthma and copd. coi is used to include the expenditure of treatment, including the outpatient and in-patient costs related to the ailment. the coi for each city, based on national averages, have been used for diseases, as indicated in table 6 . the valuation of the cost of treatment of morbidity is evaluated using eq. (6). apart from the treatment expenditure, the reduction in functionality of an individual also leads to massive losses to the economy. this is often evaluated as daly and is valued as well. for valuation, per capita income is used as a surrogate measure for the individuals getting effected along with dalys associated with their diseases. the data related to daly and per capita income based on city gdp averages is given in table 4 and table 5 , respectively. the daly-related valuation is carried out using eq.(5). the morbidity valuation is shown in table 9 while fig. 3 represents a comparative loss of all cities due to ap morbidity in the years 2019 and 2020. it can be seen from fig. 3 that the highest benefit in terms of absolute numbers and in terms of percentage reduction of about 38% is seen by delhi, which also happens to be one of the most polluted cities in the world. the lockdown scenario must have brought down the pollution levels drastically bringing a huge benefit to the city. in terms of change, paris also sees a considerable reduction with morbidity damages reduced by almost 35%. the city of wuhan and london see a similar kind of drop in terms of percentage reduction of about 19 to 20%. while the morbidity damages are in millions of dollars, it is evident that they have reduced considerably as compared to the previous year, indicating that the lockdown has improved air quality thereby saving of millions of dollars and more importantly an improved health and associated intangibles.mortality valuation is done using vsl, which is usually evaluated for low-to moderate-income groups in order to avoid overshooting the valuations. the value of statistical life for individuals staying in different countries is given in table 3 and is used for the mortality air qual atmos health cases as evaluated by the relative risk and baseline incidences reported by who. table 10 gives the mortality valuation under each category of disease for the respective pollutants. the equation used for valuation for mortality damages is given in the "methodology" section as eq. (4). figure 4 gives a year-wise comparison of the benefits produced by lockdown in 2020 in terms of mortality reduction. it is to be noted that mortality damages are reported as total mortality, and within that, there is respiratory and cardiovascular mortality. the total mortalities of particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide have been added to get the total value of damage related to mortality, which then further includes mortalities related to other factors of ap. a similar result is obtained as in case of morbidity. delhi has the greatest benefit with almost 49% reduction in damages related to mortality due to lockdown followed by paris with 39% reduction, london with 29%, and wuhan having 26% reduction. further, in terms of absolute numbers, the reduction of damages is highest in delhi, followed by london, wuhan, and paris, respectively.overall, mortality and morbidity represent the total loss due to ap in the select cities. the damages have been added and compared to the economic damages caused during the considered lockdown of these cities. the economic damages have been reported at the country level; the ratio of the gdps of the corresponding cities is taken to normalize the damages for cities. the raw data with respect to economic damages and gdp ratios are given in table 7 . the overall damages and economic damages are shown in table 11 .valuation of ap damages for 2019 and 2020 gives an understanding of the magnitude of damages which occurs due to ap. due to lockdown, there is a drastic reduction in ap as indicated by 2020 scenario in table 8 and  table 11 , leading to the prevention of ap-related damages. it can be seen from table 11 that the highest prevention happens in terms of absolute magnitude and percentage in delhi. london has the second-highest amount of prevention in terms of absolute numbers but falls behind paris in terms of percentage benefit. wuhan has the lowest prevention in terms of magnitude and percentage.when compared with the economic damages, as indicated in fig. 5 above, actually wuhan has the highest normalized benefit due to ap reduction, followed by delhi, london, and paris, respectively. this is evidently shown in terms of damage prevented per unit economic damage, which is highest for wuhan 1.85, followed by delhi 1.19, london 0.11, and paris 0.03. this study highlights that although the world is fighting with covid-19 and suffering from huge economic losses, due to reduced cohesive situation for work, the environment is benefitted. this further is demonstrated in monetary terms for reduced health damages related to air pollution. the exposure and impact assessment is carried out for delhi, london, paris, and wuhan, using relative risk and baseline indices of various air pollutants including pm 2.5 , pm 10 , and no 2 . the study further incorporates monetization of the impacts for 2019 and 2020, to gauge the magnitude of impact reduction of air pollution under covid-19 lockdown scenario. the monetary assessment of damages is done using econometric approaches like vsl, coi, and pci for daly. the key conclusions are summarized as follows:1. pm 2.5 is one of the major contributors to the burden of disease related to ap. delhi, being one of the most polluted cities globally, is the worst affected. pm 10 and no 2 impacts are also considerable, while so 2 is found within who guidelines limits for both 2019 and 2020. monetarily, the impact is curtailed by average 36% in mortality and about 28% in morbidity in the year 2020 due to substantial reduction in ap amid reduced anthropogenic activities owing to covid-19 lockdown. in terms of an absolute number of people affected, an average 31% reduction is for combined mortality and morbidity for all cities. impacts of no 2 are zeroed for the year 2020. for pm 2.5 mortality cases, delhi sees the highest fall in the number of cases for 2020 from 2019, followed by paris, wuhan, and london, in that order. it can be seen the trend in mortality damages between the cities is not similar to morbidity, indicating that there could be other compounding factors like age, life expectancy, and standard of living in these cities. 4. the total of morbidity and mortality damages reduction in 2020 is compared with the economic damages being reported for the cities. it is reported that london (18.6b$) suffered maximum economic damage during its respective lockdown days, while wuhan suffered the lowest (0.56b$). paris (15.81b$) and delhi (5.36b$) suffered the second-highest and lowest damages, respectively. delhi, london, wuhan, and paris prevented ap damages worth 6.4b$, 2.09b$, 0.97b$, and 0.47 b$, respectively, in 2020. this indicates that wuhan and delhi could extract better worth from prevention of damages from lockdown as compared to their lockdown losses. this might be due to the fact that both these cities are highly polluted as compared to paris and london and are economically developing as well. wuhan is actually higher as the economic damages incurred by that city are the lowest. the lowest recovery is made by paris, while london stands at second-lowest.it is apparent that while quantifying ap damages in terms of exposure and affected population is fruitful, there are more insights which can be explored to understand the true magnitude of the damage caused by it. the monetary evaluation gives a common denomination for comparison and for making a rational decision for policy formulation. the above research of four major global cities demonstrates that while the world is suffering from enormous economic damage, the lockdown has created some positive for the air environment and hence the human health as well. while the above analysis might hold true for the majority of the cities suffering from a probable of ap, a detailed analysis should be carried out for the respective city before making decisions. accounting of the cost and benefits due to halting of anthropogenic activities gives us a clear indication of the change of damage being incurred on the ecosystem and on human health. it further suggests that stronger policies are needed to safeguard the ecosystem balance. the virus starts the cell infection by binding to ace2, a major hub in multiple physiological processes: this binding can block ace2 network activity. however, the virus will enter the host cell when tmprss2 cleavages ace2. the first column depicts average gene and protein expression confidence for ace2 receptor; the second column depicts average expression confidence of tmprss2. the mean and standard deviation of expression confidence across 69 genes/proteins of ace2 network are presented in third and fourth columns, respectively. notice that lungs and respiratory system are ranked as #14-15 in this list, while heart and cardiovascular system #12-13. nervous and reproductive system are ranked as, #16-17 and #1-10, respectively.to identify how ace2 network is connected with the sars-cov-2/human interactome, we included the previously published interactome into our analysis. 30 we found that three proteins from our network, ace2, clec4m, and tmprss2, are directly interacting with virus glycoprotein s. in total, 45 proteins from the complete ace2 network are interacting with 38 from 94 human host proteins for sars-cov-2. the strongest connection between networks was associated with ins, which interacted with 12 host proteins from sars-cov-2/human interactome. other top interactors were cat, ccl2, cdk4, calm1 connected with at least 6 host proteins. among host proteins directly interacting with virus proteins, the strongest connection with ace2 network occurs by alb (31 interactors form ace2 network) and cav1 (13 interactors) (figure 3 ). enrichment analysis of the signaling within ace2-tissue specific network. by applying enrichment analysis for analyzing signaling pathways associated with analyzed networks we used kegg database and reactome databases. according to the kegg database, only the ras and protein digestion and absorption pathways were shared between all six compared networks ( figure  4b ). analysis of signaling pathways using the reactome database showed analogous pathways, for metabolism of angiotensinogen to angiotensin and peptide hormone metabolism. reactome pathway analysis also showed that intrinsic pathway of fibrin clot formation, neutrophil degranulation, endothelial nitric oxide synthase (enos) figure 2 . predicted ace2 interaction network. (a) complete ace2 network, visualized as two circles sorted by the number of connections (degree) with other nodes. the external circle depicts the first level ace2 interactors; the internal circle depicts the second level of interactors, with genes which do not connect directly with ace2. for clarity, we showed only the edges associated with virus-related proteins (gene id in red). edges associated with virus-related proteins are shown in red for first-level (direct) and in grey for the second--level (indirect) ace2 interactors. inset in the top right depicts the additional information for each gene/protein, as associated processes (blue letters), associated diseases (color-label ring) and expression confidence across key tissues (black bars). inset in the bottom right depict the same network including all edges. notice that the closest ace2 interactors are ren and ins, which play a central role in the pathophysiology of a number of cardiovascular disorders. the following interactor is kng1, essential for blood coagulation and assembly of the kallikrein-kinin system. in the network are present 11 virus-infection related proteins forming a dense connection with ace2 and its top interactors which can affect its functionality. (b) subsets of ace2 network containing only highly expressed proteins in the heart, lung, and nervous system; analogous network for virus-related proteins (right). activation, innate immune system pathway, and protein metabolism related pathways were shared across all networks, except for virus-infection related proteins networks. platelet activation associated with formation of blood clots was enriched in lung and heart tissue, while digestion of dietary carbohydrate (kegg) was enriched only in the complete network ( figure 4a ).we performed enrichment analysis of disgenet disease and rare diseases autorif database using enrichr website to evaluate phenotypes associated with ace2 interaction in different tissues. it enabled us to identify the disease traits which would be helpful in precise identification of the risk groups of patients with covid-19. this analysis guides the identification of phenotypes which can be triggered by ace2-network alterations in selected tissues. moreover, the analysis of rare traits enabled us to precisely characterise the consequences of alterations in the groups of ace2-network related genes.the analysis of non-cancerous diseases in the disgenet database revealed that the highest number of genes from all analyzed networks was associated with following disease phenotypes (in the decreasing order): obesity, hypertensive disease, non-insulin dependent dm, congestive hf, coronary artery disease and atherosclerosis and were observed in all analyzed networks ( figure 5a ). enriched terms not enriched in virus-related network, but containing virusinfection related genes were: alzheimer's disease, heart failure, diabetes mellitus, asthma and rheumatoid arthritis.the analysis focused on 11 virus-infection related proteins and diseases shared with other networks, except for diseases mentioned in the last paragraph, revealed that the most significant ones were, sars, virus diseases, mi and arteriosclerosis ( figure 5a ). additional enrichment analysis of rare disease terms is shown in figure 5b .ace2 network related mirna predictions. we found 1954 mirnas regulating components of the ace2 interaction network. in further analyses, we put special focus on mirnas which regulated the highest number of the genes from the network as well including ace2. analysis of top 10 mirnas regulating each network (complete network, heart, lung, nervous system tissues and virus-infection related proteins network) revealed overall 16 mirnas ( figure 6 ). five of them were shared between all networks (hsa-mir-302c-5p, hsa-mir-27a-3p, hsa-mir-1305, hsa-mir-587, hsa-mir-26b-5p) ( figure 6c ). signaling pathways associated with 36 genes regulated by those top mirnas included: ras pathway, age-rage signaling pathway in diabetic complications and the apelin signaling pathway. we also observed enrichment signaling pathways associated with the following diseases: chagas disease, diseases with heightened arterial wall shear stress, atherosclerosis, alzheimer's disease, and malaria ( figure 6b ). performed pathway enrichment analysis in the complete ace2 network (left-most column of symbols) and also in subsets of this network expressed in the heart, lung, and nervous system; we performed this same analysis also for 11 virus-infection related proteins (right-most column of symbols, grey numbers). all circles presented on the graph are associated with significantly enriched pathwyas (fdr corrected p-value <0.05). pathways marked with asterisks include the ace2 gene. notice that all analyzed datasets showed enrichment of pathways related to renin-angiotensin system and protein digestion and absorption in both databases. the pathways for "enos activation", "intrinsic pathway of fibrin clot formation", "immune system (reactome)", "age-rage signaling pathway in diabetic complications'' , and "apelin signaling pathway (keeg)" were enriched in all analyzed tissues. specific on heart tissue, the "adrenergic signaling in cardiomyocytes (reactome)" was enriched. 12 a b figure 5 . top 80 potential covid-19 risk groups, from common and rare diseases significantly associated with ace2 interaction networks. this list is based on enrichment analysis of disgenet, analyzed through enrichr database. we performed disease enrichment analysis in the complete ace2 network (left-most column of symbols) and also in subsets of this network expressed in the heart, lung , and nervous system; we performed this same analysis also for 11 virus-infection related proteins (right-most column of symbols). diseases marked with asterisks include the ace2 gene. for heart, lung and nervous system tissue, we used the cutoff of expression confidence >2, obtained from tissue2.0 database. all circles presented on the graph are associated with significantly enriched diseases terms (fdr corrected p-value <0.05). we did not include cancer-related diseases in this analysis. terms marked with * symbols include ace2 gene (all except "asthma" include it). the highest number of genes was observed in disease terms shared between all of the networks: sars*, renal glycosuria*, marburg hemorrhagic fever, hyperinsulinism due to glutamate dehydrogenase deficiency, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, ebola virus disease. enriched terms not enriched in virus-related network but containing virusrelated genes were kallikrein hypertension*, aortic coarctation*, coarctation of aorta dominant*, plasma thromboplastin antecedent deficiency, mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis, goodpasture syndrome, eclampsia and hyperoxaluria*. analysis focused on 11 virus-related proteins and diseases shared with other networks showed that the most significant were, except for mentioned ones also krabbe leukodystrophy.in the current study, we characterized the interaction between sars-cov-2 infection and ace2 functional networks with a focus on cvd. using data mining and bioinformatic tools, we described the ace2 interaction network and evaluated its expression. the main findings of this analysis are the following:(1) expression of ace2 is similar in lungs and heart, which provides a rationale why the cardiovascular system is also a target of sars-cov-2 infection; (2) change in the heart-relevant ace2 interaction network by sars-cov-2 binding to the receptor likely leads to disturbances in signaling pathways linked to cardiac adverse outcomes; (3) genes, which are altered in patients with cardiovascular risk factors (as dpp4, ccl2 and anpep) are extensively connected with top regulators of the ace2 network; (4) specific mirnas (mir-302c-5p, mir-1305, mir-587, mir-26b-5p, and mir-27a-3p) are shared as top regulators between the heart-specific network, complete ace2 network, virus-infection related proteins network, lung, and nervous system networks;recently published studies suggested that the highest expression of ace2 was found in the digestive tract, followed by testis and kidney. 31, 32 our analysis shows the highest expression of ace2 in the genitourinary tract and related tissues. moreover, we found in the genitourinary tract the highest co-expression of tmprss2 gene that is known to positively regulate viral entry into the host cell via proteolytic cleavage of ace2. our analysis also supports the findings of a previous study using integrated analyses of single-cell atlases showing a high expression of ace2 in ventricular cardiomyocytes, heart macrophages, and pericytes of the heart, lung, and kidney. 33 therefore, the disturbances in the ace2 interaction network, by sars-cov-2 binding in the ace2 receptor on cardiomyocytes, might explain cardiac abnormalities presented in covid-19 patients, including elevated troponin, myocarditis, and sudden cardiac death. 34 moreover, as myocardial complex interaction network of ace and its own expression is increased in patients with coexisting cvd, sars-cov-2 infection may result in greater damage to cardiomyocytes, and account for greater disease acuity and poorer survival in these patients.our analysis of ace2 interaction network, as well as analysis only focused on heart-tissue specific genes, showed that change in ace2 receptor activity can lead to significant disturbances in signaling pathways linked to wellknown complications in covid-19 disease. those pathways included ras, age-rage signaling pathway in diabetic complications, neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, innate immune system, neutrophil degranulation and intrinsic pathway of clot formation. moreover, signaling pathways identified as specific for the heart-relevant ace2 interaction network were associated with adrenergic signaling in cardiomyocytes, foxo2 signaling pathway, relaxin signaling pathway, platelet degranulation and vegfr2 mediated vascular permeability. in these networks, the closest interactors of ace2 were ren, ins, kng1, and agt. those results were supported by our subsequent analysis showing that genes from the ace2 network have strongest connection with rare diseases related to high blood pressure, respiratory diseases (i.e. sars and goodpasture syndrome), renal diseases, coagulation disorders and several phenotypes like obesity, hypertension, dm that are known to be a risk factors for severe course of covid-19. moreover, in our in silico analysis using ace2 functional networks, we found that ras/ace2, age-rage, and apelin signaling pathways play an important role in sars-cov-2 infection. these pathways have a crucial role in pathogenesis of dm, cvd and blood pressure regulations. therefore, binding of the sars-cov-2 to the ace2 receptor leading to disturbances in the pathways of these key regulators might explain the adverse outcome in covid-19 patients with coexistence of cvd. abnormalities of ace2/ras pathway signaling and deregulation of angiotensin ii as a fundamental mediator of this axis are closely related to pathophysiology of hypertension and progression of cardiovascular remodeling. 35 furthermore, increased ace2 expression attenuates hypertension-linked pathophysiological changes and protects against elevated blood pressure whereas loss of ace2 function exacerbates hypertension. 36 apelin signaling is involved in many physiological processes such as energy metabolism, blood pressure regulation, and cardiac contractility and plays an important role in organ and tissue pathologies including, dm, obesity, hf as well as hiv-1 infection. 37 in vitro analysis showed that apelin is a second catalytic substrate for ace2 and it can effect as an inotropic and cardioprotective peptide. 38, 39 thromboembolic complications in covid-19: the role of kng1, one of the top ace2 interactors. in this study we found a strong connection between ace2 and kng1 which as a part of kalikrein-kinin system (kks) encoding precursors of kinins. 40 kks mediators are involved in vessel wall remodeling, intimal hyperplasia 41 and affect nitric oxide and prostacyclin production. 42 moreover, high molecular weight kininogen (hk) is essential in surface-binding and activity of factor xi, a component of intrinsic pathway of blood coagulation. 43 plasma kininogen may induce the development of arterial thrombosis, especially under pathologic conditions. 44 2-chain hka was also found to inhibit pai-1 function, interfere with platelet activation and mediate platelet-leukocyte interaction 45, 46 and therefore, deregulation of kks may result in thromboembolic complications and lead to sepsis exacerbation in infections. [47] [48] [49] pro-inflammatory cytokines modulated by ace2, a putative mechanism for generalized inflammatory response. several experimental studies indicated that ace2 is able to modify acute and chronic inflammatory response. 50, 51 in line, we found in our analysis a strong interaction of ace2 with several genes related with inflammatory response including ccl2 and tgfb1. loss of function of ace2 in mutant mice resulted in enhanced production of inflammatory cytokine and collagenase levels, increased ros, neutrophilic infiltration and mapk activation. 52 diminished ace2 function may deregulate ras and induce inflammation and vessel permeability and lung edema. 53 it is worth to mention that among sars-cov-infected patients the level of pro-inflammatory cytokines, especially ccl2 and tgf-β1 were increased in cells expressing ace2, while this could not be seen in tissue with undetectable ace2 expression 54 a comparable pattern of inflammatory cytokines was found in sars-cov-2 infection as well. 55 the role of virus-infection related proteins from ace2 network in covid-19 adverse outcomes. additional analysis of ace2 interaction network identified 11 virus-infection related proteins involved in significantly enriched pathways. three of them (ace2, clec4m and tmprss2) directly interact with virus glycoprotein s. we identified 10 virus-infection related proteins in the heart-specific interaction network, (except for tmprss2) suggesting that the heart tissue could be capable of being as strongly affected as the respiratory system. three of those genes: dpp4, ccl2 and anpep showed especially extensive connections with top regulators of the network. interestingly, higher plasma dpp4 can be found among patients with obesity, metabolic syndrome and dm, who are at risk of a severe course of covid-19. 56 moreover, in experimental models of ards, dpp4 inhibitors suppressed pro-inflammatory cytokine production and attenuated lps-induced lung injury. 57 dpp4 knockin mice were found more susceptible to mers-cov infections which resulted in severe inflammatory response and lethal lung disease. 58, 59 therefore, it should be further investigated whether dpp4 inhibitors, widely used for the treatment of dm, may act as therapeutic drugs for ards caused by sars-cov-2 infection. 60 interestingly, dpp4 inhibitors are able to at least partially reverse the olfactory dysfunction observed in dm, suggesting that dpp4 pathway may be involved in anosmia which occurs commonly among covid-19 patients. 61, 62 this evidence show that dpp4 could be a crucial factor in regulation of multiple pathological processes associated with covid-19.second crucial cytokine in the network is the chemokine ccl2 also referred to as mcp-1. it has been shown that the ccl2 expression was increased among patients infected with sars-cov. 63, 64 possibly, ace2 mediates viral entry and leads to activation of erk1/2/ap-1 pathway and upregulation of ccl2. ccl2 protein has been implicated in lung inflammatory disorders and contributes to development of pulmonary fibrosis. 19, 65 besides, in the late stage of disease ccl2 expression levels are constantly elevated among severe sars patients in comparison to non-severe controls and associated with diffuse pulmonary infiltrates, higher body temperatures and longer hospitalization. 66 it is worth to mention that among sars-cov-infected patients the level of pro-inflammatory cytokines, especially ccl2 and tgf-β1 were increased in cells expressing ace2, while this could not be seen in tissue with undetectable ace2 expression. 54 a comparable pattern of inflammatory cytokines was found in sars-cov-2 infection as well. 55 significant association of the ccl2 with malaria disease pathway in our study, target of chloroquine, a potent anti inflammatory agent (regulating also ace2 and ins) make it a promising link between ace2 and cytokine storm associated with severe covid-19 disease.the third gene with extensive ace2 network connection, anpep encodes aminopeptidase n (apn, cd13), which similarly to ace2 and ddp2 is also recognized as a target for coronavirus named hcov-22944. 67 apn plays a role in inflammatory response by regulating the activity of various hormones, chemokines and cytokines and was found to be increased in some inflammatory diseases. 68 apn may influence on controlling blood pressure by regulating the metabolism of ang iii. 69in the next step of our study, we searched for mirnas that may regulate expression of ace2 networks and related processes. our prediction model revealed that mir-302c-5p, mir-1305, mir-587, mir-26b-5p, and mir-27a-3p are top regulators of complete ace2 network, heart-specific network as well as virus-infection related network. to our best knowledge, we present here novel results on a potential role of mirnas as a diagnostic and prognostic tool in heart muscle injury in the course of sars-cov-2 infection.mir-1305 and mir-587: tgf-β signaling pathway regulators in hf progression. mir-1305 and mir-587 were found to regulate the expression of tgf-β pathway members, smad3 and smad4. 70, 71 smad3 negatively regulates the inflammatory response and modulates t-cell activation. 72 the tgf-β/smad signaling pathway has been directly related to viral infections. 73 moreover, this pathway deregulation has been also implicated to ventricular remodeling, myocardial fibrosis and hypertrophy and, as a result, hf progression. 74 the highest expression of mir-587 was found in platelets of patients with acute coronary syndrome and was closely related to the severity of coronary artery stenosis. 75 mir-26b-5p: anti-fibrotic agent and agtr1-dependent hypertension modulator. in our study we found that mir-26b-5p may play an important role in pathogenesis of hf in covid-19 patients as showed by an interaction of ace2 with enpep, agt, ccn2, calm1, ccl2, and agtr1. noteworthy, previous study showed that in the mirna-differentially expressed genes (deg) regulatory network, hsa-mir-26b-5p was one of the most important mirna and agtr1 was the most outstanding up-regulated degs in the ppi network. 76 it has been suggested that agtr1 can modulate hypertension, via the regulation of mir-26b-5p in arachidonic acid metabolism. the anti-fibrotic effect of mir-26b-5p was shown in the liver, in the diabetic mouse myocardium and in ang-ii-induced mouse cardiac fibroblasts . 77 mir-302c-5p: potential antiviral therapeutic and biomarker of hf. another regulating mirna from our network was mir-302c-5p playing an important role in many viral infections. [78] [79] [80] a study reported an association between the mir-302, kpna2 axis and ev71-related cytokine storm and showed the potential of mir-302 as an antiviral therapeutic. 80 our bioinformatic analysis for the first time showed the importance of mir-302c-5p in sars-cov-2 infection. apart from the crucial function of mir-302 in viral infections, it may be also associated with cvd, 81,82 as circulating mir-302 was positively correlated with nt-probnp levels in acute hf patients and showed strong potential as a novel biomarker for the diagnosis and the differentiation of disease severity of acute hf. 81 mir-27a-3p: a potential biomarker of acute hf and nf-κb signaling regulator. also mir-27a-3p was found to be involved in inflammatory response and oxidative stress through several pathways including ppar-γ, nf-κb and pi3k/ akt/nrf2 signaling. [83] [84] [85] in animal model of acute lung injury, expression of mir-27a-3p in alveolar macrophages was significantly decreased, while overexpression of mir-27a-3p suppressed nf-κb activation and alleviated acute lung injury by binding to its target nfkb1. 83 moreover, it was also found that mir-27a-3p may target pathways related to atherosclerosis, and may act as a potential biomarker of acute hf. 86, 87 this comprehensive analysis provides novel information regarding the complexity of signaling pathways of sars-cov-2 infection affecting the cardiovascular system and forms a basis for a creation of predictive tools and introduction of therapy to improve outcome in covid-19, and therefore has a potential to reduce economic consequences of the global pandemic. we believe that the results of our analysis could be further validated in laboratory and clinical settings and help to create a paradigm for future studies in this field. mirnas identified for the first time in this study can serve as potential biomarkers helping with identification of the pathological changes in covid-19 or serve as therapeutic targets due to their stability in the serum, forming a basis for personalized therapy in patients with or at risk for cvd as those with obesity, dm or hypertension suffering from covid-19.in brief yang et al. show that hpsc-derived cells and organoids provide valuable models to study sars-cov-2 tropism and to model covid-19. they find that hpscderived pancreatic endocrince cells and human adult hepatocyte and cholangiocyte organoids are permissive to sars-cov-2 infection.q6 q5 covid-19 was declared a pandemic by the world health organization, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). respiratory failure is the most common mortality outcome in covid-19 patients, yet serious and even fatal manifestations are seen across multiple organ systems, including the heart (mehra et al., 2020 covid-19 patients, nearly 20% had suffered in-hospital cardiac injury, which was a significant independent risk factor for mortality . nearly 25% of patients have gastrointestinal manifestations including anorexia, diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and these symptoms are associated with worse covid-19 outcomes (pan et al., 2020) . a recent clinical study among 7,300 covid-19 patients also showed a strong correlation between poor covid-19 outcomes and type 2 diabetes . recent clinical studies suggest that diabetes is not only a risk factor for severe covid-19 disease, but also that sars-cov-2 infection can induce new-onset diabetes (bornstein et al., 2020) .currently, there are no vaccines or effective treatment options for covid-19 due to limited knowledge of sars-cov-2 viral biology. most current studies are based on clinical data, immortalized cell lines, or transgenic animals that express the human sars viral entry receptor, ace2. unfortunately, these in vitro (e.g., african green monkey vero cells or human cancer cell lines) and in vivo (e.g., mice engineered to express ace2) models are sufficiently distinct from human biology that they are unlikely to capture key aspects of viral infection and virus-host interactions. several human cancer lines, including a549, calu3, hfl (lung adenocarcinoma), caco2 (colorectal adenocarcinoma), huh7 (hepatocellular adenocarcinoma), hela (cervical adenocarcinoma), 293t (embryonic kidney), u251 (glioblastoma), and rd (rhabdomyosarcoma) have been used to study sars-cov-2 infection and for drug evaluation (chu et al., 2020; hoffmann et al., 2020; ou et al., 2020; shang et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020) . however, many human organs and tissues contain multiple cell types and ace2, the putative receptor of sars-cov-2, is heterogeneously expressed in different cell types. thus, using cancer cell lines might fail to appreciate the different cell types affected by sars-cov-2 infection. in addition, most of these human cancer cell lines carry tumor-associated mutations, such as p53 mutations. p53 has been shown to regulate sars-cov replication, which raises concern for how these cancer cell lines recapitulate the viral biology of sars-cov-2 in normal nontransformed cells (ma-lauer et al., 2016) . moreover, certain cell lines (such as huh7.5) have mutations in genes controlling the innate immune response (a known defect in rig-i) which may obscure antiviral responses and the subsequent viral life cycle. as these cells are all cancer cell lines, they have maintained their ability to proliferate and often are unpolarized which could impact several components of viral infection. taken together, it seems likely that these differences from primary cells and tissues will impact their ability to model sars-cov-2 infection. as a consequence, there is an urgent need to create models to study sars-cov-2 biology using human disease-relevant cells and tissues. a human cell-based platform to study viral tropism would be a first step toward defining cell types permissive to sars-cov-2 infection and for modeling covid-19 disease across multiple organ systems.human pluripotent stem cells (hpscs), including human embryonic stem cells (hescs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hipscs), can be used to derive functional human cells/tissues/ organoids for modeling human disease and drug discovery, including for infectious diseases. for example, hpsc-derived neuronal progenitor cells (hnpcs) and brain organoids were used to study the impact of zika virus (zikv) on human brain development and the mechanistic link between zikv infection and microcephaly, as reviewed (wen et al., 2017) . hpsc-derived hnpcs were used to screen for anti-zikv drugs and identified emricasan as a pan-caspase inhibitor that protects hnpcs, in addition to cyclin-dependent kinases and niclosamide that inhibit zikv replication (xu et al., 2016) . similarly, we performed a high content screen and identified an anti-zikv compound, hippeastrine hydrobromide, that suppressed viral propagation when administered to adult mice with active zikv infection, highlighting its therapeutic potential . here, we present a platform developed using hpscs to generate multiple different cell and organoid derivatives representative of all three primary germ layers. we used these to systematically explore the viral tropism of sars-cov-2 and cellular responses to infection.we used directed differentiation of hpscs to generate eight distinct cell types or organoids representing lineages from all three definitive germ layers ( figure 1a ). after hpsc differentiation into definitive endoderm (de), pancreatic and liver cells were generated. for the pancreatic lineage, de cells were differentiated progressively into pancreatic progenitors and then directed into pancreatic endocrine lineages using a modified strategy from a previously published protocol (zeng et al., 2016) that specifies glucagon + (gcg + ) pancreatic alpha cells, insulin + (ins + ) pancreatic beta cells, and somatostatin + (sst + ) delta cells ( figures s1a and s2a ). the de cells were otherwise induced using a modification of a previously published approach to differentiate into liver organoids, comprising mainly albumin + (alb + ) hepatocytes (figure s1b and s2a).cells committed to mesoderm fate were directed to differentiate into endothelial cells (figure s1c), cardiomyocytes (figure s1d) , macrophages (figure s1e), or microglia ( figure s1f ). the endothelial cells stained positively with antibodies recognizing cd31 ( figure s2a ). the cardiomyocytes were derived from an myh6:mcherry hesc reporter line (tsai et al., 2020) and more than 90% expressed mcherry and stained positively with an antibody recognizing sarcomeric a-actinin ( figure s2a ). mesodermal cells were alternatively differentiated progressively to hematopoietic progenitor cells, monocytes, and finally either cd11b + /cd206 + macrophages or pu.1 + /iba1 + microglial cells ( figure s2a ).cells initially induced to form ectoderm were differentiated into cortical neurons or dopaminergic neurons using previously reported protocols (zhou et al., 2018) . day 45 cortical neurons stained positively with antibodies against beta iii-tubulin, while dopaminergic neurons stained positively with antibodies recognizing the midbrain marker foxa2 and the neuronal marker map2 ( figure s2a ).ace2 is a putative receptor for sars-cov-2 infection (hoffmann et al., 2020) . immunostaining was performed to examine the expression of ace2 in the spectrum of hpsc-derived cell types. in pancreatic endocrine cells, ace2 expression was detected readily in gcg + alpha cells and ins + beta cells, but not in sst + delta cells ( figures 1b and s2b ace2 was expressed in most albumin + hepatocytes ( figure 1b ). ace2 was also expressed in hpsc-derived cd31 + endothelial cells, hpsc-derived cardiomyocytes, microglia, cd206 + macrophages, and hpsc-derived dopaminergic neurons ( figure 1b ). in contrast, ace2 expression was detected at relatively low levels in hpsc-derived cortical neurons ( figure 1b ). ace2 expression was not detected in hpscs ( figure s2c ).differential cell type-dependent permissiveness to sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus infection to determine the relative permissiveness of hpsc-derived cells and organoids to sars-cov-2 viral entry, we used a vesicular stomatitis virus (vsv)-based sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus, for which the backbone was provided by a vsv pseudo-typed dg-luciferase virus with the sars-cov-2 spike protein incorporated in the surface of the viral particle instead whitt, 2010) . pseudo-typed entry viruses based on either a vsv or hiv backbone have been broadly used to study sars-cov-2 entry (ou et al., 2020; shang et al., 2020) and to evaluate drug candidates (hoffmann et al., 2020) and neutralizing antibodies lei et al., 2020; walls et al., 2020) . each of the eight distinct hpsc-derivatives were inoculated with the sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus and at 24 h post-infection (hpi) analyzed for viral entry based on luciferase activity (figures 1c and s2d) . the results largely correlated with ace2 expression profiles with a few exceptions. high luciferase (luc) activity, as a readout for the efficiency of sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus infection, was readily detected in hpscderived pancreatic endocrine cells, liver organoids, cardiomyocytes, and dopaminergic neurons. relatively low or no luc levels were found for endothelial cells, microglia, macrophages, or cortical neurons. time course experiments showed that low luc activity was not a delayed response, as levels remained comparable at 48 h ( figure s2e ). thus, we focused on 24 hpi for remaining studies. the same cell types that showed high luc activity stained positively with a luc antibody ( figure 1d ). in hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells, luc expression was detected in gcg + alpha cells and ins + beta cells, but not in sst + delta cells, consistent with ace2 expression ( figure 1e and s2f). in liver organoids, luc expression was detected in alb + hepatocytes ( figure 1f ). luc was also detected in sarcomeric a-actinin + cardiomyocytes ( figure 1g ). luc was rarely detected in iba1 + microglial cells ( figure 1h ), cd31 + endothelial cells ( figure 1i ), or cd206 + macrophages ( figure 1j ). finally, luc + cells were detected in hpsc-derived map2 + and foxa2 + dopaminergic neurons ( figures 1k and s2g ), but not beta iii-tubulin + cortical neurons ( figure 1l ).permissive to sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus and sars-cov-2 virus infection before validating permissiveness of primary human islets to sars-cov-2 virus, we used single-cell rna-sequencing to examine global transcript profiles and to define cell lineages. the data were projected using uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap, figure 2a ). nine distinct cell types were identified, including acinar, ductal, beta, alpha, mesenchymal, poly-peptide (pp), delta, endothelial, and immune cells ( figures  2b and s3a ). the expression of unique marker genes, including figure 2b ). we examined the expression profiles of two factors associated with sars-cov-2 infection: the putative receptor ace2 and the effector protease tmprss2 (hoffmann et al., 2020) . ace2 and tmprss2 were both expressed in acinar cells, ductal cells, cell stem cell 27, 1-12, july 2, 2020 5 beta cells, alpha cells, mesenchymal cells, and endothelial cells ( figures 2c and 2d ). immunohistochemistry further validated that primary human beta cells and alpha cells express ace2 (figure 2e) . human primary islets were infected with sars-cov-2 virus (usa-wa1/2020, moi = 0.01) and analyzed at 24 hpi by immunostaining. both ins + beta cells and gcg + alpha cells ( figure 2f ) stained positive for sars-cov-2 spike protein.humanized mice carrying human pancreatic endocrine cells in vivo provide a unique platform for modeling covid-19. in brief, hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells were transplanted under the kidney capsule of scid-beige mice ( figure 2g ). two months after transplantation, the organoid xenograft was removed and examined for cellular identities. consistent with in vitro culture, ace2 can be detected in hpsc-derived ins + beta cells and gcg + alpha cells ( figure 2h ). next, sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus was inoculated locally in xenografted mice (1 3 10 4 pfu). at 24 hpi, the xenografts were removed and analyzed by immunohistochemistry. luc was detected in the xenografts inoculated with virus, but not in mock-infected controls. immunohistochemistry detected luc in ins + beta cells and gcg + alpha cells (figures 2i and 2j) , indicating these are both permissive to sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus infection in vivo.to evaluate the cellular response of human pancreatic endocrine cells to sars-cov-2 infection, hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells were infected with sars-cov-2 (usa-wa1/2020) at increasing mois (moi = 0.01, 0.05, 0.1). viral replication 24 hpi as measured by viral subgenomic (sg) n rna levels was detected using qrt-pcr analysis ( figure 3a ). sars-cov-2 spike protein was detected in both ins + beta cells and gcg + alpha cells by immunofluorescence staining ( figure 3b ). a substantial number of sars-s + ins + cells (more than 50 for each field) and sars-s + gcg + cells (approximately 20 for each field) were detected in sars-cov-2-infected conditions ( figure 3c ). transcript profiling was then performed to compare mock and sars-cov-2-infected cells. alignment of transcripts with the viral genome confirmed robust viral replication in hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells ( figure 3d ). principal component analysis (pca) showed that mock and sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cell samples cluster separately ( figure 3e ). kegg gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) comparing mock-infected with sars-cov-2-infected cells revealed the upregulation of pathways associated with viral infection, such as human cytomegalovirus infection, herpes simplex infection, human immunodeficiency virus 1 infection, epstein-barr virus infection, and hepatitis c. interestingly, the insulin resistance pathway was also upregulated. the pathways associated with beta cell or alpha cell function, including calcium signaling pathways, glucagon signaling pathways, and meta-bolic pathways, were all downregulated in the virus-infected conditions ( figure 3f , table s1 ). these changes could be due either to increased cell death or loss of cellular identities. to distinguish these possibilities, we stained mock or sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells with a cell apoptotic marker (casp3) and cell type-specific markers (gcg for alpha cells and ins for beta cells). both the percentage of casp3 + cells in gcg + cells and the percentage of casp3 + cells in ins + cells increased in sars-cov-2-infected cells (figures s3b and s3c) , suggesting that the changed signaling pathway profiles in sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived endocrine cells is mainly due to increased cell apoptosis. in agreement with this, genes associated with apoptosis were upregulated while genes associated with cell survival were downregulated in sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells ( figure s3d ). as it is technically challenging to obtain pancreatic samples from covid-19 patients, we compared transcript profiles from lung autopsy samples from healthy donors or covid-19 patients and identified a robust upregulation of chemokines, including ccl2, cxcl5, and cxcl6, in the covid-19 patient samples as has been described previously ( figure 3g ; blanco-melo et al., 2020) . these and other chemokine and cytokine transcript levels were also upregulated in sars-cov-2-infected pancreatic endocrine cells compared to mock infected cells ( figure 3h ). together, the data suggest that sars-cov-2-infected pancreatic endocrine cells show robust chemokine induction, which is similar to what is found in autopsy samples from covid-19 patients.the viral tropism analysis using hpsc-derived cells showed that hpsc-derived liver organoids are permissive to sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus infection ( figure 1f ). we next used human adult hepatocyte and cholangiocyte organoids to validate this finding. adult primary human hepatocyte organoids were infected with sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus (moi = 0.1). at 24 hpi, significantly increased luc activity was detected in sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus-infected samples ( figure s4a ) and luc expression was detected in sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus-infected alb + hepatocytes but not mock-infected hepatocytes ( figures s4b and s4c) . consistently, luc expression was also detected in sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus-infected ck19 + cholangiocyte organoids but not mock-infected organoids at 24 hpi ( figures s4d and s4e) .adult primary human hepatocyte organoids were inoculated with sars-cov-2 (usa-wa1/2020, moi = 0.1) and analyzed at 24 hpi. analysis by qrt-pcr data demonstrated robust sars-cov-2 infection as evidenced by high levels of viral sgrna transcripts of the replicating viral rna ( figure 4a ). this was (i and j) confocal imaging (i) and quantification (j) of human pancreatic endocrine xenografts against luc, ins, or gcg, at 24 hpi of sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus (1 3 10 4 pfu) infection. scale bar represents 25 mm. n = 3 independent biological replicates. data were presented as mean ± stdev. p values were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student's t test. ***p < 0.001. see also figure s3 . (legend continued on next page) ll stem 2874cell stem cell 27, 1-12, july 2, 2020 7 confirmed at the protein level by immunostaining for sars-cov-2 spike protein expression ( figure 4b ). the percentage of sars-s + cells in the infected hepatocyte organoids was highly significant ( figure 4c ). we were also able to generate primary human organoids comprised mostly of cholangiocytes. these organoids were also inoculated with sars-cov-2 (moi = 0.1) and analyzed at 24 hpi. analysis by qrt-pcr demonstrated robust sars-cov-2 infection ( figure 4d ), which was confirmed by immunostaining ( figure 4e ), and the percentage of sars-s + cells in infected cholangiocyte organoids was also significant ( figure 4f ). transcript profiles were then compared between mock and sars-cov-2-infected human primary hepatocyte and cholangiocyte organoids. alignment with the viral genome confirmed robust viral replication in both hepatocyte organoids ( figure 4g ) and cholangiocyte organoids ( figure 4h ). pca showed significant distinction between mock infected and sars-cov-2-infected hepatocyte organoids ( figure 4i ). volcano plots and heatmaps of differentially expressed genes in sars-cov-2-infected hepatocyte organoids revealed robust induction of chemokines, including cxcl1, cxcl3, cxcl5, cxcl6, and ccl20, and significant downregulation of key hepatocyte metabolic markers, such as cyp7a1, cyp2a6, cyp1a2, and cyp2d6 ( figures 4j  and s4f ). kegg gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) comparing mock-infected with sars-cov-2-infected hepatocyte organoids revealed over-represented and upregulated pathways, including cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, il-17 signaling, chemokine signaling pathway, tnf signaling, and nf-kb signaling pathway, while cellular metabolism was largely downregulated ( figure 4k , table s1 ).pca also suggested that mock and sars-cov-2-infected cholangiocyte organoid transcript profiles clustered separately ( figures 4l and s4g ). volcano plots and heatmap analysis of differentially expressed genes in sars-cov-2-infected cholangiocyte organoids revealed robust induction of chemokines, including cxcl1, cxcl2, cxcl3, and ccl2 (figures 4m and s4h) . consistent with results using hepatocyte organoids, kegg gsea comparing mock infected with sars-cov-2-infected cholangiocyte organoids revealed the upregulation of inflammatory pathways, including cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and il-17 signaling ( figure 4n , table s1), which is consistent with previous findings in covid-19 lung autopsy samples (han et al., 2020) .finally, qrt-pcr analysis of sars-cov-2-infected (moi = 0.1) hpsc-derived cardiomyocytes, dopaminergic neurons, macrophages, microglia, and cortical neurons demonstrated high levels of viral sgrna in cardiomyocytes ( figure s4i ) and dopaminergic neurons ( figure s4j) and low or no level of viral sgrna was detected in cortical neurons ( figure s4k ), microglia ( figure s4l ), and macrophages ( figure s4m ), consistent with data from pseudo-entry virus infections.although respiratory failure is the most common adverse outcome for covid-19 patients, they often present with additional clinical complications involving the metabolic, cardiac, neurological, and gastrointestinal systems. defining the tropism of sars-cov-2 is a first step toward understanding the pathology of sars-cov-2, which is critical for the development of anti-sars-cov-2 therapies. the most broadly used models for sars-cov-2 studies have been african green monkey-derived vero cells or human cancer cell lines, which have clear limitations for modeling complex human organ systems. therefore, the development of physiologically relevant human models to study sars-cov-2 infection is critically important. by developing a broad platform using system-wide human cell lineages and organoids, we discovered that pancreatic alpha and beta cells, liver organoids, cardiomyocytes, and dopaminergic neurons are permissive to sars-cov-2 virus infection using both pseudo-entry virus and live sars-cov-2 systems. one possible concern to using hpsc-derived cells for disease modeling is whether hpsc-derived cells can recapitulate the biology of sars-cov-2 infection in adults, since vertical infection of the fetus is not entirely clear (lamouroux et al., 2020) . here, we used primary adult human islets to confirm the ace2 expression profiles and the permissiveness of pancreatic alpha and beta cells to sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus and sars-cov-2 virus infection. in addition, adult liver organoids were used to confirm the permissiveness of hepatocytes and cholangiocytes to sars-cov-2 virus infection. the liver is susceptible to a variety of viral pathogens including hepatitis a, b, c, d, and e as well as atypical viruses such as herpes simplex virus family members along with cytomegalovirus (talwani et al., 2011) . although human coronaviruses previously had not been considered to infect liver cells, our results are consistent with current covid-19 clinical observations that more than 50% of patients have evidence of viral hepatitis (ong et al., 2020) . consistent with these results, sars-cov-2 virus was recently shown to infect liver ductal organoids which caused increased cell death .it is particularly interesting that human pancreatic beta cells are infected by sars-cov-2. previous studies suggested that ace2 is expressed in the human pancreas (yang et al., 2010) . using scrna-seq and immunostaining, we showed that ace2 is expressed in human adult alpha and beta cells. a number of studies support the hypothesis that viral infections play a causative role in type 1 diabetes (vehik et al., 2019) , including enteroviruses (krogvold et al., 2015) such as coxsackievirus b (e) pca of differential gene expression from sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells compared to mock infection. (f) kegg gene set enrichment analysis of differential gene expression profiles from sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells compared to mock infection. (g) volcano plot analysis of differentially expressed genes from lung autopsies of healthy donors compared to covid-19 patients. individual genes denoted by gene name. differentially expressed genes (p-adjusted value < 0.05) with a log 2 (fold change) > 2 are indicated in red. non-significant differentially expressed genes with a log 2 (fold change) > 2 are indicated in green.(h) heatmap of chemokine transcript levels in sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cell cells compared to mock infection. n = 3 independent biological replicates. data were presented as mean ± sd. p values were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student's t test. ***p < 0.001. see also table s1 . (legend continued on next page) ll (anagandula et al., 2014; hyö ty et al., 1995) , as well as rotavirus (honeyman et al., 2000) , mumps virus (hyö ty et al., 1988) , and cytomegalovirus (forrest et al., 1971) . enterovirus isolates obtained from newly diagnosed type 1 diabetic patients could infect and induce destruction of human islet cells in vitro (elshebani et al., 2007) . here, we found that both hpsc-derived and adult human pancreatic beta cells are permissive to sars-cov-2 infection. a recent clinical study showed a strong correlation between covid-19 and type 2 diabetes . closer monitoring of individuals with high risk for diabetes is needed to evaluate the contribution of sars-cov-2 in previously infected covid-19 patients to progression toward type 1 or type 2 diabetes.in summary, we generated a library of hpscs-derived cells/organoids, including pancreatic endocrine cells, liver organoids, endothelial cells, cardiomyocytes, macrophages, microglia, cortical neurons, and dopaminergic neurons, to evaluate the permissiveness of normal human cells to sars-cov-2 infection. the hpsc-derived hepatic and pancreatic cells were found to be permissive to sars-cov-2 infection, which was further validated using adult primary human islets, adult hepatic and cholangiocyte organoids, and a humanized mouse model. transcript profiling after sars-cov-2 infection of hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells and liver organoids revealed upregulation of chemokine expression, consistent with profiles of tissues obtained after autopsy of covid-19 patients. interestingly, several cell types expressing ace2, such as endothelium, macrophages, and cortical neurons show low or no permissiveness to both sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus and sars-cov-2 virus, suggesting that factors besides ace2 are also involved in viral entry (exemplified by the tmprss2 effector protein). the non-linear relationship between ace2 and permissiveness to sars-cov-2 infection highlights the importance of using hpsc-derived primary-like cells instead of ace2-overexpressing cells to study sars-cov-2 biology. finally, this disease-relevant human cell/ organoid-based platform can now be directly applied for drug screening and the evaluation of prospective anti-viral therapeutics.while our study demonstrated permissiveness of multiple cell types for sars-cov-2 virus, whether or not some of these cells are major targets of viral infection in covid-19 will not be clear without more thorough analysis of primary patient-derived sam-ples. we focused here on viral entry and to some extent replication, but there may be cell lineage differences for viral release and secondary infection that could next be explored. the cell and organoid-based platform described here is a first step toward modeling covid-19 in human organ systems but is clearly simplified compared to fully functioning and interacting adult human organs. in the future, the platform can be expanded to generate more complex organoid models, including incorporation of immune system components that are currently missing from the analysis.detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: (n) kegg gene set enrichment analysis of transcripts from sars-cov-2-infected adult human cholangiocyte organoids (donor 1) compared to mock infection. n = 3 independent biological replicates. data were presented as mean ± sd. p values were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student's t test. *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001. see also figure s4 and table s1 . cell stem cell 27, 1-12.e1-e7, july 2, 2020 e1further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, shuibing chen (shc2034@med.cornell.edu).this study did not generate new unique reagents.data and code availability scrna-seq data is available from the geo repository database with accession number gse147903. rna-seq data is available from the geo repository database with accession number gse151803.hpsc maintenance and pancreatic differentiation pancreatic endocrine cell differentiation was performed using ins gfp/w mel-1 cells. cells were cultured on matrigel-coated 6-well plates in stemflex medium (gibco thermo fisher). cells were maintained at 37 c with 5% co 2 . hescs were differentiated using a previously reported strategy (zeng et al., 2016) . in brief, on day 0, cells were exposed to basal medium rpmi 1640 supplemented with 1 3 glutamax (thermo fisher scientific), 50 mg/ml normocin, 100 ng/ml activin a (r&d systems), and 2 mm of chir99021 (gsk3b inhibitor 3, cayman chemical) for 24 h. the medium was changed on day 1 to basal rpmi 1640 medium supplemented with 1 3 glutamax (thermo fisher scientific), 50 mg/ml normocin, 0.2% fetal bovine serum (fbs, corning), 100 ng/ml activin a (r&d systems) for 2 days. on day 3, the resulting definitive endoderm cells were cultured in mcdb 131 medium (thermo fisher scientific) supplemented with 1.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 1 3 glutamax, 10 mm glucose (sigma aldrich) at final concentration, 2% bovine serum albumin (bsa, lampire), 0.25 mm l-ascorbic acid (sigma aldrich) and 50 ng/ml of fibroblast growth factor 7 (fgf-7, peprotech) for 2 days to acquire primitive gut tube. on day 5, the cells were induced to differentiate to posterior foregut in mcdb 131 medium supplemented with 2.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 1 3 glutamax, 10 mm glucose at final concentration, 2% bsa, 0.25 mm l-ascorbic acid, 50 ng/ml of fgf-7, 1 mm retinoic acid (ra; sigma aldrich), 100 nm ldn193189 (ldn, axon medchem), 1:200 its-x (thermo fisher scientific), 200 nm tppb (tocris bioscience) and 0.25 mm sant-1 (sigma aldrich) for 2 days. on day 7, the cells were induced to differentiate to pancreatic endoderm in mcdb 131 medium supplemented with 2.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 1 3 glutamax, 10 mm glucose at final concentration, 2% bsa, 0.25 mm l-ascorbic acid, 2 ng/ml of fgf-7, 0.1 mm ra, 200 nm ldn193189, 1:200 its-x, 100 nm tppb and 0.25 mm sant-1 for 3 days. on day 10, the cells were induced to differentiate to pancreatic endocrine precursors in mcdb 131 medium supplemented with 1.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 1 3 glutamax, 20 mm glucose at final concentration, 2% bsa, 0.05 mm ra, 100 nm ldn, 1:200 its-x, 0.25 mm sant-1, 1 mm t3 hormone (sigma aldrich), 10 mm alk5 inhibitor ii (cayman chemical), 10 mm zinc sulfate heptahydrate (sigma aldrich) and 10 mg/ml of heparin (sigma aldrich) for 3 days. on day 13, cells were exposed to mcdb 131 medium supplemented with 1.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 1 3 glutamax, 20 mm glucose at final concentration, 2% bsa, 100 nm ldn193189, 1:200 its-x, 1 mm t3, 10 mm alk5 inhibitor ii, 10 mm zinc sulfate, 10 mg/ml of heparin, 100 nm gamma secretase inhibitor xx (millipore) for the first 7 days. on day 27, cells were exposed to mcdb 131 medium supplemented with 1.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 1 3 glutamax, 20 mm glucose at final concentration, 2% bsa, 1:200 its-x, 1 mm t3, 10 mm alk5 inhibitor ii, 10 mm zinc sulfate heptahydrate, 10 mg/ml of heparin, 1 mm n-acetyl cysteine (sigma aldrich), 10 mm trolox (millipore), 2 mm r428 (medche-mexpress) for 7-15 days. the medium was subsequently refreshed every day. the protocol details are summarized in figure s1a .hpsc liver differentiation in brief, induced pluripotent stem cells (ipscs) were cultured in monolayers on matrigel. differentiation was achieved by sequential exposure to 100 ng/ml activin a, 20 ng/ml bmp-4, 10 ng/ml bfgf and 20 ng/ml hepatocyte growth factor (hgf, r&d systems) (si-tayeb et al., 2010) . cells at the hepatoblast stage were subsequently aggregated into spheroids and then exposed to continued 20 ng/ml hgf and 20 ng/ml oncostatin m (r&d systems). the protocol details are summarized in figure s1b .to derive endothelial cells from hpscs, we optimized a previously reported strategy (harding et al., 2017) . briefly, hesc line h1 were passaged onto matrigel-coated 6-well plates in stemflex medium with an additional 10 ng/ml of bfgf. after 1 day, culture medium was changed to stemdiff apel medium (stemcell technologies) with an additional of 6 mm chir99021 for 2 days. then, cells were cultured in stemdiff apel medium with an additional of 25 ng/ml bmp-4, 10 ng/ml bfgf and 50 ng/ml vegf (r&d systems) for another two days. on day 4, cells were dissociated with accutase (innovative cell technologies) and reseeded onto p100 culture dishes in ec growth medium mv2 (promocell) with an additional 50 ng/ml vegf for 4-6 days. finally, endothelial cells were generated and passaged every 3-5 days in ec growth medium mv2 with an additional 50 ng/ml vegf. the protocol details are summarized in figure s1c .hpsc cardiomyocyte differentiation for monolayer-based cardiomyocyte (cm) differentiation, hpscs were passaged at density of 3x10 5 cells/well of 6-well plate and grown for 48 h to 90% confluence in the humidified incubator with 5% co 2 at 37 c. on day 0, the medium was replaced with rpmi 1640 supplemented with b27 without insulin and 6 mm chir99021. on day 2, the medium was changed to rpmi 1640 supplemented with b27 without insulin for 24 h. day 3, medium was refreshed to rpmi 1640 supplemented with b27 without insulin and 5 mm xav939 for another 48 h. on day 5, the medium was changed back to rpmi-b27 without insulin for 48 h, and then switched to rpmi 1640 plus normal b27 for another 48 h. on day 9, the medium was transiently changed to rpmi 1640-b27 without d-glucose for two days to allow metabolic purification of cms. from that day on, fresh rpmi 1640-b27 was changed every two days. on day 30, cells were dissociated with accutase at 37 c followed by resuspending with fresh rpmi 1640-b27 plus y-27632 and reseeding into 96-well plates. after 24 h, medium was switched to rmpi 1640-b27 without y-27632 for following virus infection tests. the protocol details are summarized in figure s1d .we derived macrophages from hesc line h9 and adapted a previously reported protocol (cao et al., 2019) . first, h9 cells were lifted with relesr (stemcell technologies) as small clusters onto matrigel-coated 6-well plates at low density. on day 0, if9s medium was supplemented with 50 ng/ml bmp-4, 15 ng/ml activin a and 1.5 mm chir99021. on day 2, medium was refreshed with if9s medium with 50 ng/ml vegf, 50 ng/ml bfgf, 50 ng/ml scf (r&d systems) and 10 mm sb431542 (cayman chemical). on day 5 and day 7, medium was changed into if9s with 50 ng/ml il-6 (r&d systems), 12 ng/ml il-3 (r&d systems), 50 ng/ml vegf, 50 ng/ ml bfgf, 50 ng/ml scf and 50 ng/ml tpo (r&d systems). on day 9, cells were dissociated with tryple (life technologies) and resuspended in if9s medium with 50 ng/ml il-6, 12 ng/ml il-3 and 80 ng/ml m-csf (r&d systems) onto low attachment plates. on day 13 and day 15, medium was changed and supplemented with 50 ng/ml il-6, 12 ng/ml il-3 and 80 ng/ml m-csf to generate monocytes. after day 15, monocytes were seeded onto normal plates and cultured in if9s medium supplemented with 80ng/ml m-csf for 4 days. all differentiation steps were cultured under normoxic conditions at 37 c, 5% co 2 . the protocol details are summarized in figure s1e .hpsc microglia differentiation hesc line h9 was used for microglial differentiation. for microglial differentiation, hescs were harvested using accutase and plated on matrigel-coated dishes at low density in e8 medium supplemented with y-27632, activin a, bmp-4 and chir99021, followed by wnt-inhibition. on day 2, bfgf was added to the medium. on day 3, cells were dissociated and passaged at low density on matrigel-coated dishes in e6 medium supplemented with vegf, bfgf and y-27632. on day 4, y-27632 was removed from medium. for the four following days, a cocktail was used of e6 containing the following cytokines/growth factors: vegf, bfgf, scf, il-6, tpo, il-3. then, round cells were harvested from the culture between day 10-14 and replated on tissue culture treated plastic dishes in rpmi medium supplemented with 10% fbs, m-csf, il-34. maturation was achieved over 4-8 weeks of culture. the protocol details are summarized in figure s1f .hpsc cortical and dopamine neuron differentiation cortical and mda differentiation were performed using h9 hescs. hescs were grown on vtn-n (thermo fisher scientific)-coated 6well plates in e8-essential medium. cells were maintained at 37 c, 5% co 2 . hescs were differentiated with an optimized protocol from a previously reported study (zhou et al., 2018) .adult liver organoid culture human hepatocytes and human nonparenchymal fractions were obtained from the liver tissue cell distribution system (pittsburgh, pennsylvania) funded by (r01-dk-7-0004/hhsn26700700004c). human liver tissue was digested to obtain cellular fractions. 2,500 cells were mixed 1:1 with matrigel and placed at the bottom of a 6-well plate. 5 drops per well were added and then incubated for 5 min at 37 c. medium was used that contained dmem/f12 supplemented with 1:50 b27 supplement (without vitamin a), 1:100 n2 supplement, 1 mm n-acetylcysteine, 10% (vol/vol) rspo1-conditioned medium, 10 mm nicotinamide, 10 nm recombinant human [leu15]-gastrin i, 50 ng/ml recombinant human egf, 100 ng/ml recombinant human fgf-10, 25 ng/ml recombinant human hgf, 10 mm forskolin and 5 mm a83-01. medium was changed every 3-4 days and cultures split at about 14 days after initial plating with following split every 5-7 days.the pancreatic organs were obtained from the local organ procurement organization under the united network for organ sharing (unos). the islets were isolated in the human islet core at university of pennsylvania following the guidelines of clinical isletthe 10x libraries were sequenced on the illumina nextseq500 sequencer. the sequencing data were primarily analyzed by the 10x cellranger pipeline (v3.0.2) in two steps. in the first step, cellranger mkfastq demultiplexed samples and generated fastq files; and in the second step, cellranger count aligned fastq files to the 10x pre-built human reference genome (grch38 v3.0.0) and extracted gene expression umi counts matrix.single-cell rna-seq data analysis we filtered cells with less than 300 or more than 6000 genes detected as well as cells with mitochondria gene content greater than 15%, and used the remaining cells (3990, 5594 and 6563 cells for the three samples) for downstream analysis. we normalized the gene expression umi counts using a deconvolution strategy implemented by the r scran package (v.1.14.1). in particular, we pre-clustered cells using the quickcluster function; we computed size factor per cell within each cluster and rescaled the size factors by normalization between clusters using the computesumfactors function; we normalized the umi counts per cell by the size factors and took a logarithm transform using the normalize function. we further normalized the umi counts across samples using the multibatchnorm function in the r batchelor package (v1.2.1). we identified highly variable genes using the findvariablefeatures function in the r seurat (v3.1.0) (stuart et al., 2019) , and selected the top 3000 variable genes after excluding mitochondria genes, ribosomal genes and dissociationrelated genes. the list of dissociation-related genes was originally built on mouse data (van den brink et al., 2017); we converted them to human ortholog genes using ensembl biomart. we aligned the three samples based on their mutual nearest neighbors (mnns) using the fastmnn function in the r batchelor package, this was done by performing a principal component analysis (pca) on the highly variable genes and then correcting the principal components (pcs) according to their mnns. we selected the corrected top 50 pcs for downstream visualization and clustering analysis. we ran umap dimensional reduction using the runumap function in the r seurat package with the number of neighboring points setting to 35 and training epochs setting to 1000. we clustered cells into thirteen clusters by constructing a shared nearest neighbor graph and then grouping cells of similar transcriptome profiles using the findneighbors function and findclusters function (resolution set to 0.1) in the r seurat package. we identified marker genes for each cluster by performing differential expression analysis between cells inside and outside that cluster using the findmarkers function in the r seurat package. after reviewing the clusters, we merged them into nine clusters representing nine cell types (acinar cells, ductal cells, beta cells, alpha cells, mesenchymal cells, delta cells, pp cells, endothelial cells and immune cells) for further analysis. we re-identified marker genes for the merged nine clusters and selected top 10 positive marker genes per cluster for heatmap plot using the doheatmap function in the r seurat package. the rest plots were generated using the r ggplot2 package.for rna analysis, tissue was acquired from four deceased covid19 human subjects during autopsy and processed in trizol. (b) immunostaining of hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells using antibodies against ace2 and pancreatic delta cell marker, sst. scale bar = 10 µm.(c) immunostaining of hpscs using antibodies against ace2 and hpsc markers, sox2, oct4 and nanog. scale bar = 100 µm. (f) immunostaining of hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells using antibodies against luciferase and pancreatic delta cell marker, sst, at 24 hpi of sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus (moi = 0.01). scale bar = 10 µm.(g) immunostaining of hpsc-derived dopaminergic neurons using antibodies against luciferase and dopaminergic neuron marker, foxa2, at 24 hpi of sars-cov-2 pseudoentry virus (moi = 0.01). scale bar = 10 µm. n = 3 independent biological replicates. data was presented as mean ± stdev. p values were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student's t test. ***p < 0.001. prss2  prss1  cela3a  cela3b  ctrb1  cela2a  cpa1  cpb1  clps  pnlip  tacstd2  anxa4  ambp  mmp7  cxcl1  s100a10  spp1  sat1  anxa2  scgb3a1  iapp  ins  meg3  cpe  dlk1  gad2  ppp1r1a  uchl1  bex1  scg3  gcg  ttr  cryba2  vgf  chgb  scg5  tm4sf4  chga  tmem176b  gc  igfbp7  mgp  tagln  dcn  apod  lum  timp3 lgals1 (b and c) confocal imaging (b) and quantification (c) of sars-cov-2 infected (moi = 0.1) hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells at 24 hpi. cells are stained for apoptotic marker casp3 and either alpha cell maker gcg or beta cell marker ins. scale bar = 50 µm.(d) heatmap of differential gene expression of cell apoptosis associated genes (red) and cell survival associated genes (blue) in sars-cov-2 infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells compared to mock infection.n=3 independent biological replicates. data was presented as mean ± stdev. p values were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student's t test. **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001. in brief yang et al. show that hpsc-derived cells and organoids provide valuable models to study sars-cov-2 tropism and to model covid-19. they find that hpscderived pancreatic endocrince cells and human adult hepatocyte and cholangiocyte organoids are permissive to sars-cov-2 infection.q6 q5 covid-19 was declared a pandemic by the world health organization, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). respiratory failure is the most common mortality outcome in covid-19 patients, yet serious and even fatal manifestations are seen across multiple organ systems, including the heart (mehra et al., 2020 covid-19 patients, nearly 20% had suffered in-hospital cardiac injury, which was a significant independent risk factor for mortality . nearly 25% of patients have gastrointestinal manifestations including anorexia, diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and these symptoms are associated with worse covid-19 outcomes (pan et al., 2020) . a recent clinical study among 7,300 covid-19 patients also showed a strong correlation between poor covid-19 outcomes and type 2 diabetes . recent clinical studies suggest that diabetes is not only a risk factor for severe covid-19 disease, but also that sars-cov-2 infection can induce new-onset diabetes (bornstein et al., 2020) .currently, there are no vaccines or effective treatment options for covid-19 due to limited knowledge of sars-cov-2 viral biology. most current studies are based on clinical data, immortalized cell lines, or transgenic animals that express the human sars viral entry receptor, ace2. unfortunately, these in vitro (e.g., african green monkey vero cells or human cancer cell lines) and in vivo (e.g., mice engineered to express ace2) models are sufficiently distinct from human biology that they are unlikely to capture key aspects of viral infection and virus-host interactions. several human cancer lines, including a549, calu3, hfl (lung adenocarcinoma), caco2 (colorectal adenocarcinoma), huh7 (hepatocellular adenocarcinoma), hela (cervical adenocarcinoma), 293t (embryonic kidney), u251 (glioblastoma), and rd (rhabdomyosarcoma) have been used to study sars-cov-2 infection and for drug evaluation (chu et al., 2020; hoffmann et al., 2020; ou et al., 2020; shang et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020) . however, many human organs and tissues contain multiple cell types and ace2, the putative receptor of sars-cov-2, is heterogeneously expressed in different cell types. thus, using cancer cell lines might fail to appreciate the different cell types affected by sars-cov-2 infection. in addition, most of these human cancer cell lines carry tumor-associated mutations, such as p53 mutations. p53 has been shown to regulate sars-cov replication, which raises concern for how these cancer cell lines recapitulate the viral biology of sars-cov-2 in normal nontransformed cells (ma-lauer et al., 2016) . moreover, certain cell lines (such as huh7.5) have mutations in genes controlling the innate immune response (a known defect in rig-i) which may obscure antiviral responses and the subsequent viral life cycle. as these cells are all cancer cell lines, they have maintained their ability to proliferate and often are unpolarized which could impact several components of viral infection. taken together, it seems likely that these differences from primary cells and tissues will impact their ability to model sars-cov-2 infection. as a consequence, there is an urgent need to create models to study sars-cov-2 biology using human disease-relevant cells and tissues. a human cell-based platform to study viral tropism would be a first step toward defining cell types permissive to sars-cov-2 infection and for modeling covid-19 disease across multiple organ systems.human pluripotent stem cells (hpscs), including human embryonic stem cells (hescs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hipscs), can be used to derive functional human cells/tissues/ organoids for modeling human disease and drug discovery, including for infectious diseases. for example, hpsc-derived neuronal progenitor cells (hnpcs) and brain organoids were used to study the impact of zika virus (zikv) on human brain development and the mechanistic link between zikv infection and microcephaly, as reviewed (wen et al., 2017) . hpsc-derived hnpcs were used to screen for anti-zikv drugs and identified emricasan as a pan-caspase inhibitor that protects hnpcs, in addition to cyclin-dependent kinases and niclosamide that inhibit zikv replication (xu et al., 2016) . similarly, we performed a high content screen and identified an anti-zikv compound, hippeastrine hydrobromide, that suppressed viral propagation when administered to adult mice with active zikv infection, highlighting its therapeutic potential . here, we present a platform developed using hpscs to generate multiple different cell and organoid derivatives representative of all three primary germ layers. we used these to systematically explore the viral tropism of sars-cov-2 and cellular responses to infection.we used directed differentiation of hpscs to generate eight distinct cell types or organoids representing lineages from all three definitive germ layers ( figure 1a ). after hpsc differentiation into definitive endoderm (de), pancreatic and liver cells were generated. for the pancreatic lineage, de cells were differentiated progressively into pancreatic progenitors and then directed into pancreatic endocrine lineages using a modified strategy from a previously published protocol (zeng et al., 2016) that specifies glucagon + (gcg + ) pancreatic alpha cells, insulin + (ins + ) pancreatic beta cells, and somatostatin + (sst + ) delta cells ( figures s1a and s2a ). the de cells were otherwise induced using a modification of a previously published approach to differentiate into liver organoids, comprising mainly albumin + (alb + ) hepatocytes (figure s1b and s2a).cells committed to mesoderm fate were directed to differentiate into endothelial cells (figure s1c), cardiomyocytes (figure s1d) , macrophages (figure s1e), or microglia ( figure s1f ). the endothelial cells stained positively with antibodies recognizing cd31 ( figure s2a ). the cardiomyocytes were derived from an myh6:mcherry hesc reporter line (tsai et al., 2020) and more than 90% expressed mcherry and stained positively with an antibody recognizing sarcomeric a-actinin ( figure s2a ). mesodermal cells were alternatively differentiated progressively to hematopoietic progenitor cells, monocytes, and finally either cd11b + /cd206 + macrophages or pu.1 + /iba1 + microglial cells ( figure s2a ).cells initially induced to form ectoderm were differentiated into cortical neurons or dopaminergic neurons using previously reported protocols . day 45 cortical neurons stained positively with antibodies against beta iii-tubulin, while dopaminergic neurons stained positively with antibodies recognizing the midbrain marker foxa2 and the neuronal marker map2 ( figure s2a ).ace2 is a putative receptor for sars-cov-2 infection (hoffmann et al., 2020) . immunostaining was performed to examine the expression of ace2 in the spectrum of hpsc-derived cell types. in pancreatic endocrine cells, ace2 expression was detected readily in gcg + alpha cells and ins + beta cells, but not in sst + delta cells ( figures 1b and s2b ace2 was expressed in most albumin + hepatocytes ( figure 1b ). ace2 was also expressed in hpsc-derived cd31 + endothelial cells, hpsc-derived cardiomyocytes, microglia, cd206 + macrophages, and hpsc-derived dopaminergic neurons ( figure 1b ). in contrast, ace2 expression was detected at relatively low levels in hpsc-derived cortical neurons ( figure 1b ). ace2 expression was not detected in hpscs ( figure s2c ).to determine the relative permissiveness of hpsc-derived cells and organoids to sars-cov-2 viral entry, we used a vesicular stomatitis virus (vsv)-based sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus, for which the backbone was provided by a vsv pseudo-typed dg-luciferase virus with the sars-cov-2 spike protein incorporated in the surface of the viral particle instead whitt, 2010) . pseudo-typed entry viruses based on either a vsv or hiv backbone have been broadly used to study sars-cov-2 entry (ou et al., 2020; shang et al., 2020) and to evaluate drug candidates (hoffmann et al., 2020) and neutralizing antibodies lei et al., 2020; walls et al., 2020) . each of the eight distinct hpsc-derivatives were inoculated with the sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus and at 24 h post-infection (hpi) analyzed for viral entry based on luciferase activity (figures 1c and s2d) . the results largely correlated with ace2 expression profiles with a few exceptions. high luciferase (luc) activity, as a readout for the efficiency of sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus infection, was readily detected in hpscderived pancreatic endocrine cells, liver organoids, cardiomyocytes, and dopaminergic neurons. relatively low or no luc levels were found for endothelial cells, microglia, macrophages, or cortical neurons. time course experiments showed that low luc activity was not a delayed response, as levels remained comparable at 48 h ( figure s2e ). thus, we focused on 24 hpi for remaining studies. the same cell types that showed high luc activity stained positively with a luc antibody ( figure 1d ). in hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells, luc expression was detected in gcg + alpha cells and ins + beta cells, but not in sst + delta cells, consistent with ace2 expression ( figure 1e and s2f). in liver organoids, luc expression was detected in alb + hepatocytes ( figure 1f ). luc was also detected in sarcomeric a-actinin + cardiomyocytes ( figure 1g ). luc was rarely detected in iba1 + microglial cells ( figure 1h ), cd31 + endothelial cells ( figure 1i ), or cd206 + macrophages ( figure 1j ). finally, luc + cells were detected in hpsc-derived map2 + and foxa2 + dopaminergic neurons ( figures 1k and s2g ), but not beta iii-tubulin + cortical neurons ( figure 1l ).before validating permissiveness of primary human islets to sars-cov-2 virus, we used single-cell rna-sequencing to examine global transcript profiles and to define cell lineages. the data were projected using uniform manifold approximation and projection (umap, figure 2a ). nine distinct cell types were identified, including acinar, ductal, beta, alpha, mesenchymal, poly-peptide (pp), delta, endothelial, and immune cells ( figures (legend continued on next page) beta cells, alpha cells, mesenchymal cells, and endothelial cells ( figures 2c and 2d ). immunohistochemistry further validated that primary human beta cells and alpha cells express ace2 (figure 2e ). human primary islets were infected with sars-cov-2 virus (usa-wa1/2020, moi = 0.01) and analyzed at 24 hpi by immunostaining. both ins + beta cells and gcg + alpha cells ( figure 2f ) stained positive for sars-cov-2 spike protein.humanized mice carrying human pancreatic endocrine cells in vivo provide a unique platform for modeling covid-19. in brief, hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells were transplanted under the kidney capsule of scid-beige mice ( figure 2g ). two months after transplantation, the organoid xenograft was removed and examined for cellular identities. consistent with in vitro culture, ace2 can be detected in hpsc-derived ins + beta cells and gcg + alpha cells ( figure 2h ). next, sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus was inoculated locally in xenografted mice (1 3 10 4 pfu). at 24 hpi, the xenografts were removed and analyzed by immunohistochemistry. luc was detected in the xenografts inoculated with virus, but not in mock-infected controls. immunohistochemistry detected luc in ins + beta cells and gcg + alpha cells ( figures 2i and 2j ), indicating these are both permissive to sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus infection in vivo.to evaluate the cellular response of human pancreatic endocrine cells to sars-cov-2 infection, hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells were infected with sars-cov-2 (usa-wa1/2020) at increasing mois (moi = 0.01, 0.05, 0.1). viral replication 24 hpi as measured by viral subgenomic (sg) n rna levels was detected using qrt-pcr analysis ( figure 3a ). sars-cov-2 spike protein was detected in both ins + beta cells and gcg + alpha cells by immunofluorescence staining ( figure 3b ). a substantial number of sars-s + ins + cells (more than 50 for each field) and sars-s + gcg + cells (approximately 20 for each field) were detected in sars-cov-2-infected conditions ( figure 3c ). transcript profiling was then performed to compare mock and sars-cov-2-infected cells. alignment of transcripts with the viral genome confirmed robust viral replication in hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells ( figure 3d ). principal component analysis (pca) showed that mock and sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cell samples cluster separately ( figure 3e ). kegg gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) comparing mock-infected with sars-cov-2-infected cells revealed the upregulation of pathways associated with viral infection, such as human cytomegalovirus infection, herpes simplex infection, human immunodeficiency virus 1 infection, epstein-barr virus infection, and hepatitis c. interestingly, the insulin resistance pathway was also upregulated. the pathways associated with beta cell or alpha cell function, including calcium signaling pathways, glucagon signaling pathways, and meta-bolic pathways, were all downregulated in the virus-infected conditions ( figure 3f , table s1 ). these changes could be due either to increased cell death or loss of cellular identities. to distinguish these possibilities, we stained mock or sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells with a cell apoptotic marker (casp3) and cell type-specific markers (gcg for alpha cells and ins for beta cells). both the percentage of casp3 + cells in gcg + cells and the percentage of casp3 + cells in ins + cells increased in sars-cov-2-infected cells ( figures  s3b and s3c) , suggesting that the changed signaling pathway profiles in sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived endocrine cells is mainly due to increased cell apoptosis. in agreement with this, genes associated with apoptosis were upregulated while genes associated with cell survival were downregulated in sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells ( figure s3d ). as it is technically challenging to obtain pancreatic samples from covid-19 patients, we compared transcript profiles from lung autopsy samples from healthy donors or covid-19 patients and identified a robust upregulation of chemokines, including ccl2, cxcl5, and cxcl6, in the covid-19 patient samples as has been described previously ( figure 3g ; blanco-melo et al., 2020) . these and other chemokine and cytokine transcript levels were also upregulated in sars-cov-2-infected pancreatic endocrine cells compared to mock infected cells ( figure 3h ). together, the data suggest that sars-cov-2-infected pancreatic endocrine cells show robust chemokine induction, which is similar to what is found in autopsy samples from covid-19 patients.adult liver hepatocyte and cholangiocyte organoids are permissive to sars-cov-2 virus infection and show similar chemokine responses for sars-cov-2 infection as seen in autopsy samples from covid-19 patients the viral tropism analysis using hpsc-derived cells showed that hpsc-derived liver organoids are permissive to sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus infection ( figure 1f ). we next used human adult hepatocyte and cholangiocyte organoids to validate this finding. adult primary human hepatocyte organoids were infected with sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus (moi = 0.1). at 24 hpi, significantly increased luc activity was detected in sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus-infected samples ( figure s4a ) and luc expression was detected in sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus-infected alb + hepatocytes but not mock-infected hepatocytes ( figures s4b and s4c) . consistently, luc expression was also detected in sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus-infected ck19 + cholangiocyte organoids but not mock-infected organoids at 24 hpi ( figures s4d and s4e) .adult primary human hepatocyte organoids were inoculated with sars-cov-2 (usa-wa1/2020, moi = 0.1) and analyzed at 24 hpi. analysis by qrt-pcr data demonstrated robust sars-cov-2 infection as evidenced by high levels of viral sgrna transcripts of the replicating viral rna ( figure 4a ). this was (i and j) confocal imaging (i) and quantification (j) of human pancreatic endocrine xenografts against luc, ins, or gcg, at 24 hpi of sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus (1 3 10 4 pfu) infection. scale bar represents 25 mm. n = 3 independent biological replicates. data were presented as mean ± stdev. p values were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student's t test. ***p < 0.001. see also figure s3 . cell stem cell 27, 1-12, july 2, 2020 7 confirmed at the protein level by immunostaining for sars-cov-2 spike protein expression ( figure 4b ). the percentage of sars-s + cells in the infected hepatocyte organoids was highly significant ( figure 4c ). we were also able to generate primary human organoids comprised mostly of cholangiocytes. these organoids were also inoculated with sars-cov-2 (moi = 0.1) and analyzed at 24 hpi. analysis by qrt-pcr demonstrated robust sars-cov-2 infection ( figure 4d ), which was confirmed by immunostaining ( figure 4e ), and the percentage of sars-s + cells in infected cholangiocyte organoids was also significant ( figure 4f ). transcript profiles were then compared between mock and sars-cov-2-infected human primary hepatocyte and cholangiocyte organoids. alignment with the viral genome confirmed robust viral replication in both hepatocyte organoids ( figure 4g ) and cholangiocyte organoids ( figure 4h ). pca showed significant distinction between mock infected and sars-cov-2-infected hepatocyte organoids ( figure 4i ). volcano plots and heatmaps of differentially expressed genes in sars-cov-2-infected hepatocyte organoids revealed robust induction of chemokines, including cxcl1, cxcl3, cxcl5, cxcl6, and ccl20, and significant downregulation of key hepatocyte metabolic markers, such as cyp7a1, cyp2a6, cyp1a2, and cyp2d6 ( figures 4j  and s4f ). kegg gene set enrichment analysis (gsea) comparing mock-infected with sars-cov-2-infected hepatocyte organoids revealed over-represented and upregulated pathways, including cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, il-17 signaling, chemokine signaling pathway, tnf signaling, and nf-kb signaling pathway, while cellular metabolism was largely downregulated ( figure 4k , table s1 ).pca also suggested that mock and sars-cov-2-infected cholangiocyte organoid transcript profiles clustered separately ( figures 4l and s4g) . volcano plots and heatmap analysis of differentially expressed genes in sars-cov-2-infected cholangiocyte organoids revealed robust induction of chemokines, including cxcl1, cxcl2, cxcl3, and ccl2 (figures 4m and s4h) . consistent with results using hepatocyte organoids, kegg gsea comparing mock infected with sars-cov-2-infected cholangiocyte organoids revealed the upregulation of inflammatory pathways, including cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and il-17 signaling ( figure 4n , table s1), which is consistent with previous findings in covid-19 lung autopsy samples (han et al., 2020) .finally, qrt-pcr analysis of sars-cov-2-infected (moi = 0.1) hpsc-derived cardiomyocytes, dopaminergic neurons, macrophages, microglia, and cortical neurons demonstrated high levels of viral sgrna in cardiomyocytes ( figure s4i ) and dopaminergic neurons ( figure s4j) and low or no level of viral sgrna was detected in cortical neurons ( figure s4k ), microglia ( figure s4l ), and macrophages ( figure s4m ), consistent with data from pseudo-entry virus infections.although respiratory failure is the most common adverse outcome for covid-19 patients, they often present with additional clinical complications involving the metabolic, cardiac, neurological, and gastrointestinal systems. defining the tropism of sars-cov-2 is a first step toward understanding the pathology of sars-cov-2, which is critical for the development of anti-sars-cov-2 therapies. the most broadly used models for sars-cov-2 studies have been african green monkey-derived vero cells or human cancer cell lines, which have clear limitations for modeling complex human organ systems. therefore, the development of physiologically relevant human models to study sars-cov-2 infection is critically important. by developing a broad platform using system-wide human cell lineages and organoids, we discovered that pancreatic alpha and beta cells, liver organoids, cardiomyocytes, and dopaminergic neurons are permissive to sars-cov-2 virus infection using both pseudo-entry virus and live sars-cov-2 systems. one possible concern to using hpsc-derived cells for disease modeling is whether hpsc-derived cells can recapitulate the biology of sars-cov-2 infection in adults, since vertical infection of the fetus is not entirely clear (lamouroux et al., 2020) . here, we used primary adult human islets to confirm the ace2 expression profiles and the permissiveness of pancreatic alpha and beta cells to sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus and sars-cov-2 virus infection. in addition, adult liver organoids were used to confirm the permissiveness of hepatocytes and cholangiocytes to sars-cov-2 virus infection. the liver is susceptible to a variety of viral pathogens including hepatitis a, b, c, d, and e as well as atypical viruses such as herpes simplex virus family members along with cytomegalovirus (talwani et al., 2011) . although human coronaviruses previously had not been considered to infect liver cells, our results are consistent with current covid-19 clinical observations that more than 50% of patients have evidence of viral hepatitis (ong et al., 2020) . consistent with these results, sars-cov-2 virus was recently shown to infect liver ductal organoids which caused increased cell death .it is particularly interesting that human pancreatic beta cells are infected by sars-cov-2. previous studies suggested that ace2 is expressed in the human pancreas (yang et al., 2010) . using scrna-seq and immunostaining, we showed that ace2 is expressed in human adult alpha and beta cells. a number of studies support the hypothesis that viral infections play a causative role in type 1 diabetes (vehik et al., 2019) , including enteroviruses (krogvold et al., 2015) such as coxsackievirus b (e) pca of differential gene expression from sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells compared to mock infection. (f) kegg gene set enrichment analysis of differential gene expression profiles from sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells compared to mock infection. (g) volcano plot analysis of differentially expressed genes from lung autopsies of healthy donors compared to covid-19 patients. individual genes denoted by gene name. differentially expressed genes (p-adjusted value < 0.05) with a log 2 (fold change) > 2 are indicated in red. non-significant differentially expressed genes with a log 2 (fold change) > 2 are indicated in green. (h) heatmap of chemokine transcript levels in sars-cov-2-infected hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cell cells compared to mock infection. n = 3 independent biological replicates. data were presented as mean ± sd. p values were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student's t test. ***p < 0.001. see also table s1 . cell stem cell 27, 1-12, july 2, 2020 9 (anagandula et al., 2014; hyö ty et al., 1995) , as well as rotavirus (honeyman et al., 2000) , mumps virus (hyö ty et al., 1988) , and cytomegalovirus (forrest et al., 1971) . enterovirus isolates obtained from newly diagnosed type 1 diabetic patients could infect and induce destruction of human islet cells in vitro (elshebani et al., 2007) . here, we found that both hpsc-derived and adult human pancreatic beta cells are permissive to sars-cov-2 infection. a recent clinical study showed a strong correlation between covid-19 and type 2 diabetes . closer monitoring of individuals with high risk for diabetes is needed to evaluate the contribution of sars-cov-2 in previously infected covid-19 patients to progression toward type 1 or type 2 diabetes.in summary, we generated a library of hpscs-derived cells/organoids, including pancreatic endocrine cells, liver organoids, endothelial cells, cardiomyocytes, macrophages, microglia, cortical neurons, and dopaminergic neurons, to evaluate the permissiveness of normal human cells to sars-cov-2 infection. the hpsc-derived hepatic and pancreatic cells were found to be permissive to sars-cov-2 infection, which was further validated using adult primary human islets, adult hepatic and cholangiocyte organoids, and a humanized mouse model. transcript profiling after sars-cov-2 infection of hpsc-derived pancreatic endocrine cells and liver organoids revealed upregulation of chemokine expression, consistent with profiles of tissues obtained after autopsy of covid-19 patients. interestingly, several cell types expressing ace2, such as endothelium, macrophages, and cortical neurons show low or no permissiveness to both sars-cov-2 pseudo-entry virus and sars-cov-2 virus, suggesting that factors besides ace2 are also involved in viral entry (exemplified by the tmprss2 effector protein). the non-linear relationship between ace2 and permissiveness to sars-cov-2 infection highlights the importance of using hpsc-derived primary-like cells instead of ace2-overexpressing cells to study sars-cov-2 biology. finally, this disease-relevant human cell/ organoid-based platform can now be directly applied for drug screening and the evaluation of prospective anti-viral therapeutics.while our study demonstrated permissiveness of multiple cell types for sars-cov-2 virus, whether or not some of these cells are major targets of viral infection in covid-19 will not be clear without more thorough analysis of primary patient-derived sam-ples. we focused here on viral entry and to some extent replication, but there may be cell lineage differences for viral release and secondary infection that could next be explored. the cell and organoid-based platform described here is a first step toward modeling covid-19 in human organ systems but is clearly simplified compared to fully functioning and interacting adult human organs. in the future, the platform can be expanded to generate more complex organoid models, including incorporation of immune system components that are currently missing from the analysis.detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following: (i and j) pca (i) and volcano plot (j) analysis of differential expressed genes in sars-cov-2-infected human hepatocyte organoids compared to mock infection. individual genes denoted by gene name. differentially expressed genes (p-adjusted value < 0.05) with a log 2 (fold change) > 2 are indicated in red. non-significant differentially expressed genes with a log 2 (fold change) > 2 are indicated in green. (k) kegg gene set enrichment analysis of transcript profiles from sars-cov-2-infected human hepatocyte organoids compared to mock infection. (l and m) pca (l) and volcano plot (m) analysis of differential expressed genes in sars-cov-2-infected adult human cholangiocyte organoids (donor 1) compared to mock infection. individual genes denoted by gene name. (n) kegg gene set enrichment analysis of transcripts from sars-cov-2-infected adult human cholangiocyte organoids (donor 1) compared to mock infection. n = 3 independent biological replicates. data were presented as mean ± sd. p values were calculated by unpaired two-tailed student's t test. *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001. see also figure s4 and table s1 .supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j. stem.2020.06.015. recent infectious disease outbreaks—including severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), ebola, and influenza a (h1n1)—have presented great challenges to the global public health community, including lack of basic epidemiologic knowledge to support important preparedness and control decisions. to address this gap, innovative surveillance methods have been developed over the last several years to leverage the increasing availability of digital data related to outbreaks. to date, many studies have retrospectively examined nontraditional digital data sources and have demonstrated their utility in estimating epidemic curves or changes in important epidemiologic parameters over time [1-3]. such studies have provided a foundation for building near real-time prospective analytic techniques that can assess transmission dynamics in the absence of traditional data. these methodological developments fill a knowledge vacuum that may prove useful for public health decision making in the early stages of an outbreak.the ongoing outbreak of zika virus disease in central and south america has attracted global attention due to its rapid geospatial growth as well as concerns over associated central nervous system complications [4,5]. although zika virus is primarily transmitted via aedes mosquitoes, evidence of vertical and sexual transmission exists [6-8]. likely introduced to the americas in mid- to late 2013, the virus has since been propagated by the density of competent vectors throughout the region [8]. at present, approximately 40 countries in central and south america have experienced local vector-borne transmission, resulting in nearly 300,000 total reported cases to date [9]. of the cases that have sought care thus far in the region, about 70,000 have been reported out of colombia, of which 17% were pregnant at time of clinical or laboratory diagnosis [9,10]. however, given the generally mild nature of zika virus disease and subsequent lack of care seeking, reported cases undoubtedly comprise a small fraction of total cases [11,12].current prevention efforts focus on vector suppression [13], while interest in and efforts toward vaccine development are mounting rapidly due to increasing rates of guillain-barré syndrome following zika virus infection and microcephaly in newborn babies born to women infected with zika virus while pregnant [4,5]. quantitative analyses designed to inform vaccine policies—in addition to other preparedness and control activities—are dependent on the transmission dynamics associated with the disease and, therefore, estimates for critical epidemiologic parameters are urgently needed for such decision making within the context of zika virus disease.in this paper, we use nontraditional digital disease surveillance data via healthmap and google trends to develop near real-time estimates for the basic and observed reproductive numbers associated with zika virus disease in colombia as well as expected final outbreak size and duration. we then validate our results against traditional health care-based disease surveillance data and discuss the implications of our work on outbreak mitigation strategies in colombia and assessment of transmission dynamics elsewhere in the region.cumulative reported case counts of zika virus disease in colombia were acquired via the healthmap digital disease surveillance system, consisting of 28 unique nongovernmental media alerts between october 16, 2015 and april 16, 2016 [14]. the cumulative reported case curve obtained from these reports shows an unrealistic l-shape, presumably due to increased interest in reporting during recent weeks and lack of awareness during early weeks (figure 1). by assuming that the total number of cases obtained from healthmap was a reasonable approximation of reality for the given time period, we used google search data to distribute cumulative reported case counts more realistically over time.although many cases of dengue and influenza go undetected, previous studies have shown that relevant google search trends demonstrate high linear correlation with reported disease incidence over time [15,16]. thus, we obtained weekly google search fractions of the term “zika” from colombia via the google trends website (accessed on april 29, 2016). these search fractions are displayed weekly as normalized values that range from zero to 100, which reflect the level of nationwide search interest in the word “zika” from january 4, 2004 (first available datum) to april 16, 2016.we created a smoothed cumulative incidence curve (referred to as “smoothed healthmap”) by scaling the google search curve against the healthmap-reported zika cases [17]. the scaling constant was obtained by dividing the most recent total number of healthmap-reported zika cases by the total number of google search fractions from may 31, 2015 to april 16, 2016. perhaps due to initial delays in reporting, the first relevant uptick of the term “zika” in the google trends data occurred during the week of may 31, 2015, approximately 20 weeks before the first healthmap alert of zika virus disease in colombia. because of this, may 31, 2015 was selected as the start date for modeling efforts using smoothed healthmap data; april 16, 2016 (last available datum at time of manuscript preparation) was selected as the cut-off date.due to successful applications in other data-scarce (ie, cumulative incidence only) settings, the incidence decay and exponential adjustment (idea) model was used to estimate the basic reproductive number (r0) and the discount factor (d) associated with the ongoing outbreak [2,18,19]. both r0 and d were solved for using nonlinear optimization to minimize the sum of squared differences (ssd) between reported (user-inputted) and modeled cumulative incidence (i) curves across multiple serial intervals (ie, outbreak generations). figure 2 presents a formulation for i expressed in terms of r0 and d, where t is the number of outbreak generations (ie, serial intervals) that have passed thus far and is inversely proportional to the serial interval length (ie, number of days per serial interval [si]). given that distribution for the si associated with zika virus disease had not yet been established, r0 and d were solved for iteratively over a range of 14 deterministic lengths (10-23 days) [20].these values of r0 and d were then used to define maximum, minimum, and mean values for the observed reproductive number (robs), final reported outbreak size (imax), and final reported duration (tmax).the observed number of secondary infections per infected individual for a given value of t (robs) was calculated using the following equation: robs = r0/(1+ d)t.when d is greater than zero, r0 does not equal robs. in such circumstances, disease incidence is nonexponential due to either planned or unplanned reductions in disease duration, contact rate, or infectiousness of cases [18]. likewise, final reported outbreak duration (tmax) was calculated as follows [18]: tmax≥ln(r0)/ln(1+ d).final reported outbreak duration can also be expressed in days by multiplying tmax by si; however, in calculating imax, original units (ie, outbreak generations) are used (figure 3).in the event that a viable vaccine is developed before the ongoing outbreak in colombia ends (tmax), the following equation was used to assess the percentage of the susceptible population that would need to be immunized against zika virus (%vax) to eliminate transmission, assuming 100% vaccine efficacy: %vax=1–(1/ robs).after completion of the analyses on the digital surveillance data, we performed a validation study using traditional surveillance data obtained from weekly instituto nacional de salud (ins) (national institute of health, colombia) epidemiological bulletin publications [21]. the ins first reported incidence of zika virus disease in colombia on october 16, 2015. however, subsequent publications indicated that the outbreak likely began during epidemiologic week 32 of 2015 or earlier [22]. as result, august 22, 2015 was selected as a start date for modeling efforts using ins data. april 16, 2016 (date of the most recent publication at time of manuscript preparation) was selected as the cut-off date [22]. the analyses described previously for the smoothed healthmap dataset were conducted on the ins dataset as well, resulting in r0, d, robs, imax, tmax, and %vax estimates for both digital (smoothed healthmap) and traditional (ins) cumulative reported case data.example model fits for both digital (smoothed healthmap; ssd=1.47×108) and traditional (ins; ssd=1.55×107) cumulative case data are shown in figures 4 and 5 (si=17 days). in general, the traditional data model fits (mean ssd=1.76×107) were superior to those derived from digital data (mean ssd=1.64×108).using the digital (smoothed healthmap) cumulative case counts, we estimated a mean r0 of 3.26 (range 1.91-5.05) and a mean d of 0.04 (range 0.01-0.07) across 14 deterministic serial interval lengths (range 10-23 days) (figure 6). we then calculated a mean robs of 1.63 (range 1.31-2.05), a mean imax of 85,546 cases (range 80,028-93,885 cases), and a mean tmax of 530 days (range 522-538 days; november 2016). cumulative reported case projections using these modeled parameters are shown in figure 7.the traditional (ins) data yielded a mean r0 of 5.36 (range 2.52-9.63) and a mean d of 0.07 (range 0.02-0.14) across 14 deterministic serial interval lengths (range 10-23 days) (figure 8). using these, we calculated a mean robs of 1.96 (range 1.45-2.58), a mean imax of 77,386 cases (range 76,587-78,619 cases), and a mean tmax of 387 days (range 382-392 days; september 2016). cumulative reported case projections using these modeled parameters are shown in figure 9.although r0 values calculated using the traditional (ins) data were general higher than those calculated using digital (smoothed healthmap) cumulative case counts (ssd=82.14), robs values were quite similar across data sources (ssd=1.84). as a result, the digital (smoothed healthmap) and traditional (ins) cumulative case data produced similar mean %vax values of 0.39 (range 0.24-0.51) and 0.49 (range 0.31-0.61), respectively.when depletion of susceptible individuals due to infection (ie, via death or immunity-conferred recovery) is small relative to the total population, basic reproductive numbers obtained using the idea model are comparable to simple sir-type models [19]. although they are especially suitable for use in data-scarce settings, sir-type models—and, by extension, the idea model—cannot easily incorporate global dynamics, such as the importation and exportation of infectious agents (ie, vectors and humans) or significant climate events (ie, el niño and la niña). nevertheless, others have demonstrated that simple sir-type models perform similarly to complex mechanistic models when describing the transmission dynamics of vector-borne and water-borne diseases in localized contexts [23,24]. as a result, the idea model is a reasonable method for analyzing nationwide transmission dynamics of zika virus disease in colombia.as defined by the idea modeling method, r0 represents potential transmissibility of a given pathogen in a fully susceptible, naïve population; meanwhile, robs represents observed transmission in the face of existing interventions, as captured by d [2,18,19]. in this sense, the robs is similar to the effective reproductive number (rt), which represents transmissibility in a population that is not fully susceptible. mean modeled estimates for r0 across both data sources were consistent with r0 estimates for zika virus disease in french polynesia and with r0 estimates for chikungunya and dengue [12,25,26]. mean modeled estimates for robs were also comparable to rt estimates for chikungunya and dengue [27,28]. to take into account the effects of ongoing transmission control efforts, robs was used instead of r0 to calculate %vax.in this study, we found that using the traditional (ins) data yielded higher r0 estimates than the digital (smoothed healthmap) cumulative reported case counts. nevertheless, because estimates for d were also higher, modeled ranges for robs and %vax were comparable across both data sources. similarly, the narrow range of possible case projections generated by the traditional (ins) data was largely encompassed by the wider range produced by the digital (smoothed healthmap) cumulative reported case counts. therefore, in the absence of traditional health care-based surveillance data, important epidemiologic parameters may be estimated using smoothed digital surveillance data as described here.the methods used in this study are not without limitations. for both data sources, estimates for country-level case projections and imax apply only to those that seek care; true caseloads are likely to be as much as five times higher than those that are reported [11,12]. furthermore, because country-level data are utilized, in-country transmission heterogeneities are not captured. as geographic granularity of digital surveillance data improves, similar analyses should be conducted at smaller scales. nevertheless, given that projection models are designed to serve as decision-support tools, estimating the number of cases that will report to hospitals and clinics over the next several months—even at the country level—is still valuable for the purposes of resource allocation. this may be especially pertinent with respect to diagnostic support for pregnant women presenting with clinical symptoms for zika virus disease. to date, nearly 20% of all reported zika virus disease cases in colombia have been pregnant women; if the current rate holds, thousands more may be infected and seek care before the outbreak ends. however, the projections presented in this paper only apply in the event that circumstances remain unchanged (eg, no new interventions are put in place).with improved compliance, vector suppression interventions (eg, elimination of standing water, exhaustive use of insect repellant) have the potential to bring this outbreak to a swift close, even in the absence of a vaccine. in the event that a viable vaccine can be developed before the outbreak ends, our estimates suggest that approximately half of the susceptible population would need to be immunized to confer herd immunity. considering the growing body of evidence linking zika virus infection during pregnancy to microcephaly in newborn babies, women of childbearing age should be given priority if the option becomes available [4,5].regardless of whether a vaccine reaches the market before the outbreak in colombia ends, the data acquisition and modeling approach presented in this paper may still benefit other zika-affected countries with limited capacity for government-implemented health care-based data collection. although traditional surveillance data should be used preferentially, in its absence digital surveillance data can yield comparable estimates for key transmission parameters. it has been shown that digital surveillance data can be used retrospectively to assess transmission dynamics of well-understood pathogens (eg, vibrio cholerae); however, our findings suggest that similar analyses can also be conducted in near real time for emerging infectious diseases [3]. moreover, the epidemiologic parameters estimates from these analyses may be readily updated as new information emerges, enabling prospective tracking of transmission dynamics at the country level despite data scarcity.recent history has shown the need for rapid epidemiologic assessments to better inform intervention strategies in the face of a public health emergency. for effective evaluation of such interventions, baseline estimates for transmissibility—like those described in this study—must be established. furthermore, changes in outbreak dynamics must be closely monitored in order to assess the impact of active interventions on disease transmission. our approach offers an important alternative to guesswork based loosely on related diseases and previous outbreaks. given the absence of traditional surveillance data and transmission heterogeneities across central and south america, digital surveillance data can and should be used to conduct similar analyses for other zika-affected countries in the months ahead.the first case of coronavirus disease 2019 in the united states (us) was reported in washington state in january 2020. 1 cases in the us continue to increase exponentially, with several "hotspots" emerging throughout the country, particularly within counties of new jersey, new york, michigan, and washington. 2 the surge of covid-19 cases has created numerous unprecedented challenges in the healthcare field. in most areas across the country, non-essential procedures have been halted and health systems are encouraged to provide remote patient care activities when possible both to promote social distancing and help flatten the curve. 3 in the absence of clear consensus guidelines, ambulatory practices have varied in their approaches to restructuring the delivery of care. some practices have temporarily closed their doors, while others remain open. many of these open establishments are limiting face-to-face care to urgent visits only; thus, non-urgent visits require another method of care delivery. at the same time, a lack of access to routine healthcare during national emergencies and pandemics may lead to higher mortality rates for patients with chronic diseases. 4, 5 therefore, swift and prudent implementation of practice changes have been important in providing continued medication management during the coronavirus pandemic.ambulatory care clinical pharmacists provide accessible and coordinated healthcare services in various outpatient settings (community pharmacies, physicians' offices/clinics). 6 positive clinical and financial outcomes across many chronic disease states have been associated with directed patient care services offered by ambulatory care clinical pharmacists. [7] [8] [9] [10] direct patient care services are often delivered under collaborative practice agreements and include comprehensive medication management (cmm); whereby pharmacists ensure each patient's medications are appropriate, effective, achieving therapeutic goals, safe, and that medication regimens can be adhered to and taken as intended. 11 as part of the cmm process, the pharmacists can ensure medication access, and thereby may enroll this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. accepted article patients into medication access programs. furthermore, the pharmacist may conduct medication stewardship activities.during the pandemic, clinical pharmacy practice has required adaptability to provide direct patient care services, while meeting the changing demands across healthcare systems. 12 pharmacists in ambulatory care practices received rapid rates of information exchange regarding the virus and its transmission, executive orders, and reimbursement guides. in addition to changes in clinical practice, many simultaneously adapted their students' advanced pharmacy practice experiences (appe) as educators. collaborations between pharmacists across different ambulatory care practices can assist with modifying both clinical practices and appe. as such, a group of ambulatory care clinical pharmacists in detroit, michigan quickly convened to form a workgroup. this workgroup enabled timely information exchange, support, and guidance for redesigning ambulatory care practice models and appe. the purpose of this paper is to highlight clinical and experiential challenges that ambulatory care clinical pharmacists have been facing, generate discussion, and provide examples of potential solutions that can serve as a framework for covid-19 ambulatory care practices and experiential sites.during the covid-19 era, ambulatory care clinical pharmacists are ensuring patient access to care, supporting their care teams, and easing the burden on the healthcare system. these roles have become increasingly important following the institution and extension of 'stay-at-home' orders.ambulatory care clinical pharmacists are providing covid-19 education and triaging, medication stewardship, medication coordination, and insurance coordination. 13 to ensure continuity of care and provision of cmm, pharmacists have quickly adapted to the urgent need for practice changes in practice, with a shift to telehealth that consist of video and/or telephone encounters.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.telehealth has been an emerging form of care delivery for pharmacists in recent years.telehealth is a way to provide long-distance healthcare and education to patients by using electronic information and telecommunication technologies. 14, 15 this mode of service has been linked to a positive impact on outcomes related to clinical disease management, patient self-management, and adherence in the management of chronic diseases. 16 numerous pharmacy organizations support the use of telehealth and recognize the future relevance of this practice for the profession. the national association of boards of pharmacy and the american pharmacists association both have definitions of "telehealth" or "telepharmacy" that address operations and regulatory considerations. 17 amidst covid-19, telehealth services have been scaled-up and have become the main mode of facilitating cmm services. 3, 21 given the guidance and experience many pharmacists have with telehealth, they are well-positioned to meet the increased demands during this time of need.ambulatory care clinical pharmacists can conduct either scheduled or ad hoc telehealth visits, which typically include communication with patients via phone or video. the scope of the pharmacists' services provided should be consistent with the scope of practice in their respective states, within the health system, and as written in a collaborative practice agreement. such services may include adjusting medication therapy, ordering self-monitoring devices and laboratory monitoring, providing education, and designing a follow-up care plan.in order to decrease risk of covid-19 exposure and transmission, ambulatory care clinical pharmacists can utilize telehealth to promote and provide more frequent follow-up on patient selfmonitoring; this can serve as a short-term alternative to office-based and laboratory monitoring. while some patients may already have access to monitoring devices such as scales, home blood pressure cuffs, home blood glucose monitors, and peak flow meters, pharmacists can help facilitate access to these tools. other devices, such as point-of-care machines, "smart devices," and continuous blood glucose monitors may provide additional information for patients who have access and meet specified criteria.in cases where telehealth guided by self-monitoring is not sufficient, or not an option, ambulatory care clinical pharmacists have implemented solutions such as drive-up testing.drive-up point-of-care monitoring and medication administration can keep patients from entering the clinic and minimize person-to-person exposure risk. ambulatory care clinical pharmacists can offer this service to increase access and provide faster testing and treatment for patients. one of the most widely implemented drive-up services being conducted during the pandemic is point-of-care international ratio (inr) testing for patients on warfarin therapy. high quality anticoagulation management is important for patient safety and efficacy. frequent inr monitoring, often performed at intervals of one month or less, is common for patients taking warfarin. 22 therefore, drive-up inr monitoring can offer timely evaluation for less stable patients where extended interval inr monitoring is not optimal. there are additional recommended strategies for safe warfarin management during the pandemic. these strategies are dependent on factors such as therapeutic stability, clinical and economic feasibility of switching to an agent that does not require routine monitoring, reasonable access to a clinical laboratory that can offer limited patient exposure, or eligibility and access to home inr selftesting ( figure 1 ). 23in addition to drive-up inr testing, other monitoring or medication-related services may be delivered in a drive-up manner. the public readiness and emergency preparedness act authorized pharmacists to order and administer covid-19 tests, including serology tests, during the national publichealth emergency. 24 therefore, covid-19 testing is an important drive-up or on-site service that pharmacists can provide at this time. blood pressure monitoring for those needing antihypertensive this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.accepted article titration can also be performed through drive-up services. furthermore, patients requiring scheduled injections such as denusomab, epoetin, colony-stimulating factors, or other such medications are good candidates for drive-up minimized contact care.in response to covid-19, there have been expanded approvals of existing telehealth billing codes, as well as the addition of new codes. the coronavirus preparedness and response supplemental appropriations act, the largest economic relief bill in us history, became law on march 6, 2020. 25 the intention of this legislation was, in part, to loosen restrictions on telehealth and promote patient access to care. as a result, on march 17, 2020, the centers for medicare & medicaid services (cms) introduced a waiver to ensure access to telehealth for covid-19 care, as well as management of other chronic conditions. 26 medicare has provided guidance on billing for telehealth, which often serves as a standard for medicaid and commercial payors (table 1) . medicare specifically groups these opportunities into three categories: telehealth using video, virtual check-ins using phone or other technologies, and e-visits using an online patient portal. more recently, cms has also allowed reimbursement for telephonic discussions without the use of video. 26,27 telehealth video visits require real-time audio and video for communication. of note, during the pandemic, these visits are currently being paid at the same rate as in-person visits; co-insurance and deductibles may still apply, though medicare has indicated that coinsurance can be waived. 26 virtual check-ins refer to brief patient-initiated communication with a practitioner via telephone, video, secure text messaging, email, shared images, or use of patient portal.patient consent is required for virtual check-ins. lastly, e-visits refer to non-face-to-face patient-initiated communication using an online patient portal. codes are available for physicians and non-physicians to be billed for time spent over a seven-day period. while both virtual check-ins and e-visits are intended to be patient-initiated, practitioners can educate the patient on the service availability prior to patient agreement. co-insurance and deductibles apply to both types of interactions. reimbursement this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. accepted article opportunity for telehealth services for federally qualified health centers also exist. 28 each of the described services can be furnished by the pharmacist and billed "incident to" a recognized provider.new patients can engage in telehealth visits without a prior established relationship with a medicarerecognized provider. 26 nevertheless, "incident to" billing roles for pharmacists stipulate that the patient must have an established relationship with the provider; this language has not been changed in response to covid-19 telehealth changes. 29 the cms requires documentation of duration of patient contact for time-based billing codes but has removed requirements to document history and physical exam. 27 ambulatory care clinical pharmacists can also continue to utilize pre-covid-19 chronic care management codes offered by cms for non-face-to-face telephonic and care coordination efforts for medicare beneficiaries. 30 existing reimbursement opportunities for non-face-to-face anticoagulation management are also available. 31 of note, the american society of health system pharmacists (ashp) continues to seek clarification from cms on additional billing stipulations specific to pharmacists. therefore, pharmacists should be mindful of additional guidance as it becomes released. 32 while medicare billing codes are typically uniform across states, pharmacists should review medicaid and commercial telehealth billing codes in their respective states. 33 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.furthermore, cms has waived penalties for hipaa violations to provide flexibility for the different modes of care described. 35 technologies with audio and video capabilities are authorized for delivering medicare telehealth visits. use of popular applications, including facetime or skype, is permitted without risk of hipaa violation penalties. applications that are public facing, such as facebook live or twitch, should not be used in the provision of telehealth. 35 pharmacists working remotely can consider using cellular devices linked to their clinic phone number, call forwarding, or apps that disguise the caller's personal number and displays the clinic number instead (i.e. doximity(r)). 36 the telehealth billing mechanisms described can be utilized for cmm, anticoagulation specific services, and other non-face-to-face care efforts. lastly, while most telehealth encounters can be reimbursed, pharmacists should be mindful that some brief communications may not necessarily be linked to reimbursement.a comprehensive evaluation program is essential for the success and quality improvement of telehealth services. 19 a systematic review found traditional pharmacist telehealth programs in ambulatory care had an overall positive impact on outcomes related to laboratory value monitoring and achieving therapeutic goals. 16 for commonly managed disease states like hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and anticoagulation, outcomes measured have included change in blood pressure, a1c, ldl, inr, and time in therapeutic range. other outcomes such as hospitalizations or emergency department visits, readmissions, and mortality have also been measured by programs. patient selfreported questionnaire scores find positive patient satisfaction with pharmacist telehealthcare. 37 ambulatory care clinical pharmacists providing telehealth during covid-19, similarly, should track both clinical and non-clinical outcomes, such as number of patient outreach encounters and billing codes submitted. documentation and evaluation of such outcomes should be determined on a practicespecific basis, but nevertheless should be pre-planned. both clinical and financial outcomes tracked this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. accepted article during the provision of telehealth during covid-19 can also help to provide justification for ongoing program maintenance beyond this public emergency.patient care opportunities for pharmacists may expand far beyond traditional roles when in a crisis such as the covid-19 pandemic. for example, ambulatory care clinical pharmacists could play a larger role managing chronic conditions or providing point-of-care testing for infectious diseases to reduce the burden on other healthcare providers. 38 to encourage this expansion during the covid-19 outbreak, national pharmacy organizations joined to create policy recommendations which urged policymakers and national institutions to recognize and authorize the expanded role of pharmacists to support the covid-19 response. 39 several governors enacted executive orders which enhanced 'operational capacity, flexibility, and efficiency of pharmacies' and permitted licensed pharmacists to provide direct patient care without direct supervision by a physician. 40, 41 additional guidance from the department of health and human services encouraged pharmacists to aid in covid-19 testing. 42 these declarations reduced regulatory barriers, allowing pharmacists to use clinical judgement without physician directives.examples of pharmacist role expansion were abundant among the aforementioned ambulatory care clinical pharmacist workgroup. an ambulatory care clinical pharmacist practicing in an outpatient pulmonary clinic managed all incoming medication requests and triaged/treated patients presenting with pulmonary symptoms to prevent acute care utilization while physicians were redeployed to intensive care units. additionally, a psychiatric ambulatory care clinical pharmacist, using updated clozapine covid-19 guidelines and updated fda recommendations, was able to make clinical decisions about whether it was appropriate for delayed absolute neutrophil count laboratory monitoring for clozapine risk evaluation and mitigation strategy. 43 if the decision was made by the pharmacist to delay this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.accepted article laboratory monitoring due to covid-19 concerns, the associated risks were also communicated to the patient by the pharmacist via a telephonic visit. the pharmacist also ensured access to the medication.other role expansions include authorizing refills for medications, substituting therapeutically equivalent medications, and administering necessary vaccines/medications without a physician's order.changes to clinical practice during the covid-19 pandemic have required adjustments in the experiential training of healthcare students. early in the pandemic, the american association for medical colleges (aamc) swiftly called for a pause to all medical student clinical rotations, and later supported their voluntary participation in direct patient care experiences. 44 while the aamc provided specific guidance for medical students, to date there have been no public statements from the american association of colleges of pharmacy or the accreditation council for pharmacy education providing guidance for the experiential training of pharmacy students or adjustments to graduation requirements.as such, pharmacy schools and health-systems were required to strike a balance between providing adequate learning experiences while ensuring the safety of the students, staff, patients, and community.state pharmacy organizations, such as the michigan pharmacists association (mpa), advocated for the expanded role of student pharmacists in clinical practice to ease the care burden. 45 students were enabled to support pharmacists' efforts by administering covid-19 testing or dispensing medications without direct oversight. 45 additionally, some pharmacy schools elected to graduate students early to assist with the pandemic efforts. 46,47 one effective approach to modifying inpatient appe rotations was described in the literature. pharmacist preceptors assessed students virtually as they conducted modified rotational activities, such as presenting on de-identified patients, answering drug information questions, and drafting therapeutic protocols. 48 there is a paucity of published literature providing guidance for the training of students in the ambulatory care practice during a pandemic. since the pandemic is expected to continue well into the early summer with a potential for resurgence, a cohesive approach to delivering appe was necessary for present and future planning. in response, the previously mentioned ambulatory care workgroup convened to address challenges being faced including how to provide effective orientation, shadowing and training, assessment, and feedback.the covid-19 pandemic presented many challenges to delivering experiential appe in ambulatory clinics. the strategies developed in a covid hotspot may serve as a framework for other pharmacy schools and health-systems around the country. our workgroup devised a structured plan to help adapt ambulatory care appe rotations during the covid-19 pandemic (figure 2) . the plan focused on how to remotely orient students to complete tasks and demonstrate competence in the learning objectives of the experience. the workgroup also identified opportunities to modify traditional experiential activities using remote virtual platforms to host video meetings, share clinical files, and conduct experiential activities. consideration was given to determining which virtual meeting platforms would comply with the health insurance portability and accountability act. 35 additionally, the workgroup modified data collection, patient communication, and documentation templates to support clinical activities of the students. there was also a consensus that once shadowing and training components were satisfied preceptors may supervise student-patient communication using methods such as three-way calling and virtual audio/video visits. following the first trial of remote appe, the workgroup modified the systematic approach to include acceptable clinical activities for students. some of these activities include, but are not limited to, conducting patient interviews, obtaining medication histories, completing prior authorizations, ensuring patient access to medications, assisting with refill requests, developing clinical protocols, providing remote in-services to the care team, participating in multi-disciplinary patient discussions, answering drug information questions, and collecting clinical outcome data.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.the coronavirus pandemic has abruptly changed almost every aspect of healthcare. in outpatient clinics, operations have slowed or even suspended scheduling of face-to-face visits.telehealth and limited contact forms of patient care have become key modes of ambulatory care delivery. at the same time, many outpatient healthcare workers have been redeployed to other areas of demand. thus, ambulatory care clinical pharmacists are practicing at the top of their licenses, filling gaps as healthcare provider colleagues are redeployed due to the pandemic, especially by managing medication therapy for chronic conditions. economic, regulatory, and logistical barriers for pharmacists to assume provider roles have shifted, or even evaporated for the time being. 26,41 ambulatory care clinical pharmacists have been ready, agile, and able to develop best practices to meet the rapidly evolving need for increased provider access.while being flexible and strategic during the covid-19 crisis, pharmacists, healthcare organizations, and regulators should be forward thinking. after the crisis is over, healthcare will most likely look different. social distancing is expected to linger beyond the re-opening of businesses and outpatient care. pharmacists can be providers and leaders in covid-19 testing that will likely become a key component in re-opening the country to return to work. telehealth is likely to become a prevailing form of healthcare delivery. it will be important for pharmacists to sustain heightened levels of patientcentered care in various modes of delivery, including telehealth. furthermore, provision of telehealth by pharmacists can increase access to and quality of care, which is prudent as health care continues to transition from traditional payment models to value-based care. 49 advocacy for maintaining expanded scopes of pharmacy practice will be important in removing barriers that hinder the optimization of medication therapy through pharmacists' care. patient's access to pharmacists' care must be sustainable as well. medicare, medicaid, and commercial payors should institute systems to ensure access to pharmacist services. specifically, a joint group of pharmacy organizations recommended immediate legislative action to include the pharmacy and medically underserved areas enhancement act. 39, 50 this this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.accepted article crisis has magnified the need for pharmacists to fill provider roles. pharmacists must be ready to act and advocate for appropriate coverage and reimbursement for their services. reimbursement should include screening, testing, immunization, and medication management under medicare b, c, and d.the covid-19 crisis has created a need for ambulatory care clinical pharmacists to be problemsolvers and make quick adjustments. it has highlighted a need to collaboratively share information between ambulatory care clinical pharmacists across practices, to recreate workflow and care delivery, and to expand our roles. collaboration as practitioners and experiential educators aids in efficiency and helps ambulatory care clinical pharmacists effectively assist healthcare teams, provide care for patients, and protect communities both during times of pandemic and into the future. limited resources, manpower shortages, tight infection control, physical distancing regulations and stay-at-home policies, we are all adapting our systems to care for stroke patients during this challenging time. there are different phases in the care of stroke patients and these may overlap; hyperacute care often involving reperfusion treatments, acute stroke unit (asu) management as an inpatient and subsequently rehabilitation focus in an inpatient or outpatient setting. there have been reports providing guidance and protocols for hyperacute reperfusion treatment provision such as the management of stroke activations, considerations for intravenous thrombolysis and endovascular clot retrieval.(1-3) whilst some reports have commented on considerations along the spectrum of stroke care, (4, 5) there has been little guidance beyond hyperacute stroke treatment.care in asu is proven to reduce mortality and disability with long lasting benefits up to 10 years after stroke onset. (6) during this pandemic, asu care is likely to be affected in many hospitals. many may have their physical stroke units displaced due to bed utilization needs for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) infected and suspect cases. most hospitals have staff deployed outside their usual workplaces to cover emergency, isolation and screening services therefore disbanding the acute stroke unit team of multi-professional healthcare providers. in our hospital, we estimate that 20-25% of our doctors, nurses and therapists from the stroke ward have been deployed to other areas. staff shortages are often compounded by quarantine of staff due to covid-19 patient exposure or acute respiratory illnesses. thus, patients may be scattered across various wards in the hospital, are being managed by healthcare providers who are unfamiliar with stroke care and are not trained to use established stroke pathways and protocols. furthermore, stroke patients who have concomitant acute respiratory symptoms or contact history will need to be isolated and therefore cared in areas other than the asu.at the singapore general hospital, our asu has remained physically intact but many asu staff have been deployed elsewhere asu due to the covid-19 crisis. the stroke team attending to patients at the emergency department don full personal protection equipment as patient's covid-19 risk status is unknown. once this has been determined, the patient may be admitted to isolation wards based on specific criteria. we have encountered stroke patients being managed in isolation wards due to suspected possible covid-19 infection, including some who had been treated with intravenous thrombolysis and endovascular clot retrieval. in order to orientate staff in these circumstances, our stroke team had to brief healthcare workers in these isolation wards on the care of these stroke patients, which was difficult as many had no neurology training and usually practice in other specialty areas. we realized that our asu pathway was developed to be used by healthcare workers trained to use it, familiar with its format and was too complex to be used by untrained staff.an interprofessional team with medical, nursing and allied health backgrounds at the singapore general hospital developed an adapted asu protocol that was easy to use and ensured that the key elements the acute stroke unit are maintained. this protocol focuses on the asu phase of stroke care with some rehabilitation aspects which occurs just before or after the asu phase. this tool may be useful to others facing similar issues in hospitals across the world.our adapted asu guide has 3 components based on the asu acronym-acute monitoring, stroke complications and unified team approach. it has been outlined in a one-page document ( figure 1 ) that can be provided to healthcare workers caring for stroke patients in isolation or non-asu wards so that the key elements of the proven stroke unit management are maintained and therefore stroke patients can benefit from its proven effects. it requires a short briefing and specifics for the individual patient should be handed over. we emphasize that the stroke team should continue care following inpatient admission to ensure that there is continuity of care for patients and their families.there are 4 elements included in this section: neurological observations, blood pressure measurement, input-output charting, investigations and specific issues following hyperacute whilst this is not as comprehensive as the nihss, it is a reasonable alternative for untrained staff and covers key components. use of gcs is limited for assessing neurological deterioration in stroke. (7) the frequency of observations should be specified and the nursing team should receive advice on when to activate the medical team of any differences in neurological status. blood pressure is particularly important in acute stroke patients and this is emphasized as a separate component. the frequency of measurements should be specified and targets above and below that require escalation should also be specified. daily input and output charting is important as patients may require intravenous fluids and their daily intake may be affected by the stroke. bowel movements should be noted to avoid constipation.investigations should be ordered mindfully to avoid unnecessary transfers and use of resources. if there is no urgent need nor significant impact on patient care, the managing team may choose to defer some investigations if there are pressures on hospital resources. for example, work-up to search for a possible patent foramen ovale may be deferred if the suspicion for this is low in a patient with cryptogenic stroke. there may be specific instructions for patients following thrombolysis and endovascular clot retrieval and these should be advised for individual needs accordingly.there are 5 stroke complications emphasize in the adapted asu protocol which should be screened for, prevented, as well as detected and managed early should they occur. these are venous thromboembolism (vte), dysphagia complications including aspiration pneumonia, complications from tubes and lines, immobility complications and issues with nutrition.vte prophylaxis for stroke patients should be maintained for patients cared outside the asu.if the staff is not familiar with the indications, intermittent pneumatic compressions devices should be applied universally unless contraindicated. prevention of aspiration pneumonia is important may not be a particular issue outside the asu and thus is important to highlight.as the medical and nursing staff may not be trained to assess swallowing, all patients should have a speech therapy assessment for dysphagia screening if possible. prior to this, patients should be kept nil by mouth or fed through a nasogastric tube. other measures are to ensure that the appropriate diet consistency advised by the speech therapist is adhered to; elevate the patient's head of bed to minimum 30-45 degree if it not contraindicated during and at least 30 minutes after feeding; stop feeds or diet if the patient is drowsy; and to not let the patient swallow food or drink if the patients is drooling, coughing, choking, has frequent throat clearing, is breathless after swallowing or has a wet or gurgling voice. unnecessary tubes should not be inserted and should be removed as soon as not needed including urinary catheters, intravenous cannula and nasogastric tubes. intravenous cannula insertion sites should be checked for signs of phlebitis every nursing shift. patients with stroke often have immobility and hence regular monitoring for pressure issues is needed. prevention of immobility complications is important and involves regular turning, protection of the hemiplegic shoulder with appropriate positioning, pressure area protection and out-of-bed mobilization. nutritional needs must be considered as swallowing may be affected. this is especially pertinent for patients on tube feeding.this section deals with components of asu care which are often inter-professional. we have included daily check-ins with the stroke team, patient education, communication with families, discharge planning and support after discharge.we have adopted daily telephone check-ins by the stroke team contacting the clinical team there is a system for patients to speak to and interact with families with facilitated teleconferencing. in addition, regular updates by the healthcare team to patient's loved ones are provided. discharge planning is different with the covid-19 crisis as many postdischarge services are not available due to lockdown or physical distancing restrictions. we attempt to attend to most issues as far as possible as an inpatient to avoid unnecessary outpatient visits. the stroke team physiotherapist checks in with patients by telephone 2 weeks after discharge to assess coping at home and post stroke complications, and any particular issue is brought up to the appropriate stroke team professionals to address. a hospital contact number is provided so that stroke survivors can seek help if needed.appropriate rehabilitation needs are addressed for discharge. whilst usual rehabilitation services prior to the covid-19 pandemic may be curtailed due to lockdown, infection control and other reasons, other options such as tele-rehabilitation, home exercise program, guidance with videos may be considered. international stroke organizations have collated resources for use by stroke clinicians to facilitate the change of practice in treatment delivery.(8-10) as care may be truncated due to the covid-19 situation, we advocate for outpatient follow-up for all patient at a multidisciplinary post-stroke clinic to ensure all loose ends are addressed. these clinics are currently face-to-face but we will soon be initiating a virtual post-stroke clinic for patients who will likely not require a physical examination such as those with no or minor residual deficits. stroke support organizations (sso) are not able to provide their usual host of services. we are encouraged by our local sso who has developed online befriending, support groups and other programs. patients should be referred to adapted care and support services for stroke survivors and their caregivers.the adapted asu pathway is a guide which has assisted care of stroke patients outside our usual asu physical ward and pathway, and by staff not familiar with stroke patient management. it was designed to be simple, require little training and cover key elements of asu care, and can be adopted by other hospitals and centers facing challenges of maintaining asu care during the covid-19 crisis. rhinosinusitis (rs) is an inflammatory disorder of the upper respiratory tract affecting the nasal mucosa and paranasal sinuses. one of the most commonly reported diseases in the united states, rs is estimated to affect approximately 32 million people annually, or 16% of the adult population [1] [2] [3] , and accounts for an estimated 15 million office visits annually [4] . rhinosinusitis is usually classified, based on duration, as acute, subacute, chronic, and recurrent. acute rs is characterized by symptoms lasting for less than 4 weeks, in contrast to subacute (symptoms lasting 4-8 weeks), chronic (symptoms for 8 weeks or longer), and recurrent (3 or more acute episodes per year) rs (table 1 ) [5, 6] . in most cases, clinical interventions are directed toward the diagnosis and management of acute and chronic rs [5] .acute rs arises most frequently as a consequence of viral rhinitis (common cold), although bacterial infection can subsequently occur [7] . the incidence of acute rs is particularly high in children (who experience an estimated 7-10 colds per year), although it is also common in adults (who have 2-5 colds per year) [8] . the microbiology of acute rs is varied, with rhinovirus (found in 50% of cases) [9, 10] , coronavirus (approximately 15%; also responsible for up to 18% of colds) [9, 11] , and respiratory syncytial, parainfluenza, and influenza viruses being the most commonly isolated [12] [13] [14] . bacterial infections are found in approximately 38% of adults presenting with rs symptoms in general medical practices and in 6% to 18% of children presenting with upper respiratory infections in the primary care setting [15] . however, studies suggest a positive bacterial culture is found in only about 0.5% to 2% of viral rs cases [16] . the bacterial species most frequently involved are streptococcus pneumoniae, haemophilus influenzae, and moraxella catarrhalis, the latter being more prevalent in children [5, [16] [17] [18] .the treatment goals for acute rs are to eliminate infection when present, improve ostiomeatal patency as a means of restoring ventilation, promote drainage, reduce inflammation, and relieve symptoms, including pain and nasal congestion [17, 19] . intranasal corticosteroids (inss), with their recognized anti-inflammatory properties, have been shown to be effective in reducing mucosal swelling and improving sinus drainage, thereby hastening the elimination of pathogens [5, 19] . consequently, the joint task force on practice parameters for allergy and immunology recommends combining an ins with an antibiotic (mainly amoxicillin/potassium clavulanate) for the symptomatic treatment of recurrent acute or chronic rs. the joint task force also notes that ins monotherapy may be helpful in patients with acute and chronic rs [5] . similarly, the european academy of allergology and clinical immunology recommends ins therapy, either alone or as an adjunct to an antibiotic, for the treatment of moderate and severe rs [8] .the anti-inflammatory effects of inss include decreased vascular permeability as well as inhibition of the release and/ or formation of mucous secretogogues (eg, histamine, leukotrienes, prostanoids, platelet-activating factor) [5, 20] . those effects are thought to result from inhibition of the release of proinflammatory mediators, such as adhesion molecules, cytokines, mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils [21] . by binding to the glucocorticoid receptor in the cytoplasm, the glucocorticoid molecule of an ins produces a complex that acts on a variety of transcriptional activities, leading to reductions in levels of proinflammatory molecules and cells (table 2) [21] [22] [23] [24] . in acute rs, inss have been shown to reduce the inflammation associated with symptoms such as congestion, headache, and facial pain [21, 25] .concerns about the safety of corticosteroids in acute rs are related to the systemic absorption of oral corticosteroids, which may affect hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (hpa) axis function, bone metabolism, and ocular pressure [17, [26] [27] [28] .these effects may result in adverse events (aes), such as growth inhibition in children [29, 30] , bone mineral density loss [31] [32] [33] [34] , hip fracture [35] , cataracts [36] , ocular hypertension or glaucoma [37] , hypertension, hyperglycemia [38] , and easily bruised skin [31, 39] .given current recommendations for the use of inss in acute rs and concerns about the safety of corticosteroids in general, this article will review data from clinical trials to help clarify the safety issues pertaining to the use of the ins drugs for acute rs, as well as the differences in systemic absorption between the older and newer inss.the motivation for the development of all the intranasal formulations of the corticosteroids-including the older inss beclomethasone dipropionate (bdp), flunisolide (flu), budesonide (bud), and triamcinolone acetonide (taa) and the more recently developed fluticasone propionate (fp), mometasone furoate (mf), fluticasone furoate, and ciclesonide-was to minimize the risk of systemic absorption and the resulting aes (fig. 1) . the intranasal route of administration delivers drug directly to the target organ, allowing local therapeutic concentrations because of the high affinity of the agents for the glucocorticoid receptor. approximately 30% of the administered dose is deposited in the nose, where it binds with the glucocorticoid receptor, while the remaining 70% is swallowed. the swallowed drug is subject to hepatic firstpass metabolism, which is about 90% with bud and taa, 2 agents with relatively lower lipophilicity (or lipid-partitioning potential), and 99% with mf and fp, which have higher lipophilicity [40] . the rank order of some of the currently available inss according to lipophilicity (highest to lowest) is mf, fp, bdp, bud, taa, and flu [41, 42] .concern about the risk of systemic side effects with inss arises from the possibility that a portion of the drug may reach the systemic circulation through the airway and the gastrointestinal (gi) tract [43] . the main determinant of systemic bioavailability of these drugs is the amount directly absorbed from the lung or nose, which does not undergo first-pass hepatic inactivation as does most of the swallowed portion of the dose [40] . as shown in table 3 , the estimated absolute bioavailability of an intranasal dose is highest with compounds with greater water solubility (eg, bud and flu, with 34% and 49% absolute bioavailability, respectively) [43, 45, 46] and lowest with the less water-soluble, more lipophilic agents (eg, fp with b1% and mf with b0.1% absolute bioavailability) [43, 45, 47, 48] . in a randomized, single-blind, placebo-controlled, 3-way, cross-over study in 15 healthy subjects, mf and fp (both administered at the higher than indicated doses of 400 μg/d for 4 days) produced mean peak plasma concentrations that were slightly above the assay's lower limit of detection [49] . investigators used a variety of markers or surrogates to determine the systemic presence of glucocorticoids in the circulation. an excessive level of systemic glucocorticoids would reduce the endogenous production of cortisol, which can be detected by evaluating basal hpa activity. measurements of hpa function, such as area-under-thecurve cortisol concentrations and urinary free cortisol excretion, are considered the most sensitive indicators of ins systemic bioavailability. stimulation tests of hpa-axis function, such as tests that measure serum cortisol levels after the administration of adrenocorticotropic hormone (acth) or cosyntropin, are not as sensitive in identifying the systemic bioavailability of the inss, but they predict the likelihood of aes more accurately [43, 50, 51] . corticosteroids also may inhibit linear bone growth [52] , an effect that has been assessed in short-term studies using knemometry (a precise measurement of lower-leg growth) [50, 53, 54] and surrogate markers of bone formation (eg, osteocalcin) [43] , as well as in long-term studies using whole-body stadiometry [43, 50, 51] .most of the knowledge about the safety of inss is derived from studies in patients with allergic rhinitis (ar), which is a common indication for inss, rather than in rs, for which a relatively small number of clinical studies have been conducted [17] . a correlation exists between rs and ar; ar may contribute from a quarter to more than a half of rs cases, and perennial ar (par) may be a predisposing factor for chronic rs [3, [55] [56] [57] [58] [59] [60] . consequently, more information about the safety profiles of inss is available from clinical studies for ar than for acute rs, especially with regard to systemic effects, such as hpa-axis suppression and inhibition of growth in children. this review will therefore summarize the clinical evidence from studies involving patients with ar and acute and chronic rs. systemic aes will be discussed first, followed by local effects.a relatively small amount of published data for only a few agents is available on the systemic safety of inss in patients with rs. giger et al [61] , in a randomized, doubleblind, parallel-group trial involving 112 patients with nonallergic chronic rs, did not detect any signs of adrenal suppression or significant changes in morning serum cortisol values with once-or twice-daily intranasal bdp (400 μg/d) administered for 12 weeks. a 3-week, randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial with mf 200 μg or 400 μg bid in 967 patients (aged 8-78 years) with acute rs did not find any clinically relevant decreases in plasma cortisol levels, based on 30-minute cosyntropin stimulation tests [62] . (table 4 ). in one of the earliest such studies, an open, longitudinal, multicenter trial involving 25 patients with par followed for up to 5.5 years, treatment with intranasal bud (400 μg/ d) did not affect hpa-axis activity, based on response to acth challenge. the investigators noted that plasma cortisol values were well within normal ranges, and increases in plasma cortisol levels after acth stimulation were high and remained unchanged regardless of duration of treatment [64] .similarly, no significant differences were seen between 2 dosages of bdp nasal spray (336 μg qd and 168 μg bid) and placebo in plasma cortisol response to cosyntropin stimulation in a randomized, placebo-and positive-controlled, third party-blind, parallel-group, multiple-dose study of 64 adult men with ar who were treated for 36 days. in contrast, a significant (p b .01) difference between patients receiving prednisone or placebo was seen in the plasma cortisol response to cosyntropin stimulation [65] . vargas et al [66] reported similar results from a 4-week, randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, placebo-controlled study (n = 105), in which the hpa-axis response to a 6-hour cosyntropin test was not altered with intranasal fp 200 μg qd or fp 400 μg bid, compared with placebo or oral prednisone. prednisone (7.5 or 15 mg/d) was associated with a significant decline in hpa-axis function compared with placebo, as indicated by lower plasma cortisol levels (area under the curve and peak concentrations) after cosyntropin stimulation and reduced mean 24-hour urinary cortisol excretion [66] . the investigators concluded that fp, whether administered at the recommended dose of 200 μg qd or at 4 times that dose, does not alter hpa-axis response to the 6-hour cosyntropin test. studies in children with ar have generally been consistent with adult studies in terms of demonstrating a lack of hpa-axis suppression with inss. a 2-week, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallelgroup, multicenter study in children (n = 250; aged 4-11 years) with seasonal ar did not identify any significant differences between fp (100 and 200 μg qd) and placebo in morning plasma cortisol concentrations in all subject groups before and after treatment [67] . similarly, no significant effects on adrenocortical function at 30 or 60 minutes after cosyntropin stimulation with either of 2 doses of intranasal taa (220 and 440 μg qd) were seen in a 6-week, randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled, parallel-group, multicenter study of children (n=80; aged 6-12 years) with ar [68] . another 6-week study with a similar design in 78 children (aged 2-5 years) demonstrated no hpa-axis suppression with bud (64 μg qd), based on plasma cortisol levels at 0, 30, and 60 minutes after cosyntropin stimulation [26] .brannan et al [69] have reported no clinically relevant systemic exposure to mf in children as young as 3 years of age. in the first phase of a randomized, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multiple-dose study, 48 children (aged 6-12 years) received mfns (50, 100, or 200 μg qd) or placebo for 7 days [69] . at the end of treatment, mean plasma cortisol concentrations were not significantly different from baseline values, nor were mean plasma cortisol and 24-hour urinary free cortisol values with mf significantly different from placebo. a second phase of the study was conducted in 48 children (aged 3-5 years) who received the same doses of mf or placebo for 14 days; hpa-axis function was assessed by response to a 30-minute cosyntropin stimulation test administered 2 to 3 hours after the last dose on the final day of treatment. all of the children experienced a normal plasma cortisol response to the cosyntropin challenge, and mean increases in plasma cortisol after cosyntropin stimulation were not significantly different between mf and placebo [69] .the inss also have been evaluated for risk of growth suppression using stadiometry and knemometry, occasion-ally with results different from that seen in tests of hpa-axis suppression. for example, no hpa-axis suppression with bdp (168 μg bid), as measured by a 60-minute cosyntropin stimulation test, was reported in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, multicenter study in 100 children with ar [51] . however, stadiometry testing of these same children found a significantly slower rate of growth. the difference in growth rate was apparent as early as 1 month after the start of treatment and remained statistically significant over the last 6 months of the 1-year study.stadiometry studies of fp and mf did not uncover any evidence of growth suppression. continuous treatment for 1 year with the maximum recommended dose of intranasal fp (200 μg qd) was found not to affect mean standing height, as measured by stadiometry, in 150 children (aged 3.5-9 years) with par [70] . in this randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled study, fp was equivalent to placebo in effects on growth velocity.a 1-year, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter study found no growth retardation, as measured by stadiometry, in 98 children (aged 3-9 years) with par randomized to receive either mf 100 μg qd or placebo [50] . at all time points, the mean height of mf-treated patients was similar to that of the placebo group; although a significantly greater change in height from baseline was seen in the mf group at weeks 8 and 52, the rate of growth over 12 months was similar in both groups. in a subgroup of 38 subjects enrolled in the cosyntropin arm of the study, subjects receiving mf did not exhibit any evidence of hpaaxis suppression in a 30-minute cosyntropin stimulation test.a 1993 parallel-group study found evidence of suppressed short-term lower-leg growth, as measured by knemometry, with bud (200 μg bid) or intramuscular methylprednisolone acetate (60 mg qd) when compared to terfenadine tablets (60 mg qd) in 44 children (aged 6-15 years) with ar. both of the corticosteroids, administered for 6 weeks, were associated with a significant reduction in lower-leg growth compared with terfenadine (p b .001) and with values observed during a 4-week run-in period (p b .01) [53] . those findings contrast with a knemometry study conducted with mf in 22 children (aged 7-12 years) with ar. in this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 4-way crossover study, no significant differences were observed in lower-leg growth rates in children treated for 2 weeks with once-daily mf 100 μg or 200 μg, bud 400 μg, or placebo [71] . pairwise comparisons showed that patients receiving a 100-μg qd dose of mf experienced greater growth than those receiving bud (p = .033) or placebo (p = .024). investigators did not detect any statistically significant sequence, carryover, overall treatment, or period effects on lower-leg growth rates. table 5 summarizes local aes observed in clinical trials of patients with acute and chronic rs. in general, the incidence of treatment-related local aes with inss was comparable to that found with placebo, and most events were mild or moderate in severity. the most commonly reported local aes were headache, epistaxis, and gi complaints. the first double-blind, randomized trial of an ins as adjunctive therapy for acute or chronic rs was a parallelgroup, multicenter study (n = 180) with flu (300 μg tid) or placebo as an adjunct to amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium (acp) for 3 weeks (phase 1), followed by monotherapy with either flu or placebo for an additional 4 weeks (phase 2) [74] . approximately two thirds of patients in phase 1 and half of those in phase 2 complained of at least one ae. most complaints were attributed to the rs itself, to ineffective therapy, or to gi side effects of the antibiotic. during phase 2, headache was the most frequently reported side effect with flu. the incidence of aes was similar in the active treatment and placebo groups.since that initial study, clinical trials have been conducted with 4 other inss-mf (200 or 400 μg bid), fp (200 μg qd), bdp (400 μg qd), and bud (50 μg qd and 200 μg qd in separate studies)-as adjunctive therapy with an antibiotic for acute rs [25, 62, 75, 76] .similar aes were seen in 2 studies with mf as adjunctive therapy to oral antibiotics. in two 3-week, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter studies, in which mf (200 or 400 μg twice daily) was given with acp in patients (n = 407 and n = 967) with acute or acute recurrent rs, the most commonly reported aes were headache, epistaxis, nasal burning/irritation, and pharyngitis. most aes were mild or moderate in severity, and their incidence was similar in the mf and placebo groups [62, 77] .in 2 separate studies of bud as an adjunct to oral antibiotics in children with acute rs, no aes associated with the ins were reported [75, 76] .only one study reported a greater incidence of aes with ins-antibiotic adjunctive therapy than with placebo, although not all of the aes may have been due to ins therapy. in a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial (n = 95), a greater number of local aes (eg, headache, epistaxis, vaginal itching/yeast infection, and nausea or stomach irritation) were observed in patients receiving a 21day course of fp (200 μg/d) as an adjunct to the cephalosporin antibiotic cefuroxime axetil and the topical decongestant xylometazoline hydrochloride than in those receiving placebo. however, investigators noted that the aes observed with fp may have been a result of the combination of medications or one of the other medications [25] .to date, mf is the only ins to have been investigated in a large-scale clinical trial as monotherapy for acute rs. the randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, dose-ranging study (n = 981) compared mf (200 μg qd and bid) for 15 days both with placebo and with amoxicillin (500 mg tid) [7] . investigators observed a similar incidence of mild or moderate local aes in all treatment groups and with placebo; the most common treatment-related events were headache and epistaxis.studies in patients with chronic rs have yielded similar information on the local effects of inss. only minor differences in ae profiles were observed between patients treated with bud (128 μg/d) and placebo in a randomized, double-blind, multicenter trial (n = 244; aged 19-65 years). most aes (eg, respiratory infection, headache, blood-tinged secretions) were reported as mild or moderate. although respiratory infection was the most commonly reported ae, there was no statistically significant difference between groups in the incidence of this ae [78] . in a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group comparison of once-or twicedaily bdp (400 μg/d) in 112 patients (aged 19-66 years) with nonallergic chronic rs, giger et al observed a similar number of local aes (eg, epistaxis, dryness of nasal mucosa, nasal burning/itching) in the once-and twice-daily groups. slight differences were seen between groups in terms of the severity of aes (once-daily: mild, 61.6%; moderate, 34.6%; severe, 3.8%; twice-daily: mild, 53.1%; moderate, 43.8%; severe, 3.1%) [61] .the safety profiles of the inss in the treatment of acute rs have been well established. reported aes have been primarily local (eg, epistaxis and headache), generally classified as mild to moderate, and similar in incidence to that of placebo. based on the results of clinical studies, concerns about possible systemic effects with intranasal use have not been justified. studies that tested for inss in the systemic circulation and possible effects arising from such exposure showed no evidence of hpa-axis suppression with administration of mf, fp, and bud at doses as high as 400 μg twice daily for 4 weeks. studies after administration of similar doses of mf, bud, and fp to children for as long as 1 year showed no evidence of growth retardation. no clinically relevant systemic exposure resulting from intranasal administration of these agents was observed. for patients receiving an ins at the recommended dose, there appears to be little risk of hpa-axis suppression or disturbed bone metabolism. the mild side effect profile for newer agents such as mf, which is the only ins that has been studied as adjunctive therapy to antibiotics and as monotherapy for acute rs, appears to be related to their relatively low systemic bioavailability. thus, physicians should feel confident in prescribing newer agents for long-term treatment of acute rs.31008 pamplona la certificación de la defunción es un acto médico en el que el profesional debe poner el mismo esfuerzo y dedicación que en el resto de los informes elaborados en vida del paciente. para su correcta cumplimentación el facultativo debe seguir las instrucciones básicas, poniendo especial cuidado en rellenar adecuadamente la secuencia de causas de muerte. en casos de pandemia, la cumplimentación del certificado de defunción corresponde a la medicina asistencial y para poder hacerlo, los organismos oficiales deben publicar instrucciones basadas en recomendaciones internacionales. debe establecerse, cuanto antes, la posibilidad de comunicación telemática de las defunciones. mientras eso no sea posible tienen que establecerse procedimientos que permitan en situación de pandemia, comunicar de forma inmediata la mortalidad a las autoridades sanitarias.abstract:.death certification requires the same effort and dedication as all reports by doctors during their patients' lifetimes. the physician must follow the basic instructions to complete a death certificate correctly, taking special care to fill in the sequence of causes of death. in the case of a pandemic, completion of the death certificate falls to the primary care physician and therefore the official bodies must publish instructions based on international recommendations. it should be established as soon as possible whether it is possible to report deaths telematically. while this is not possible, in a pandemic procedures should be put in place to enable the immediate reporting of deaths to the health authorities.palabras clave:introduction to the medical death certificate: medical-legal aspects documented knowledge of a culture's own social history and that of the individuals within it is a characteristic of developed societies. one of the factors that influence this social knowledge is the existence of records. birth and death registries are useful means for learning our social history. in spain we find documents of records of this type dating from the 16 th century, kept in parish churches together with baptism certificates. after some time inscription also took place outside churches. the first place to keep registries of death in the courts of justice was the state of massachusetts (1639). 1 the medical certification of death first appeared in the last third of the 19 th century and occurred due to several reasons. on the one hand, the increased closeness of doctors attending to the dying in cities was a factor, together with the scientific basis public hygiene, which was largely based on the development of medical statistics and public preventive measures. this also gave rise to new laws and civil codes, and it was the origin of civil registries. moreover, the inclusion of medical statistics led to the internationalisation of disease prevention. at the end of the 19 th century, almost all european countries had centralised death registration systems.in 1871, after several attempts, the registry office (ro) commenced work in spain. 2 this advance had been preceded by a transition period during which a partial provincial registry office started work for large and medium-sized towns in 1841. the law made it necessary for all municipalities to create a ro, in which data on the civil status of all spanish citizens had to be recorded (births, marriages and deaths, etc.) independently of their beliefs. a century later, in 1957, the need to update and renovate the law currently in force was detected, adapting it to the needs of the time. this led to the law of 8 june 1957, on ro. 3 finally, in 2011 a new ro law was passed, 4 to make it suitable "for the values enshrined in the 1978 constitution as well as the current reality of spanish society". although it had been planned to come into force on 30 june 2020, judicial and organisational measures against covid-19 have delayed its coming into force once again, this time until 30 april 2021. 5 parallel to the ro, the medical death certificate (mdc) has also evolved. currently in spain the model published in january 2009 is in force. this was prepared by the general board of official doctors' associations (cgcom) and the national institute of statistics (ine). the change involved the inclusion in a single document of the mdc and the statistical data of the state deaths bulletin (statistical mortality bulletin) (bed). the mdc-bed is a document composed of a printed a3 sheet folded in half. as arimany manso et al. explain, 6 if we consider this document to be composed of 2 sheets, the first corresponds to the organisation of associated doctors (organización médica colegial) (omc) and it shows the medical data supplied by the certifying doctor who has to fill it out. the second sheet is usually filled in by the undertakers with the data supplied by family members of the patient who died, and these data consist of the civil aspects of the subject. it is available in paper format from the provincial official doctors' associations (colegios oficiales de médicos) (com). the current mdc-bed has a more medical approach, to comply with the norms of the world health organisation (who) 6 .according to the regulation that expresses the ro law, the mdc-bed must be filled in by "the doctor who attended the dead individual during their final disease, or anybody else who recognises the corpse". 7 the medical ethics code (ec) 8 regulates the obligation to certify a death, stating that "although the doctor who has attended the patient the most is the one with the greatest ethical responsibility to fill out all of the sections of the death certificate, it is not ethically acceptable to reject the obligation to certify this when one has been present at the death, knows the patient or has access to the clinical history". on the back of the first mdc-bed document we find certain "basic instructions for certification" (fig. 1 ) established by the who, to be followed when filling in the certificate. in the case of violent deaths or the suspicion of criminality the mdc-bed should not be signed, and these deaths should be referred to judicial investigation. 9 the general procedure for the management and notification of deaths is shown in figure 2 .the mdc-bed is a medical-legal document in which a doctor should employ the same effort and dedication as in the other reports drawn up during the lifetime of the patient. clinically and ethically, it is possible to sign a certificate using presumptive criteria if the outcome is possible and the information about the circumstances of death and the patient's history of pathology. nevertheless, it is not acceptable to sign it if shielding oneself in a possible offense of falsity contained in the penal code. our experience and that of other authors confirms that it is unlikely that a doctor who, in good faith and after examining a patient, would be prosecuted after certifying a death as natural when it was not, 10 it being an ethical duty to fill out the mdc-bed. in this situation the priority is to reduce the suffering of family members, over and above unreasonable legal doubts, humanising treatment under circumstances of such intense emotional suffering. 11 this field to refer to clinical antecedents and not, as should be understood, noting in the [so-called] antecedent causes the process that due to the initial cause brought about the immediate cause of death". recently, these have been modified by including a qr code and recording the 9-figure membership number, in independent boxes to be appropriately filled out.correctly filling out the mdc-bed has important consequences in terms of medical policy. based on them, the ine extracts the causes of death from these documents to generate official mortality statistics. according to the results obtained, measures for prevention are applied and the necessary resources are used to meet existing needs by implementing medical policies. not filling out the causes of death correctly (fig. 3 ) may be highly important in epidemiological terms. 13 the result of this would be a poor organisation of the resources destined for health purposes, in terms of research into diseases as well as the implementation of preventive policies.there is little experience in our field in connection with the certification of deaths during epidemics. it is understood that in case of multiple deaths, procedures for action may be similar to those used in catastrophes. as barbería and xifró 14 state, catastrophes are a public health problem because they are likely to increase morbimortality and reduce quality of life. epidemics clearly fulfil these criteria. the role of certification of the causes of death in major catastrophes corresponds to forensic medicine 15 while certification in epidemics corresponds to healthcare providers. 16 however, the comparison may be useful in establishing procedures for the management of corpses and certification of death in case of multiple deaths during epidemics. 17 the sole example we have in spain of an epidemic with multiple deaths and registration of the same is the influenza pandemic of 1918. this outbreak led to many scientific studies, statistical analyses and strong reaction by the press after may 1918. it was a terrible experience for society and gave rise to multiple ways of fighting it by governments, as well as an extraordinary response by healthcare professionals and the population in general. studies of the influenza pandemic in 1918 have covered not only morbimortality data analysis, these data being intrinsically highly important, but have also led to an understanding of the epidemic that goes beyond statistics.to be able to evaluate the repercussions of the influenza epidemic on mortality we have the information contained in the movimientos naturales de población prepared by the ine and the monthly medical demography bulletins published by the ministerio de la gobernación. nevertheless, these data are not enough to allow us to go into detail. for example, they do not permit examination of data associated with city quarters. porras-gallo 18 studied the demographic statistics drawn up annually by madrid town hall statistics department, as well as the yearly summaries of the said demographic statistics. crossing these data with those of the ro records and books of registered deaths corresponding to the years 1918 and 1919 made it possible to determine the evolution of morbimortality in detail during the pandemic in spain. 19 nevertheless, in the past and like today, mortality statistics change depending on the criteria which are applied to them. thus for example, in the case of madrid, the gross rates of general mortality and the specific rates in 1918 and 1919 obtained from ro data and general annual summaries of the demographic statistics of madrid town hall were very different. this was because deaths were registered in the district corresponding to the place of death, while the town hall prepared its statistics on the basis of cemetery data, where deaths were recorded in the district where the individuals had lived rather than the one where they had died. this is an example of the complexity of studies of historical morbimortality. 18, 20 national and international recommendations for the medical certification of deaths in connection with covid-19 on 29 march 2020, the cgcom issued a communication in which, according to the definitions proposed by the who, the national committee of public administrations reported on the procedure to be followed in certifying deaths during the current covid-19 epidemic. 16 this document states that deaths caused in an epidemic are natural deaths. there is no need to inform the medical-legal or judicial fields of deaths. the judicial intervention of the forensic doctor will be restricted to cases of violent death or those in which there is a clear suspicion of criminality. in these cases, in which investigating the death corresponds to the medical-legal field, the fact of having a positive pcr sars-cov-2 indicates a datum that is of epidemiological interest, one that should perhaps be taken into account as an aggravating factor if the death occurred at another time from the traumatic event. however, it corresponds to forensic professionals to analyse this possible contributory cause. in all other cases, certification of death corresponds to healthcare doctors, regardless of whether they work in the public or private domain, as is the case in other neighbouring countries. 21, 22 we said beforehand that when somebody dies, reducing the suffering of family members should take priority over any unreasonable legal doubts when certifying the death, humanising how they are treated in circumstances of such intense emotional suffering: 11 in circumstances such as those experienced during this pandemic, this principle is more necessary than ever.the cgcom document establishes 2 scenarios when certifying deaths due to covid-19. the first refers to cases where although there is no analytical confirmation, the symptoms are compatible with the disease. in these circumstances it is recommendable to certify the fundamental cause of death as unconfirmed or suspected covid-19 coronavirus infection. as the immediate cause the proposal is to use "multiple organ failure"", "respiratory distress" or "acute respiratory failure". intermediate causes may also be cited if there are any or if any are known, such as "pneumonia", "sepsis" or "coagulation pathology". the second scenario is that where covid-19 have been confirmed by a laboratory test. in such cases the fundamental cause of death should be confirmed covid-19.an important question for all of the above scenarios is how to register comorbidity of patients who died due to covid-19. 23, 24 the omc document states that any existing diseases or comorbidities involving a greater risk of developing a serious disease should be recorded in the section referring to other processes: "cardiovascular diseases", "arterial hypertension" or "diabetes".the question sometimes arises of whether to record death due to covid-19 or death with covid-19, and it may be hard to determine whether covid-19 caused the death or whether it was a pre-existing disease. this has to be decided by the doctor who signs the certificate in the light of the data on the clinical evolution of the patient, which may require an in-depth study of their medical history. in any case, the content of the mdc-bed is evaluated later on by the professionals working in the mortality registries. this enables modifications to the fundamental cause of death after study of the clinical history and communicating, if applicable, with the professional who had certified the death at the time.the cgcom document is based on the who international guide for the certification of covid-19. this was subsequently modified in a publication dated 16 april 2020, which contained examples for the certification of deaths not caused by to codify deaths the who establishes code u07.1 for deaths caused by covid-19 and confirmed by analytical study, and code u07.2 for deaths without confirmation by a test, in which the diagnosis of covid-19 is based on clinical or epidemiological criteria (probable or suspected). 26 for the purpose of decision-making, this document uses the following differential definitions for "suspected" or "probable". for those who survive the disease it defines cases as "probable":-when the patient has an acute respiratory disease (i.e., with fever and at least one sign or symptom of respiratory disease, such as coughing or difficulty breathing, for example), without any other aetiology that could completely explain the clinical manifestations, and with a history of travel or residency in a country, area or territory where local transmission of covid-19 had been reported during the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms;-when a patient with an acute respiratory disease has been in contact with a confirmed or probable case of covid-19 during the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms;-when a patient with a severe acute respiratory infection (i.e., fever and at least one sign or symptom of respiratory disease, such as coughing or difficulty breathing, for example) and who required hospitalisation and has no other aetiology which completely explains the clinical manifestations.the same who document defines suspected cases as those which are probable for which the laboratory test for covid-19 has been performed without conclusive results.other bodies in different countries have expressed themselves in the same terms for recommendations on mdc-bed in this pandemic. [27] [28] [29] the italian model 29 has the peculiarity that the chain of events in its model is inverted respecting what is usual: it starts with the basic cause and ends with the immediate cause.as we said, the general procedure for managing and reporting deaths is shown in figure 2 .in spain and other countries there has been clear controversy regarding the number of deaths caused by covid-19. 30 the daily mortality data for all causes is obtained from the general notaries registry of births, marriages and deaths of the ministry of justice, distributed among all of the autonomous communities and including 52 provincial capitals. during the year 2020, the mortality monitoring system (momo) in spain includes deaths due to all causes from 3,929 computerised registry offices (through inforeg), representing 92% of the spanish population. 31 during this crisis a delay has been observed in recording deaths in the ro due to the high number of deaths and the effects on working of the measures established because of the state of emergency. for this reason, the general board of judicial security and public trust of the ministry of justice issued a circular so that the heads of the ro sent the number of burial licences issued every day to the ministry of justice.nevertheless, these measures do not include information on the causes of death. swift and direct reporting of mortality registrations and the causes of the same would help to achieve a suitable level of knowledge regarding mortality in an epidemic crisis such as the current one. the procedure for reporting deaths to the ine by the ro currently consists of the monthly remittance of mdc-bed to the provincial offices of the ine. in terms of reporting deaths, the implementation of data transmission to report deaths would speed the process up and make this communication faster. regarding obtaining information from the ro, corera 32 defends applying the new ro law as soon as possible, 4 with a single computerised and electronically accessible ro for the whole of spain. deaths will be reported by data transmission when it comes into force, and this will, as the author says, undoubtedly offer faster knowledge of deaths.until such time as data transmission is used, it may be useful to establish exceptional procedures, such as the one introduced in castile-la mancha. 33 other suggestions, such as the participation of the legal medicine and forensic sciences institutes (imlcf) in specific mortality monitoring systems, would make it possible to learn of deaths in real time as well as their causes, in circumstances as exceptional as the current ones. this participation is based on the supervision of mdc-bed by forensic doctors working for the ro in some imlcf in spain. this task, which is usually restricted to large towns, could be expanded to the monitoring of the mdc-bed received in all of the ro in this community. thus the imlcf would report daily on the information contained in the mdc-bed to the public health services of each community. this participation, which has been successfully undertaken in castilla y león, would bring great added value to the usual notification circuits.from a practical point of view, we should be able to access sufficient death certificates, certificates that can be accessed in the provincial com. in a pandemic, and especially in one where lockdown measures have been applied, fast and simple remittance mechanisms must be available between the com and undertakers or medical organisations.to conclude, we underline that filling out a mdc-bed is an important medical act. it requires evaluation of the whole pathological history of the patient, and it helps to humanise communications with the patient's family in circumstances of intense emotional suffering. mortality reporting methods have to be improved, creating the possibility of certification using data transmission. in epidemics and pandemics it is necessary to issue clear recommendations on certification by official bodies and establish, if data transmission cannot be used, faster circuits that make it possible to know mortality rates in real time. the current public health emergency (phe) surrounding the covid-19 pandemic, has required otolaryngology practices to rapidly change from conventional face-to-face services to the provision of telemedicine, also known as virtual (non-face-to-face), the phe surrounding the covid-19 pandemic is the time to think out of the box and consider practicing in alternative and historically unconventional ways. quick implementation of new processes and novel ways of providing otolaryngic care is key to short-term practice sustainability. many practices have implemented changes overnight, or very short-term, such as consolidating multiple practice sites to a single site and "drive by" allergy injections given in the practice"s parking lot to prevent staff exposure to the covid-19 virus. implementing virtual services in your otolaryngology practice now is essential to maintaining current and future clinical and financial viability. additionally, practices have had to do something practice management consultants have rarely recommendedholding claims for a period of time such as a week -to ensure compliance with payor billing guidelines.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 8 cms allows payment to audiologists only for diagnostic testing services; therefore, audiologists will not be paid by medicare for telehealth services.a list of current procedural terminology® (cpt) codes that may be used for synchronous (real-time two-way) telemedicine services is in appendix p of the cpt table 2 . table 5 illustrates the two most common modifiers used to report telehealth and/or telemedicine services. cms is not requiring modifier cr (catastrophe/disaster related) on telehealth service codes at this time. check with private payors to determine their policies for using modifiers when reporting telehealth/telemedicine services.medicare has relaxed the place of service rule that required a more formal originating site for telehealth visits during this phe. the patient"s home is now an approved place of service and all facilities are now approved originating sites. in other words, there are now no site of service or geographical limitations for the patient or the provider for telehealth visits (99201-99215). do not use a pos 12 (home) on the claim for any virtual service.if the provider is furnishing the telehealth service from their own home, list the provider"s they understand the need for surgery and we will schedule this as soon as possible considering the potential risk of exposure to covid-19 at his advanced age. an in-office exam will be carried out once the covid-19 crisis settles down or the mass increases in size. a 79-year-old female is seen via apple facetime while the patient was in her home and the otolaryngologist was in her own home. this is a follow up for history of laryngopharyngeal reflux (lpr) with recurrence after a recent upper respiratory infection (uri). she had previously been treated with omeprazole and had done well and able to stop medication but had to restart recently due to the uri/cough. her symptoms have persisted about a month and she has a foreign body sensation in her mid-throat. she restarted her omeprazole 20mg twice a day which seems to be helping. pertinent review of systems is negative. exam shows a well-developed, well-nourished and wellgroomed female appearing her stated age in no acute distress and without cough at this time. diagnosis is probably recurrence of lpr. the patient will continue twice a day omeprazole for at least another 4 weeks. she will follow up if symptoms persist and we will proceed with direct laryngoscopy to further evaluate. she was advised to contact us immediately if her symptoms worsen. additionally, she was advised to avoid alcohol, caffeine, not eat within 4 hours prior to bedtime and call the office if not improved. the hhs office of inspector general (oig) is allowing provider to reduce or waive cost sharing for telehealth services paid by federal healthcare programs. 5 note thatmedicare is not waiving the patient"s financial obligation, rather, they are allowing the provider to waive the patient"s portion. some commercial payors are waiving the patient"s portion and reimbursing the physician at the full allowable. otolaryngology practices should monitor explanation of benefit (eobs) forms, also called remittance advice, to ensure optimal payment and accurate adjustments.the coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security act (cares act) temporarily suspended the mandatory 2% sequestration to the physician allowable during this phe.the bad news is that that the cares act extends the sequestration policy through 2030 in exchange for this temporary suspension. 6 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f related to a previous e/m service in the past 7 days. cpt 99421 currently has a work relative value unit (wrvu) of 0.25 while the wrvu for g2012 is also 0.25 so there is no financial advantage for reporting one code over the other. however, the wrvus for 99442 and 99443 are 0.50 and 0.75, respectively. be sure to document the amount of time spent on the service to support the billed code.modifier 95 is not used with g2010 or g2012 because the codes are not considered a telehealth services by cms.there were new cpt codes in 2020 for online digital (e.g., ehr portal, email) e/m services, initiated by the patient, without an image or video included with the communication. the cpt codes are shown in table 9 .a code in table 9 in summary, table 11 provides a high level and brief summary of information for certain virtual services provided to medicare beneficiaries.commercial payors and state medicaid plans may set their own rules. many are paying for virtual services because they follow medicare"s guidelines. practices are encouraged to survey their top 5 payors on a regular, even daily, basis during this phe to maintain compliance with payor guidelines.otolaryngologists may find that providing telemedicine/virtual services has been beneficial to their practice during this phe. we recommend the following two actions if telemedicine/virtual services are continued after the covid-19 pandemic: clinicians participating in the federal telemedicine demonstration programs in alaska or hawaii must submit the appropriate cpt or hcpcs code for the professional service along with the modifier gq "via asynchronous telecommunications system." coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a life-threatening respiratory illness caused by sars-cov-2, an emerging zoonotic virus first identified in wuhan city, hubei province, china(1). the first confirmed cases of covid-19 were reported on january 12, 2020, from patients presenting respiratory symptoms between december 8, 2019 and january 2, 2020 (2). despite early containment and mitigation measures set in place (3), the high infectiousness, presymptomatic and prolonged transmission of sars-cov-2 (4,5) combined with other factors such as globalization, led to its rapid spread across the world.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 3 rigorous contact-tracing and physical distancing measures implemented in different countries have been demonstrated to be effective in delaying the epidemic during the contention phase (6) (7) (8) (9) . however, ensuing lockdowns and travel restrictions to minimize the healthcare burden has led to wellbeing decline and economic downturn, with profound impacts in low-tomiddle income countries (10). the contention phase in colombia started with the first case of covid-19 confirmed by the instituto nacional de salud (ins) on march 6, 2020, from a person returning from italy on february 26, 2020 (11).on march 23, 2020, 314 cases had been confirmed which prompted the closure of all the country borders to contain the outbreak. onmarch 31, 2020, more than 10% of confirmed cases were missing from the contact-tracing (infections linked to unknown sources), and therefore the mitigation phase was declared with physical-distancing as the main strategy to further limit virus spread. on june 18, 2020, 57,046 confirmed cases, and 1,864 deaths had been reported in colombia (12).the unprecedented global health and societal emergency posed by the covid-19 pandemic urged unprecedented data sharing and faster-than-ever outbreak research developments which are reflected in the fact that over 37.000 sars-cov-2 complete genomes have been made available through public databases, mainly gisaid (global initiative on sharing all influenza data). genome availability and the fact that sars-cov-2 is an rna virus with an estimated substitution rate of around 0.8×10 substitutions/site/year (13, 14) , enabled us to detect the virus is fast generating genetic variation as it is transmitted, and therefore genomic epidemiology is a powerful approach to characterize the outbreak (15) . this approach which relies on phylogenetic analysis has allowed researchers across the world to ascertain sars-cov-2 emergence in humans, to track its geographical spread and to investigate its evolutionary dynamics (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 4 here we describe the complete genome sequencing of sars-cov-2 from 43 clinical samples together with the epidemiological investigation of imported cases and the phylogenetic findings using 122 genome sequences from colombia, which characterize the epidemic onset of covid-19 in the country. our study suggests multiple independent introductions from across the world, mainly from europe and the co-circulation of multiple lineages in the most affected departments. these findings contribute to the molecular surveillance of covid-19 and provide venues for future outbreak response and interventions in the country.the ins is the reference lab and health authority of the national network of laboratories.in case of a public health emergency or when scientific research in public health is required, the national law 9/1979, decrees 786/1990 and 2323/2006, authorizes the ins to use the biological material and associated epidemiological information without informed consent, including the anonymous disclosure of results. this study was performed following the ethical standards noted in the 1964 declaration of helsinki and its later amendments. the information used for this study comes from secondary sources of data that were anonymized and do not represent a risk to the community.nasopharyngeal swabs samples from patients with clinical presentations of sars-cov-2 across the country were received at the instituto nacional de salud (ins, national institute of health) as part of the virological surveillance of covid-19. a total of 43 samples were selected . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 5 for genome sequencing representing either the earliest documented cases, findings from outbreak investigation (linked to transmission chains), and country-wide representativeness. viral rna extraction was performed with the qiaamp viral rna mini kit (qiagen inc., chatsworth, ca, usa) using the magna pure lc nucleic acid extraction system (roche diagnostics gmbh, mannheim, germany).library preparation and sequencing were performed following the artic network (realtime molecular epidemiology for outbreak response) protocol and both nanopore and illumina technologies (21). in brief, cdna was synthesized with the superscript iv reverse transcriptase (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa) and random hexamers (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa). a set of 400-bp tiling amplicons across the whole genome of sars-cov-2 were amplified with the primer schemes ncov-2019/v3 (22).amplicons were pooled and quantified with the qubit dsdna high sensitivity assay using the qubit 3.0 instrument (life technologies, carlsbad, ca, usa) and then purified with ampure xp beads (beckman coulter, brea, ca, usa). ten amplicons were processed using oxford nanopore technologies (oxford nanopore technologies, oxford, uk). these samples were barcoded with the native barcoding kit expnbd104 (oxford nanopore technologies, oxford, uk) and pooled in an equimolar amount. genomic libraries were prepared with the ligation kit 1d sqk-lsk109 (oxford nanopore technologies, oxford, uk) and sequenced using a flo-min106-r9.4 flow cell and the minion instrument (oxford nanopore technologies, oxford, uk). the remaining 33 amplicons were processed using illumina technologies. genomic libraries were prepared with the nextera xt dna library prep kit . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 6 (illumina, san diego, ca, usa) and sequenced using the miseq reagent kit version 2 and the miseq instrument (illumina, san diego, ca, usa).nanopore reads were basecalled using guppy version 3.2.2 (oxford nanopore technologies, oxford, uk) and then demultiplexed and trimmed using porechop version 0.3.2_pre (23). processed reads were aligned against sars-cov-2 reference genome (genbank nc_045512.2) using bwa-mem (24). single nucleotide variants were called with a coverage depth of at least 20x and then polished consensus was generated using nanopolish version 0.13.2 (25). miseq reads were demultiplexed and quality control was performed with a q-score threshold of 30 using fastp (26). processed reads were aligned against sars-cov-2 reference genome (genbank nc_045512.2) and consensus genomes were generated using bwa-mem version 0.7.17 (24) and bbmap (27).the sars-cov-2 genome sequences obtained in the present study and those from colombia deposited in gisaid were collated (n=122) and combined with 1461 representative genome sequences from the south america-focused subsampling available from nextstrain (28) as in 20-may-2020 (suppl table 1 ) plus reference mn908947.3. the full genomic dataset was classified in lineages (29) using pangolin (phylogenetic assignment of named global outbreak lineages) (30) and aligned with 10 iterative refinements using mafft (31). all the alignment positions flagged as problematic for phylogenetic inference were removed (e.g. highly homoplasic positions and 3' and 5' ends) (32). maximum likelihood phylogenetic reconstruction was performed with the curated alignment and a hky+γ4 substitution model (33) using iqtree (34). branch support was estimated with an sh-like approximate likelihood ratio test . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. the relative proportion of expected importations of covid-19 by country to colombia was inferred by taking into account sars-cov-2 incidence per international air passengers arriving in colombia and the available flight travel. the number of international flights and number of passengers arriving to colombia from january 1 to march 9, 2020 were obtained from the special administrative unit of civil aeronautics of colombia (aerocivil, aerocivil.gov.co).the air travel data consists of direct flights from 14 countries to 7 main cities. covid-19incidence for each of the 14 countries with direct flights to colombia was calculated using the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. in colombia, preventive isolation and monitoring for passengers arriving from china, italy, france, and spain started on march 10, 2020. national health emergency was declared on as per june the first, over 30 thousand cases of covid-19 had been documented in the country and 857 cases (2.8%) had been linked abroad ( figure 1a ). forty-eight (4.8%) of the imported cases were asymptomatic and detected through contact-tracing; the majority of these cases were imported from spain (39%) the united states (31.7%), brazil (7.3%) and mexico (4.9%). most of the symptomatic imported cases were traced back to european countries and then to countries in the americas. the most important geographical sources in terms of imported . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 9 cases were spain (30.5%), the united states of america (25.2%), mexico (6%), ecuador (5.8%), and brazil (5.1%). the number of symptomatic imported cases steadily increased and reached a peak on march 14, 2020, when local cases were on the rise and earlier than the closure of borders and ban of international air travel. our estimate is based on the average incubation time of covid-19 (42) and consequently 4.8 days earlier than peak based on symptoms onset (march 18, figure 1b ). the first introductions were predominantly linked to europe, however, both europe and the american region were important geographical sources of infections during the onset of the epidemic. the introductions post-peak occurred for the most part from south american countries.in order to gain a better understanding of the dynamics of sars-cov-2 spread into colombia, 43 whole genome sequences obtained in the present study were combined with sequences from colombia deposited in gisaid, resulting in a set of 122 complete genomes. a total of 133 nucleotide variants (nvs) were identified using the full genome sequences from colombia and the reference nc_045512.2. the majority (n=131) of the nvs fell in the coding region (one nv was identified at each non-coding end). a total of 71 (54,2%) of the nvs in coding sites led to non-synonymous substitutions. most of the nvs (92 out of 133) were unique to a sequence and among the shared nvs, 38 (out of 41) were associated with a specific lineage (tables s2 and s3 ). these observations suggest that the substitutions are not laboratoryspecific and most likely the outcome of in-situ evolution and/or shared ancestry. (appendix).the time-stamped phylogeny of 122 isolates of colombia and 1462 representative global sars-cov-2 isolates (figure 2a) showed that the estimated time to the most recent common . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 1 1 ancestor for the sampled sequence data is december 7, 2019 (october 25 -december 26). asia was the inferred ancestral state at the root. both these observations are in line with the known epidemiology of the pandemic. a root-to-tip regression of genetic distance against sampling time evidenced consistent temporal signal in the sequence data ( figure 2b ). the isolates from colombia appeared intersperse among the isolates from other countries (figure 2a and 2c) suggesting multiple introductions. however, there was considerable phylogenetic uncertainty along the tree and the fine-grained relationships of the isolates from colombia could not be resolved with confidence ( figure s1 ). phylogenetic uncertainty together with uneven sampling figure 3b and figure s2 ). this observation is also in agreement with our estimates using travel data as detailed below ( figure 3c and figure s2 ).between january and march 2020, 7 cities of colombia received 1,593,211 international passengers from 14 countries. bogotá concentrated the majority of the flights with around 77% of the passengers, followed by medellín with 11%, cartagena with 6%, and cali with 4%. in total, 35% of international passengers started their journey in the usa, 17% in mexico, and 12%in chile. however, we estimate that 87% of all imported covid-19 cases came from europe, 9.5% from north america, and 3.4% from south america. when stratified by country, the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 1 2 primary source of importation was spain with 71.4% ( figure s2 ).of the cases, followed by the usa with 8.4%, germany with 8%, and france with 3.4% 65.2% of the covid-19 cases were expected to arrive at bogotá, followed by medellín with 20% and cali with 9%. we estimate that the route spain-bogotá carried 42% of the total imported cases.since the first introduction of sars-cov-2 in colombia (february 26, 2020) contacttracing efforts had been set in place. multiple sequences were obtained from seven distinct early epidemiologically-linked transmission chains. this information was mapped into the phylogeny ( figure 2c ) and all but one set of sequences did not group. however, it appeared very close in the tree. this underscores the potential utility of genomic epidemiology to link individuals with incomplete information (e.g. cases that end-up disconnected due to intermediate asymptomaticthis study has some limitations. firstly, the geographical sources of infection relied on people to self-report their own symptoms onset and travel history, which is subject to inaccuracies. secondly, we use air travel data from important destinations in colombia but other locations may also have fueled covid-19 emergence and dissemination in the country; flight travel data was not available from march 9, 2020, onwards. thirdly, the number of sequences sampled represented a tiny fraction of the documented number of imported cases into colombia; the sample was selected to be a country-wide representative given limited resources for genome sequencing and consequently, the introduced viral diversity may also have been underestimated.another limitation of this analysis is the inherent uncertainty stemming from global unsystematic sampling. therefore, the inferences about the number of introductions and the corresponding geographical source need to be interpreted with caution. we attempted to overcome this by undertaking sensitivity analyses and contrasting the results with the available epidemiological . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 1 3 data and our estimates from travel data. however, more sequence data from colombia and undersampled countries together with information of sampling representativeness per country is needed in order to account for sampling uncertainty in a more statistically rigorous manner.our study provided evidence that an important number of independent introductions occurred to colombia with at least 12 lineages documented. most of the notified introductions occurred from europe and this observation was supported by phylogenetic and air travel data.although the sequence data do not represent the actual number of epidemiologically-linked transmission chains, our phylogenetic findings validated the linkage for those epidemiologicallylinked transmission chains with available sequence data. our results further underscore the advantages of genome sequencing to complement covid-19 outbreak investigation and support the need for a more comprehensive country-wide study of the epidemiology and spread of sars-cov-2 in colombia. funding this work was funded by instituto nacional de salud. c.j.v-a is supported by an erc starting grant (award number 757688). the funders had no role in study design, data collection, and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 2 11 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20135715 doi: medrxiv preprint 2 5 table s1 . gisaid's ncov-19 acknowledgements. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 29, 2020. with the development of mobile internet, location-based social networks (lbsns) [6] , such as yelp and foursquare, have emerged in recent years. in lbsns, users can share their experiences and tips for point-of-interests (pois) [2] , e.g., restaurants and sightseeing sites, in the form of check-ins [14] . the rapid growth of lbsns has attracted billions of users, promoting our urban experience to a new stage [17] . to benefit lbsn users and promote locationbased marketing, poi recommendation on lbsns has become an essential task aiming to recommend new pois to a user according to his personal preferences and to facilitate his exploration of the city [18] .different from traditional item recommendation, e.g., movie recommendation, poi recommendation is highly context-dependent. first, locations of pois are important factors for poi recommendations, since users prefer to visit pois that are not far away. for example, in gowalla and foursquare, 90% of users' consecutive check-ins are within the distance less than 50km [15] . second, users' preference over pois exhibit salient temporal periodic patterns, e.g., restaurants are preferred in dinner time and theaters are visited more frequently in weekend than in weekdays. finally, a user's check-in records form a poi sequence with continuous distance and time intervals, offering various sequential patterns [12] , e.g., pois planned in a trip. in sum, users' check-in records contain rich spatialtemporal context information that should be synthetically integrated to reflect the dynamics of the underlying check-in system.many methods have been proposed to exploit geographical influence [3, 11, 18, 20] , temporal periodic patterns [5, 22, 25] and sequential dependency [1, 4, 12, 13, 23, 24] lying in users' check-ins for improving the performance of poi recommendation. however, these methods only partially leverage the spatial context and temporal context, and they integrate these contexts using a global weighting scheme [9, 19, 25] , assuming that the importance of each context is unchanged for all pois. these methods fail to capture the dynamic role of context, given that the importance of each context is poi-specific. let's say we are going to make poi recommendation to a big foodie at 3 p.m. we may push a restaurant to him considering his long-term preference as a foodie. however, recommending a restaurant must happen at the right time, e.g., dinner time, rather than 3 p.m, at which restaurant cannot meet the user's current needs. in this scenario where restaurant is a candidate poi, we should inhibit the importance of user's long-term preference and let the temporal context play a more decisive role in user's check-in choice. that is to say, each context's importance to current recommendation should be poi-specific.in this paper, we propose to model the spatial-temporal context for poi recommendation using an attention mechanism (fig. 1) . temporal context is represented as a low-dimensional vector, capturing what type of poi is preferred for a specific temporal moment. for spatial context, due to the lack of location information of user, we infer the spatial context by exploiting users' check-in records, obtaining a low-dimensional representation through an attention enhanced recurrent neural network. finally, a poi-guided attention mechanism is adopted to learn the importance of each context for each recommendation, offering high flexibility to capture the dynamic nature of context.we evaluate the proposed poi recommendation method by extensive experiments on two real-world datasets collected from foursquare and gowalla respectively. experimental results show that the poi-specific context importance can significantly improve the performance of poi recommendation, compared with state-of-the-art methods.in this section, we make a brief discussion on related works.check-in is the main inferential evidence for poi recommendation [3, 20] . due to its nature as implicit feedback, researchers utilize the weighted matrix factorization [10] or pairwise ranking methods [7, 9] to model it.geographical influence has been proved to be effective in improving poi recommendation accuracy, with a parameterized distribution to model the distance influence [3, 10, 16, 20] . moreover, wang et al. [18] propose to model poi-specific geographical influence, which captures the asymmetry and high variation of geographical influence between pois.periodic pattern has attracted much attention from researchers. they split one day into multiple time slots and exploit the check-in pattern in each time slot in terms of temporal non-uniformness and consecutiveness [5, 22] . sequential dependency has been exploited in recent years. many methods based on matrix factorization [13] , markov models. [4, 23, 24] , word2vec [14] or rnn [12] have been proposed to learn the transitive patterns between pois.however, the above methods only partially exploit the spatial-temporal context and integrate these contexts using a global weighting scheme [9, 19, 25] given that the importance of each context is poi-specific. considering that the attention mechanism can automatically model and select pertinent piece of information from a set of inputs and achieve good performance in many neural networkbased tasks [8] . in this paper, we design a poi-guided attention mechanism to address the above issue.for ease of presentation, we first introduce the notations used in this paper. we denote u and v the user set and poi set, with u and i representing a user and a poi respectively. each poi i's location is denoted by its longitude and latitude, i.e., (lon i , lat i ). a check-in is a triple (u, i, t), which means user u visits poi i at time t. for each user u, a check-in profile d u is provided, which is the set of check-ins generated by u in chronological order. we define a long-term preference vector p u for each user u, a preference vector s i and an influence vector i i for each poi i, and a preference vector e t for each time t.poi recommendation: given all users' check-in profiles {d u }, we aim to provide a list of pois which are not visited and potentially preferred by a target user u at a target time t.in this section, we describe the proposed framework for poi recommendation, which models the spatial-temporal context by an attention enhanced recurrent neural network (star in fig. 1 ).whether a poi will be chosen is sensitive to the spatial-temporal context, e.g., restaurant is popular at dinner time and the temporal context plays a more decisive role, compared with other factors in this scenario. likewise, if user is on a food street, restaurant is also popular and the spatial context becomes more decisive. therefore, we need a model that can automatically adjust the importance of the involved context to user's current preference, and the idea comes to fruition in the proposed star model by using a poi-guided attention mechanism.star infers a target user u's preference to a candidate poi j at a target time t by capturing the dynamic influence of the spatial context and the temporal context, besides user u's long-term preference. to characterize the influence of each factor, we learn the following latent vectors in star:-p u : a n-dimension vector characterizes user u's long-term preference. -s j : a n-dimension vector characterizes poi j's preference distribution.-e t : a n-dimension vector characterizes time t's temporal periodic patterns.specifically, e t contains two types of temporal information, including hour of a day, and day of a week, to capture which pois are preferred at a specific time. figure 1 (a) shows the architecture of the proposed star model. we input user u's long-term preference p u , the temporal context e t capturing temporal periodic patterns of the recommendation time t and the spatial context h t capturing the geographical influence of user u's current location. an poi-guided attention layer is applied to distinguish the importance of each context. user u's instantaneous preference at time t, denoted as q t u , is computed by integrating the involved contexts with their importance into consideration.note that, it is tricky to model the spatial context because the real location of user is usually not available. therefore, we utilize the user's historical checkins to simulate his current location and compute the spatial context as the geographical influence of historical check-ins. figure 1(b) show the architecture of the generation of the spatial context, i.e., we use a recurrent neural network with user's historical check-in sequence as input to achieve this purpose, and we also take the influence of the geographical distance and time decay into consideration.in what follows, we specify the details of the star model.to make contextaware recommendation, we first use a poi-guided attention mechanism to distinguish the importance of the involved contexts, including user u's long-term preference p u , the temporal context e t and the spatial context h t . we introduce the generation of h t in next part. specifically, we input not only p u , e t and h t , but also the candidate poi j's preference vector s j , and compute the attention weights for the three factors based on the interaction between them:where α p , α e and α h are attention weights of p u , e t and h t respectively and w is parameter. || represents vectors' concatenation operation and σ(z) = 1 1+e −z is the sigmoid function.then, a normalization on α p , α e and α h is completed through a softmax function. take α p as an example:in this way, we can automatically determine the importance of each context guided by the candidate poi j. for example, when t is the time to eat and the poi j is a restaurant, α e would be a large value to make the temporal context get more attention.with the poi-specific attention weights pointing out the importance of different contexts, we compute user u's instantaneous preference at target time t, i.e., q t u , as follows:denote the preference as s(u, j, t) as the target user u's preference to candidate poi j at target time t. we compute s(u, j, t) as the inner product between user u's instantaneous preference vector q t u and candidate poi j's preference vector s j , like traditional matrix factorization does:spatial context generation. since we don't know user u's current location, we use the pois in his check-in history to simulate the current location and model the spatial context h t as the geographical influence from user u's historical check-ins. we use a recurrent neural network to naturally line up user u's historical check-ins as a behavior sequence. in each recurrent unit, we input the check-in activity (u, i, t ), i.e., i i as the influence vector of the visited poi i and e t as the preference vector of the check-in time t . i i is a n-dimension vector for characterizing historical poi i's influence on user's future check-in preference.we use h t to represent the hidden layer after visiting poi i at time t . h t is responsible for propagating past signals for future predictions, and it is computed as follows:where h t denotes the hidden layer from the previous recurrent unit prior to time t . w i and w e denote the weight matrices for input vectors. w h denotes the recurrent connections among consecutive recurrent steps. a(z) = 1−e −2z 1+e −2z is the tanh function, which acts as non-linear transformation.instead of directly using h t as the spatial context, we introduce another attention mechanism to build cross-dependency lying in user's check-in sequence. the spatial context h t is regarded as the aggregation of the influence of all pois that are visited prior to t, with the influence of geographical distance between historical pois and the candidate poi j, and the time decay after historical check-in time serving as weights. specifically, we compute h t as follows:where f (t − t ) is the time decay function of the elapsed time from t to t, and g(d ij ) is the geographical influence function, which is determined by the distance d ij between historical poi i and candidate poi j. they are defined respectively bywhere a, b, c, d are function parameters, controlling the initial scores and the steepness of time decay and geographical influence respectively. those two functions allow the influence of historical check-ins to decrease when the time interval becomes longer and the geographical distance becomes further, which fits intuitions and previous findings. note that, existing methods have separately studied the time decay function [2] or the geographical influence function [20] . to our best knowledge, it is the first time to jointly integrate them for capturing the spatial-temporal attenuation effect.for each check-in activity (u, j, t), we randomly sample c negative pois from poi set v with poi j being excluded and denote the set of negative samples as neg(j). the objective function is defined in a ranking manner as follows: (s(u, j, t) − s(u, l, t) ). (9) in the optimization, we learn four latent vectors, i.e., p u , e t , i i and s j , and four parameters in the time decay function and the geographical influence function, i.e., a, b, c and d.we compute the score of each poi in v according to eq. 4, and take top k pois with highest scores as the final recommendation list.we adopt two real-world datasets collected from foursquare and gowalla respectively for evaluation, which are also used in [15] . in both datasets, each poi is marked by its longitude and latitude, and each check-in is associated with a check-in time. for each user, we first sort her/his check-ins in chronological order, and then mark off the early 80% of her/his check-ins as training data, the next 10% as validation data, and the last 10% as testing data.to evaluate the models, we adopt two widely-used metrics, i.e., hit@k [21] and mean reciprocal rank (mrr@k).specifically, we denote the set of check-in time in user u's testing set as t (u). for each check-in time in t (u), we predict a recommendation list. let g u,t denote the ground truth poi that user u visited at time t, and p k u,t denotes the top k pois recommended for user u at time t. then, we calculate hit@k as follows:where δ(z) is an indicator function which equals 1 if and only if boolean variable z is t rue, and otherwise 0. | · | denotes the cardinality of a set. the mrr@k is calculated as follows:where rank(g u,t , p k u,t ) represents the rank of poi g u,t in set p k u,t . if g u,t is not in p u,t , rank(g u,t , p ut ) = ∞.we consider three values of k, i.e., 1, 5 and 10 in our experiments.we first compare the proposed star model with its variants to demonstrate the effectiveness of the attention mechanism. three variants are considered by respectively removing the attention layer in the generation of the spatial context ( star-sta), the attention layer in the integration of different contexts (starca) and both the two attention layers (star-sta-ca). then, we compare the proposed star model with several baseline methods:-ug [20] : ug combines a user-based collaborative filtering method and geographical influence. it uses a power-law function to characterize the relation between check-in probability and distance. -utg [22] : utg improves the basic user-based collaborative filtering method to incorporate temporal periodic patterns, and then combines geographical influence. -fpmc-lr [4] : fpmc-lr is a sequential prediction model, which embeds the personalized markov chain and adds region localization constraint for next check-ins. -st-rnn [12] : st-rnn extends rnn to model local temporal and spatial contexts with time-specific and distance-specific transition matrices. -ge [19] : ge is a graph-based embedding model, which utilizes sequential dependency, geographical influence and temporal periodic patterns to constrain poi's representations. -geo-teaser [25] : geo-teaser is the combination of a temporal poi embedding model and a geographically hierarchical pair-wise preference ranking model.in the experiments, we add a l 2 regularization term to the parameters when performing optimization, and the regularization coefficient is set as 0.01. for all latent vectors, we set their dimension as n = 128. we set the negative count c figure 2 present the hit@k and mrr@k of the proposed star model and its variants respectively. we can observe that removing any attention would cause performance degradation on both datasets. this phenomenon indicates that a global weighting scheme cannot effectively organize multiple heterogeneous contexts, and the attention mechanism plays a critical role while integrating the spatial-temporal contexts. figure 3 and fig. 4 present the hit@k and mrr@k of the star and baseline methods respectively. it can be observed that the proposed star method achieves the best performance under different settings of k on both datasets and both metrics, which demonstrates the superiority of our method to these state-of-the-art methods. we take a detailed account of fig. 3 as an example. since ug considers only the geographical influence, it gets the worst performance. utg further incorporates temporal periodic patterns (time slot in a day), resulting in a slightly better performance than ug. fpmf-lr and st-rnn consider the sequential dependency and ignore the temporal periodic patterns, and its performance is better than that of utg. this indicates that sequential dependence is crucial to poi recommendation. st-rnn outperforms fpmc-lr in most cases except the case of k = 1 on the foursquare dataset, this is due to the modeling of continuous distance and time intervals. ge and geo-teaser both consider all contexts, and thus perform better than the above methods. however, they just utilize these contexts to constrain pois' representation learning, and combine the involved contexts using a global weighting scheme. star uses a poi-guided attention mechanism to distinguish the importance of different contexts, guaranteeing its superior performance against baseline methods.in what follows, we study how important each recommendation context (user's long-term preference p u , the temporal context e t , the spatial context h t ) is over time. we directly compute the interactions between three types of factors and the true poi respectively, and compare the proportion of each part in the overall score. specifically, we sample a user u from the foursquare dataset for case study. u has 115 check-ins in total. we select her/his 10 consecutive checkins from january 6, 2013 to april 6, 2013, and present the changes in proportions over time in fig. 5 . we have the following observations: (1) u visited the first 5 pois in consecutive 5 days. as expected, the impact of the spatial context increases constantly, while the impact of user's long-term preference becomes negligible. (2) when predicting the 9th poi, the impact of the spatial context becomes very weak, which results from the fact that this check-in is more than one month away from the 8th check-in. this check-in is mainly triggered by user's long-term preference, since we find in the dataset that the 9th poi is the second most frequently visited poi among all check-ins of u. (3) the main reason for the last checkin is the temporal context, i.e., temporal periodic patterns (21:11) . we guess that the last poi is a place for relax, as most check-ins at this poi occurred at non-working hours.in this paper, we propose a new poi recommendation framework to dynamically integrate the spatial-temporal context. we use a low-dimensional vector to capture the temporal context and infer the spatial context by mining a user's check-in history through an attention enhanced recurrent neural network. we integrate the spatial-temporal context with user's long-term preference using another poi-guided attention, which can distinguish the importance of each context for recommendation. in this way, we can flexibly and accurately capture the dynamic nature of different contexts. we perform sufficient experiments on two real-world datasets and demonstrate that the proposed method consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods for poi recommendation.spring and summer 2020 are unique in that the challenges of care for those suffering from pollen allergy coincide with the covid-19 pandemic. several considerations are important to allow optimal care of allergic rhinitis (ar) and asthma and hence prevention of coronavirus spread through sneezing, rhinorrhoea and coughing.this compact overview of recommendations by the euforea expert teams on allergic airway diseases and ait is based on investigation of the current covid-19 literature in association with the key words above and shared clinical experience of the experts involved. it deals with similarities and differences between ar and coronavirus infection, specific recommendations for allergic disease care in the covid-19 era, including guidance on allergen specific immunotherapy, ait.key words: allergy, rhinitis, asthma, treatment, control, covid-19, symptoms, smell and taste, allergen immunotherapy acute covid-19 infection and onset of seasonal allergic rhinitis (sar) share a few similarities in their phenotype, but also differences. whereas covid-19 commonly presents as a flu-like illness with fever and persistent cough as its main symptoms, there is evidence of milder disease, especially in younger people. according to the who some patients may also have a runny nose, sore throat, nasal congestion and aches and pains or diarrhoea. some suffer profound sudden and complete loss of smell and taste (1) . about 80% of covid-19 sufferers experience a mild case -of similar severity to a common cold -and recover without needing any special treatment (2) . this clinical presentation might be confused with seasonal allergic rhinitis, especially in those new to such symptoms. figure 1 shows the overlap and the major differentiating features. cough and fever are the most prominent symptoms of covid-19, whereas conjunctivitis and itching point to allergic rhinitis as the diagnosis.given the global covid-19 threat to mankind in spring 2020 and the fact that 44%of all transmission occurs from asymptomatic people (3) it is very important to keep sar under the best possible control so as to diminish symptoms, particularly those of sneezing, rhinorrhoea and coughing, which could be responsible for viral spread to others via aerosol formation in those who do not realise that they also have covid-19. sar patients are strongly recommended to keep social distancing, to wear a mask to avoid aerosol formation when sneezing or speaking, to carry spare masks and tissues and bin them safely after use. it would be sensible, where possible, for sar patients to be tested for the sars-cov-2 virus, since they could be potent viral spreaders.therapy for sar is best started early and used regularly throughout the relevant pollen season. none of the recommended treatments for sar are contra-indicated, other than systemic corticosteroids. the euforea treatment algorithm (figure 2 ) provides useful guidance which remains relevant. there is no contraindication to the use of intranasal corticosteroids (ins). this is the concerted view of over 90% of experts (4). ins do not reduce immunity, in fact they normalize the structure and function of the nasal mucosa (5) and do not in vivo adversely affect mucociliary clearance (6) . there are even preliminary data indicating that some corticosteroids, e.g., ciclesonide and mometasone, may suppress coronavirus replication (7) . however, systemic corticosteroids should be avoided, as they may suppress the human immune system.similarly, asthma inhalers should be continued as before and taken regularly, increasing the dose if needed to maintain control in the pollen season. inhaled corticosteroids (ics) and ics combinations with bronchodilators, (long acting beta agonists, laba) are known to protect against virally-induced asthma exacerbations and may be beneficial in covid-19 (8) . also, treatment with biologicals for patients with more severe asthma and severe chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps should be continued to avoid aggravation of these diseases as per guidelines (9).although the cdc advises that "people with moderate to severe asthma may be at higher risk of getting very sick from covid-19. covid-19 can affect your respiratory tract (nose, throat, lungs), cause an asthma attack, and possibly lead to pneumonia and acute respiratory disease" (10) , asthma may not be a potent risk factor (8) . it is already known that children, in whom respiratory allergy is common, often have very mild disease. in the first report from wuhan, on 140 patients with severe covid-disease, none of the patients reported allergic rhinitis or asthma despite a prevalence of ar of nearly 20% in china (11, 12) .more recently an italian report on 3200 covid-19 positive deceased patients did not mention asthma among coexisting diseases (13) .ongoing allergen-specific immunotherapy (ait) should be continued if feasible within the health care system, as long as no covid-19 infection has been diagnosed. new ait treatment with subcutaneous injections (scit) is not advised because of the necessity for repeated visits to a physician or hospital; however the initiation of sublingual immunotherapy (slit), which mandates only one initial dose under supervision (14) should be preferred, or a switch to slit from scit considered, when there is a suitable alternative to scit for the allergen in question. ait should be performed only with registered allergen products which have been proven to be efficacious (15) .management of covid-19 is supportive, with experimental use of drugs, mainly in clinical trials which may include patients with allergic airway disease. oral corticosteroids may be needed under supervision in covid-infected asthma patients for severe virus-evoked exacerbations. avoidance of nsaids, which was suggested for all possible patients (16), then revoked (17), remains vital in nsaid-sensitive asthma.• early mild covid-19 symptoms may be confused with or co-occurrent with allergic rhinitis • proper treatment of allergic rhinitis is very important at this time as uncontrolled hay fever may increase the risk of viral dissemination • such therapy (including ait) is not immunosuppressive and does not represent a risk factor for more severe covid19-induced disease. • topical and inhaled corticosteroids may even be beneficial or preventative for covid-19 infection. • allergic airway disease is probably not a risk factor for more severe covid 19 disease, however asthma control can worsen with viral infections. treatment algorithm for ar as proposed by euforea, taking into account the reality of patient phenotypes and existing international guidelines. www.euforea.org treatments suggested are possible during the covid-19 pandemic with the exception of the use of systemic corticosteroids which should be avoided as they may be immunosuppressive. the symbol ">" means "more than" .with the availability of location-based social networks (lbsns) such as yelp and foursquare users can share their locations, experiences, and content associated with the point-of-interests (pois) via check-ins. employing the successes in the area of recommender systems (rss), poi recommendation helps to improve the user experiences on lbsns, suggesting pois according to users' past checkin history. poi recommendation helps users explore new interesting pois while helping businesses to increase their revenues by providing context-aware advertisements. as such, poi recommendation has attracted much attention from both research and industry [4, 6, 22] .one of the most important challenges that limit the accuracy of poi recommendation is the data sparsity problem [1, 25, 26] . numerous users are active on lbsns with millions of pois already being listed on these platforms. however, in practice, users are able to only visit a very limited number of pois. hence, the user-poi matrix used in different collaborative filtering (cf) approaches becomes sparse, limiting the attainable recommendation accuracy [3, 24] . to address this problem, several studies have incorporated contextual information such as geographical and temporal influences separately into their model [7, 21, 30, 31] . for example, relevant studies have tried to incorporate geographical [9, 21, 28] and temporal influences [16, 20, 27] in their proposed model. moreover, as argued in [9] [10] [11] , users commonly check in to pois around several geographical centers. while modeling these centers it is assumed that they are static and do not change according to temporal information. this assumption may not be correct and taking into account both geographical and temporal influences might help to model the users' behavior with a higher accuracy. for instance, if we consider working time and leisure time, this suggests that users tend to explore pois around their activity centers in leisure time, while they prefer to visit the same locations more often while they are at work. for example, a person would go to the same restaurant every day to have lunch while working during the weekdays. however, the same user might decide to visit a more diverse set of pois and visit new places while on holidays (i.e., leisure time). therefore, the users' check-in behavior and activity centers are dependent on their temporal states (e.g., working time vs. leisure time).to elaborate more, in fig. 1 , we have depicted a randomly selected user's check-ins from the gowalla dataset [22] during working and leisure time. as seen, this user follows a temporal center-based check-in pattern; that is, the activity centers are different at different temporal states. also, while we compare fig. 1a with figs. 1b and c, we see that the activity centers are different from each temporal state, compared to all the check-ins. based on these observations, we conclude that joint modeling of geographical and temporal information is an effective approach for defining users' activity centers. in this paper, we take a step for joint modeling of geographical and temporal information. our contributions can be summarized as follows: -we propose a novel contextual model that jointly considers both geographical and temporal information. -we propose a spatio-temporal activity-centers model that consider users' center-based behavior in different temporal states. -we propose static and temporal mf models to study the users' preference and behavior both in static and temporal manners. in the static mf, we train the model on the whole user-poi matrix, whereas in the temporal mf, we train the model using different user-poi matrices for every time slot. -we address the data sparsity problem by incorporating the proposed contextual model into the traditional mf model and propose a novel mf framework.we conduct several experiments on two well-known real-world datasets, namely, gowalla and foursquare, demonstrating the improvement of the proposed method in the accuracy of poi recommendation compared to a number state-of-the-art approaches. our experiments show that joint modeling of the geographical and temporal influence improves the performance of poi recommendation. finally, to enable reproducibility of the results, we have made our codes open source. 1poi recommendation plays an essential role in improving lbsns user experience. much work has been carried out in this area based on the core idea behind recommendation systems, assuming that users with similar behavioral histories tend to act similarly [28] . collaborative filtering (cf-based) recommendation approaches aim to base recommendations on the similarity between users and items [14, 16] . poi recommendation considers a large number of available pois (items) while a single user can only visit a few of them. hence, cf-based approaches applied to poi recommendation often suffer from the data sparsity problem. this leads to poor performance in poi recommendation. many studies have tried to address the data sparsity problem of cf approaches incorporating additional information into the model [5, 21, 22, 28] . as the users' check-in behavior follows a spatio-temporal mobility pattern, much work has incorporated this critical information. considering users' movement trajectories between pois, many of the previous studies have shown that geographical influence is one of the most important factors in poi recommendation [22, 24] .more specifically, ye et al. [28] argued that a user's check-in behavior is affected by the geographical influence of pois, following the power-law distribution and proposed a unified poi recommender system incorporating spatial and social influences to address the data sparsity problem. ference et al. [14] took into consideration several factors such as user preference, geographical proximity, and social influences for out-of-town poi recommendation. this work, however, did not take into account users' temporal information and in-town users' behavior. cheng et al. [9, 10] modeled users' check-ins via center-based gaussian distribution to capture users' movement patterns based on the assumption that users' movements consist of several centers. li et al. [21] , in another work, modeled the poi recommendation task as a pairwise ranking loss, where they exploited the geographical information using an extra factor matrix. zhang et al. [31] proposed a method that considered the geographical influence on each user separately. to this end, they proposed a model based on kernel density estimation of the distance distributions between poi check-ins per user. aliannejadi et al. [2] proposed a ranking model and predicted the appropriateness of a poi given a user's context into the ranking process. yuan et al. [29] addressed the data sparsity problem based on the idea that users tend to rank higher those pois that are geographically closer to their visited pois. guo et al. [17] proposed a location neighborhood-aware weighted matrix factorization model to exploit the location perspective that incorporates the geographical relationships among pois. more recently, aliannejadi et al. [6] proposed a two-phase collaborative ranking algorithm for poi recommendation that takes into account the geographical influence of pois in the same neighborhood.another line of research studies the temporal influence on users' preferences [13, 30, 32] . temporal information has been shown to improve poi recommendation accuracy and alleviate the problem of data sparsity [22] . griesner et al. [16] proposed an approach to integrate temporal influences into matrix factorization. gao et al. [15] computed the similarity between users by dividing users' checkins into different hourly time slots and finding the same pois at the same time slots in their check-in history to train a user-based cf model. yao et al. [27] matched the temporal regularity of users with the popularity of pois to improve a factorization-based algorithm. le et al. [20] proposed a time-aware personalized model adopting a fourth-order tensor factorization-based ranking, which enables to capture short-term and long-term preferences. yuan et al. [30] preserved the similarity of personal preference in consecutive time slots by considering different latent variables at each time slot per user. zhao et al. [33] proposed a latent ranking method to model the temporal interactions among users and pois explicitly. in particular, the proposed model builds upon a ranking-based pairwise tensor factorization framework.these previous approaches mainly explored the geographical and temporal information separately. differently from these studies, our work addresses the data sparsity problem by jointly modeling the geographical and temporal contextual information. moreover, the previous research modeled users' center-based behavior based on geographical influence. in contrast, we consider the formation of spatio-temporal activity centers for each user. therefore, we model the users' center-based behavior based on different temporal states.in this section, we propose a spatio-temporal activity center poi recommendation model called stacp, which models users' preference and users' context together. in the users' preference model, we design two preference functions for each user to consider both static and temporal users' preferences in the model. moreover, in the users' context model, we incorporate the influence of geographical and temporal information jointly. in what follows, we first describe an overview of our stacp model and further explain how each part is implemented and which challenges are addressed at each part.formally, let u = {u 1 , u 2 , u 3 , ..., u m } be the set of users and l = {l 1 , l 2 , l 3 , ..., l n } be the set of pois. further, let m and n be the number of users and pois, respectively. then, the users visit-frequency can be encoded in r m×n , where entries r u,l ∈ r can represent the previous poi check-ins of user u ∈ u to poi l ∈ l. also, l u shows all pois checked-in by user u. to address the data sparsity problem and explore the contextual influence we need to fuse the users' context with the users' preference model in a fusion framework. we fuse users' static and temporal preferences on a poi and the score of whether a user will visit that place based on our contextual influence model. stacp is proposed to estimate the recommendation score that a user u visits a poi l as follows:where u t u l l andr u,l respectively denote static and temporal users' preference model, and p (u, l|c u,t ) denotes the users' context model.in the following, we first introduce the user context model, where we show users' behavior in a joint model of geographical and temporal influences. moreover, we propose our temporal center allocation method. finally, we describe our users' static and temporal preference model. fig. 1 , users' behaviors are center-based and these centers are different based on the periodicity of temporal information (see fig. 1b and c) . this phenomenon points to the shortcoming of the previous geographical and temporal models that considered geographical and temporal influences separately. as shown previously, the second characteristic of users' behavior is that users tend to visit pois that are near their current centers. we apply these two characteristics jointly to model users' check-in behavior and propose the spatio-temporal activity-centers model. that is, the score of a user u, visiting a poi l, given the temporal multi-center set c u,t of user u in time t and temporal state t , is defined as follows:where l denotes a poi and c u,t is the set of centers for the user u in time t, given the temporal state t . for each center, calculating (2) consists of the multiplication of two terms. the first term determines the score of the poi l belonging to the center c u,t , which is related to the distance between the poi l and the center c u,t . the second term denotes the effect of check-in frequency freq cu,t , on the center c u,t .further, we define the multi-center activity function p (u, l|c u,t ) as a linear interpolation under two temporal states, as follows:where we consider it for working time p (u, l|c u,t ; w t ) and leisure time p (u, l|c u,t ; lt ) where λ shows the impact of each temporal state. the model can be generalized to define other temporal states. for example, we could apply it for weekday/weekend, monthly, or daily patterns.as argued earlier, the users' activities follow a center-based pattern. furthermore, these centers are different depending on the temporal state. to model the users' behavior in a spatio-temporal manner, we propose a temporal multi-center clustering algorithm among each user's checkins based on the pareto principle [18] , as the most visited pois account for a few users. first, for each user u and temporal state t, we rank all pois l u according to the check-in frequency. next, we select the most visited poi and combine all other visited pois within d kilometers from the selected poi, to create a region. let n u be the user u's total check-in numbers, r be the current region and n r,u be the total check-in number of current region of user u. to decide if a center should be added to the user's profile, we consider a threshold of α. a new center is considered if nr,u nu > α. we repeat this procedure until we cover all of the user u's checked-in pois.to model the user's preference based on check-in data, we apply matrix factorization (mf) in two ways: a static model of user's preference (smp) and a temporal model of user's preference (tmp). in smp, we consider the traditional matrix factorization method to model the static behavior of users. the goal of mf is to find two low-rank matrices u ∈ r k×|u | and l ∈ r k×|l| based on the frequency matrix r such that r ≈ u t l. the predicted recommendation score of a user u, like a poi l, is determined by:via solving the following optimization problem which places beta distributions as priors on the latent matrices u and l, while defining a poisson distribution on the frequency:where σ = {σ 1 , ..., σ k } and ρ = {ρ 1 , ..., ρ k } are parameters for beta distributions, and c is a constant term. in tmp, to model the temporal behavior of users, inspired by [15] , we divide the original user-poi frequency matrix r into t sub-matrices according to the different temporal states t . then each sub-matrix only containing check-in actions that happened at the corresponding temporal state. for example, we can consider t = 2 for working time and leisure time in our case. then, we apply mf on each r t to compute user u's preference on poi l at time t. finally, we sum them intor, representing the user check-in preferences of each poi. it should be mentioned that a more advanced method of automated periodic pattern extraction from spatio-temporal data as proposed in [8] can also be used for a more data-informed decision to be made for the parameter (t).in this section, several experiments are conducted to compare the performance of stacp with the other state-of-the-art poi recommendation methods.datasets. we use two real-world check-in datasets from gowalla and foursquare provided by [ as validation data. we determine the statistically significant differences in the results using the two-tailed paired t-test at a 95% confidence interval (p < 0.05). -toppopular [12] : a simple and non-personalized method that recommends the most popular pois to users. popularity is measured by the number of check-ins. -pfm [23] : a mf method, which can model the frequency data directly.pfm places beta distributions as priors on the latent matrices u and v , while defining a poisson distribution on the frequency. -pfmmgm [9] : a method based on the observation that a user's check-ins follow a gaussian distribution that combines geographical and social influence with mf. -lrt [15] : a method that incorporates temporal information in a latent ranking model and learns the user's preferences based on temporal influence. -pfmpd: a geographical method using the power-law distribution [28] that models people's tendency to visit nearby pois. we integrate this geographical model with the probabilistic factor model (pfm). -lmft [26] : a method that applies temporal information on the user's recent activities and multiple visits to a poi. -iglsr 3 [31] : a method that personalizes social and geographical influences on poi recommendation using a kernel density estimation (kde) approach. -rank-geofm [21] : a ranking-based mf model that includes the geographical influence of neighboring pois while learning user preference rankings for pois. -mlp [19] : a component of the neumf framework that models the user-poi interaction using the concatenation of latent factors via multi-layers neural network. -l-wmf [17] : a location neighborhood-aware weighted probabilistic matrix factorization model. l-wmf incorporates the geographical relationships among pois as regularization to exploit the geographical characteristics from a location perspective. -stmcp-noctx: a variation of our model which excludes the contextual model. we include this model as a baseline to demonstrate the effectiveness of our contextual model. -stmcp-notc: a variation of our model in which we remove the temporal states and consider geographical centers without temporal differences. we include this model to show the effectiveness of temporal centers in our model.performance evaluation against compared methods. table 1 shows the results of experiments based on the gowalla and foursquare datasets. as seen, stacp obtains the best performance compared to the other poi recommendation methods in terms of all evaluation metrics on both of the datasets. dacrema et al. in [12] show that even some state-of-the-art deep-learning-based methods are not able to outperform a non-personalized method such as toppopular. this is the reason why we have also selected this method as a baseline to compare with stacp. it seems that in comparison to two non-personalized baseline methods, toppopular and pfm, our method achieves significantly better performance. comparing with other geographical-based methods, pfmpd, pfmmgm, iglsr, and l-wmf, it is seen that stacp followed by rank-geofm perform best. one reason for the performance of rank-geofm is that it considers the geographical neighborhoods as a major element in the factorization method. also, rank-geofm takes a ranking approach to modeling the interactions between users and pois. this means that instead of considering a point-wise loss function, it applies a pairwise loss function in geographical factorization.results show that stacp beats all geographical-based methods in terms of all metrics for all different values of n in both datasets. this is expected as the previous models only consider the basic idea of the geographical influence that users tend to visit nearby pois. also, our proposed model outperforms the lrt and lmft that modeled temporal information to improve the accuracy of poi recommendation. the reason is that these methods do not consider the geographical information. compared to the neural baseline, mlp, the improvements of stacp in terms of recall@20 and ndcg@20 on gowalla dataset are 65% and 66%, respectively. this shows the effectiveness of our users' preference and users' context models, which considers both geographical and temporal information jointly to model users' activity centers.effect of activity centers. in this experiment, we compare the performance of stacp with its variation where we only consider geographical information in allocating activity centers (i.e., stacp-notc). therefore, we remove temporal states t from eq. (2) . the goal is to demonstrate the effect of the spatio-temporal activity centers on the performance of stacp. as seen in table 1 , stacp exhibits a significant improvement over stacp-notc in terms of all evaluation metrics for both datasets. we see that stacp improves stacp-notc by 42% in terms of recall@20. this indicates that users follow a spatio-temporally centered behavior. this objectively validates our analysis in sect. 1, in which users' centers are different based on the different temporal states.effect of contextual model. next, we study the effect of the contextual model. to this end, we compare the performance of stacp with its variation where no contextual information is used while training the model (i.e., stacp-noctx). in other words, in this experiment eq. (2) is excluded from eq. (1). as seen in table 1 , a statistically significant improvement of stacp over stacp-noctx is observed in terms of all evaluation metrics on both datasets. this observation suggests that using contextual information enables stacp to model the users' behavior more accurately. moreover, it indicates that by incorporating the contextual information, we can address the data sparsity problem.in this experiment, our goal is to study the effect of data size on the performance of our model. as such, we train stacp, as well as all the baseline methods with different data sizes. to do so, for each user, we only consider a certain percentage of visited pois in the training set randomly, ranging from 40% to 100%. we see in figs. 2a and b the performance of stacp and all baseline models in terms of ndcg@20 for different training data sizes. the results show that stacp is more effective in comparison with the baselines as the size of the training data varies, indicating that it addresses the data sparsity problem more effectively. as we see in fig. 2a , when we change the data size from 100% to 40% on gowalla, the performance of stacp decreases by about 35%, while for the competitor baseline method rank-geofm the value of decrease is 45%. this shows that stacp is more robust when we do not have access to enough data from users. more interesting, the performance of lmft, a temporal-information-based competitor baseline, decreases by 65% when the size of data changes to 40%. this indicates the unsuitability of the methods that only consider the temporal information. also, it is worth noting that we observe a more robust behavior of stacp compared to the stacp-nocn. thus, the proposed context model enables stacp to deal with noise and data sparsity more effectively. this is clearer when stacp outperforms the best competitor baseline (i.e., rank-geofm) with a larger margin, 33%, in terms of ndcg@20 on gowalla. figure 3 shows the performance of stacp for different values of d, α and λ. we report in fig. 3a the effect of different values of d on the performance of stacp in terms of precision@20 and recall@20 metrics, respectively. it can be seen that the optimal value of d for both datasets is 15. these results show that users tend to visit nearby pois to their centers, which are formed in regions. figure 3b , on the other hand, shows the effect of different α values on the performance of stacp. we can see that the optimal value is achieved at α = 0.02 for both datasets. more importantly, as seen in fig. 3c , the optimal value for λ that shows the impact of different temporal states is 0.5. this confirms our assumption and shows that users follow a spatio-temporal activity centered behavior. in fact, when we set this parameter to 1 (i.e., just working time) or 0 (i.e., just leisure time), the performance decreases.in this paper, we study the problem of poi recommendation. we have investigated in detail the characteristics of the user mobility behavior on a large-scale check-in dataset. based on the extracted properties, we propose a novel spatiotemporal activity-centers model to jointly model the geographical and temporal influence of the user's check-in behavior. we then consider the user's temporal information and the user's preferences on pois. finally, we propose the stacp model as a uniform framework for combining these three components to recommend pois. experimental results on the datasets show that our model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art models. in our future work, we may consider more information such as the user's comments and social relations to improve the performance.the spread of fake news on the internet is a cause of great concern for all members of society, including the government, policymakers, organisations, businesses and citizens. fake news is specifically designed to plant a seed of mistrust and exacerbate the existing social and cultural dynamics by misusing political, regional and religious undercurrents (wardle and derakhshan, 2017) . shu et al. (2017) argue that fake news has an adverse impact on individuals and society as it deliberately persuades consumers to accept false beliefs that are shared to forward specific agendas. the circulation of fake news poses significant challenges for organisations and brands. in fact, fake news that promotes a specific viewpoint or opinion about a product, brand or organisation, which may not be true, can be deliberately designed to mislead consumers (e.g., potthast et al., 2017) . for example, consumers threatened to boycott mcdonald's after the fake news regarding its use of ground worm filler in its burgers became viral (taylor, 2016) . some recent studies have also noted the impact of fake news on brands and organisations (e.g. cheng and chen, 2020; visentin et al., 2019) . such false information can potentially harm retailers' interests by negatively influencing consumers' intentions to buy. conversely, consumers may also be misled into buying certain products based on fake reviews, which have been acknowledged as a form of online forgery (martens and maalej, 2019) . thus, fake news and its viral circulation have become a grave concern in the era of social media, where anonymity, user-generated content and geographical distance may encourage fake-news sharing behaviour.while academic research on the dark aspects of social media use, which includes information overload, social media fatigue, fear of missing out and coping strategies, has intensified (e.g., dhir et al., 2018a,b; dhir et al., 2019; luqman et al., 2018; malik et al., 2020) , the perceptions and behaviours underlying the sharing of fake news are not clear. in fact, little is known about the motives for sharing disinformation on social media platforms (smps) (e.g., jang and kim, 2018; talwar et al., 2019) . we argue that understanding the reasons and associated behaviours that induce people to share falsehood online can help in identifying a solution to tackle the growing menace. further, a better understanding could also prove useful for marketers, retailers, brand managers, policymakers and scholars. thus, the lack of studies on factors that exacerbate the fake-news sharing behaviour represents a gap in the literature that needs to be bridged. the current study attempts to address this gap by examining the behaviour of smp users towards authentication and sharing of fake news. the research questions (rqs) guiding this study are as follows: rq1: what are the different manifestations of fake-news sharing behaviour on smps? rq2: what are the potential associations between the manifestations of fake-news sharing behaviour of smp users?this study uses a mixed-method approach, mainly because of the limited literature on this topic. we first conduct a qualitative study (n ¼ 58) to identify the different behavioural manifestations associated with the sharing of fake news on smps. the obtained qualitative data are analysed using grounded theory, and the generated themes (i.e. fakenews sharing behavioural manifestations) are examined using the honeycomb framework, which is a popular theoretical framework from social media literature (kietzmann et al., 2011) . we use the framework to sort the different manifestations by relevance. associations between the manifestations are examined via key theories in the field of media, sociology, psychology and information systems, such as uses and gratifications theory (katz et al., 1974) , social identity theory (tajfel and turner, 1986) , social exchange theory (malinowski, 1922) and the socio-technical model of media effects (marwick, 2018) .the associations are hypothesised using the third-person effect (tpe) (davison, 1983) . tpe has been used recently in studies on sharing of fake news (e.g., jang and kim, 2018) . our developed research model consists of four independent variables: (1) active corrective action on fake news ('ac' hereafter), (2) passive corrective action on fake news ('pc' hereafter), (3) instantaneous sharing of news for creating awareness ('ins' hereafter) and (4) authenticating news before sharing online ('an' hereafter). the two dependent variables are sharing fake news due to lack of time ('lt' hereafter) and sharing fake news due to religiosity ('sr' hereafter). the model controls for age and gender.the proposed model is tested with the help of two independent crosssectional studies (n ¼ 471, 374) . the results showed that instantaneous sharing of news for creating awareness (ins) among social media users positively correlated with sharing fake news due to lack of time (lt) and religiosity (sr). however, authenticating news before sharing (an) did not correlate with sharing fake news due to lt and sr. further, social media users who engaged in active corrective action (ac) were unlikely to share fake news due to lt. these findings offer a theoretical foundation for further empirical examination of fake-news sharing behaviour, an topic with limited literature. deeper insights into fake-news sharing behaviour can also be useful to businesses looking for better strategies to protect themselves against the threat of unauthenticated news going viral.the salient contributions of this study are as follows: (a) it responds to urgent calls from scholars for empirical research on the spread of fake news; (b) it shifts the focus of studies on fake news from detection methods to sharing behaviour, which fuels the uncontrollable spread of falsehood; (c) the study examines measures not used previously to model fake-news sharing behaviours by grounding them in a popular social media modelthe honeycomb frameworkand tests the associations of the proposed model by using a key media and psychology theorythirdperson perception (tpp); (d) it strengthens the debate on the link between consumer behaviour and fake news, which has been an underexplored area and (e) finally, the robustness of the methodology, in terms of qualitative intervention and quantitative testing through multiple data sets, enhances the study's validity and relevance.the honeycomb is a popular framework that sheds light on the possible reasons for sharing of information on smps (fig. 1) . developed by kietzmann et al. (2011) , the framework covers seven social media building blocks: identity, conversations, sharing, presence, relationships, reputation and groups (table 1) . scholars have used the honeycomb framework to study social media adoption (ngai et al., 2015) , online recovery strategies (azemi et al., 2019) , etc. highlighting the shortage of frameworks and theories to analyse social media strategies, effing and spil (2016) suggested that the framework serves as a reasonable basis for examining the various functions of social media. given that the framework explores the reasons for exchange of information on smps, it is ideal for the current study's focus on the dissemination process of fake news. in this study, we use it to better understand the emergent themes that represent the manifestations of fake-news sharing behaviour.the proliferation of media has led us to consider the effect of so many media messages on us and our behaviour. the tpe hypothesis, proposed by davison (1983) , explains that the receivers of such messages tend to believe that these messages will affect others more than themselves. in other words, tpe is based on the self-other difference that individuals perceive when they try to assess the effect of messages in media. the theory can be understood through its two corollaries.the first corollary comes from the perceptual component, tpp, which posits that individuals perceive that socially undesirable and negative media messages affect others more than themselves. this view is supported by seminal studies that found that individuals overestimated the impact of socially undesirable content, like gambling, pornography and alcohol advertisements, on others (e.g., rojas et al., 2012) . houston et al. (2011) argued that tpp for news with opinionated and biased comments was higher. thus, prior literature clearly suggests that the social desirability of messages in media is a key consideration in tpe and that undesirable messages are perceived to have bad effects on others. the tpp part of tpe has also been explained in prior studies as a self-serving or a self-enhancement bias (gunther and mundy, 1993) . that is, individuals tend to project a superior image of themselves by showing that they are less susceptible to negative content than others. at the same time, they try to show that they are more receptive to socially desirable media messages.the second corollary of tpe, known as the social distance corollary, is explained through the concept of social distance (cohen et al., 1988) . according to the corollary, individuals feel that those who are at a social distance from them are affected more by negative media messages than those closest to them. this social distance can refer to inferiority in certain aspects, geographical distance, psychological attributes, difference in status or other socio-demographic distinctions. social distance causes individuals to act and protect others who they think are more gullible to undesirable messages circulated on media (mcleod et al., 2001) . on the whole, tpe implies that individuals feel that others are affected more by negative messages shared via media. further, they believe that the impact is higher on those who are at a greater social distance from them. the tpe also indicates that individuals believe that media messages produce a greater change in the attitude of others in comparison to themselves (davison, 1983) .our review of literature on tpe finds that social media scholars are increasingly interested in using this theory to better understand different online social media behaviours. for example, chung and moon (2016) found that tpp had an impact on attitudinal and behavioural responses to messages in the media. scholars have extended the use of tpe beyond its original domains of application. for instance, when tpe was proposed originally, it focused on actions such as censorship of media messages. however, recent research has introduced a new dimension of behaviour, which is related to taking corrective action. such corrective action includes attempts to counterbalance harmful outcomes (barnidge and rojas, 2014) and cope with the negative impact of socially undesirable messages (lim, 2017) .endorsing the application of tpe to social media, recently, jang and kim (2018) used the theory for studying fake news and found a high perceptual corollary (tpp). their results also confirmed the social undesirability of content to be one of the positive predictors of tpp. they also confirmed the presence of the social distance corollary by showing that individuals believed that fake news would affect out-group members more than them and their in-group members. since the current study also explores fake-news sharing behaviour, we find it appropriate to invoke this theory to explore the association between the explanatory and dependent constructs.as part of the mixed-method approach of the study, we first performed a qualitative intervention (study a), which resulted in an item pool of different measures for fake-news sharing behaviour. the process resulted in the identification of six measures, which included two forms of coping mechanisms for fake-news sharing behaviour: ac and pc. the other measures were ins, an, lt and sr. the developed measures were examined using the honeycomb framework to understand their relevance to social media usage (fig. 2) . we then developed the research model to examine the association between the six behavioural manifestations in the context of fake-news sharing behaviour (fig. 3) .the study used tpe to examine the hypothesised associations. the dependent variables were sr and lt, and a model was proposed to test the influence of ins, ac, pc and an as explanatory variables. the model was tested using two independent cross-sectional surveys (study b1, n ¼ 471; study b2, n ¼ 374). the participants consisted of whatsapp users.an open-ended essay-based study was conducted to understand fakenews sharing behaviour among 58 whatsapp users (53.4% females, 20-23 years old). the open-ended essays sought information on a) the nature of fake newswhat it is and whether the respondents received fake news from others; b) actions taken by the respondents to check the authenticity of the received news or information; c) coping mechanisms (reacting or responding) used by respondents if they knowingly or unwittingly shared fake news; d) coping mechanisms (reacting or responding) used by respondents if their friends, family and acquaintances knowingly or unwittingly shared fake news.two independent cross-sectional data sets were generated with the help of a questionnaire based on study a, in line with the approach used by many recent studies (e.g., talwar et al., 2020a,b) . both the surveys were conducted in india, where a sampling frame of whatsapp users is not available. therefore, we used non-probability judgemental sampling to select survey participants. participants of the surveys consisted of whatsapp users from northern india (b1, n ¼ 471) and western india (b2, n ¼ 374). the average age of the respondents in b1 was 21 years (42% males) and in b2 was 20 years (45% males). the mean age of the respondents was between 18-23 years in both data sets. this specific age group was selected because the existing studies suggest that young adults are voracious users of smps (smith and anderson, 2018) . the respondents were briefed about the objective of the study, and responses were collected in person by one of the researchers. the selection criterion was that the respondent should have used whatsapp actively at least in the past six months. we defined active use as spending at least 1 h daily on whatsapp.qualitative data were analysed using nvivo. open codes from the qualitative data were identified and later classified using axial codes in order to develop key themes (miles and huberman, 1994 ). the obtained high-level themes were further evaluated on the basis of prior literature, in line with the standard protocol in qualitative research to develop a pool of items (hesse-biber and leavy, 2011). the pool of items developed was later tested with a group of experts: two university professors and three experts on social media research, as recommended by extant findings (saunders et al., 2016) . fifteen social media users, who represented the target population of whatsapp users, were invited to pilot-test the item pool. this step helped us check the face validity of the items and determine whether they were clear in language and relevant to the study. the developed measures representing fake-news sharing behaviour were then assessed using the honeycomb framework to understand their relevance in the context of social media usage.owing to the lack of studies in the domain, we developed multi-item table 1 seven social media building blocks (kietzmann et al., 2011) .identity social media users reveal their identities to other users, but every user differs in how much they reveal about themselves.social media is designed for communication with other users. the conversations may happen due to many reasons, including building self-esteem and positioning oneself as a presenter of innovative ideas or trending information. sharingsocial media is designed to share, exchange, distribute and receive content. presencesocial media affordances include features to ascertain the availability and accessibility of other users.social media provides opportunities for connectedness, and this block represents the degree to which users are connected to other users.social media users have a concern about how they are perceived by others. reputation can be seen as a matter of trust. groupssocial media groups represent the intrinsic need of users to be members of online social groups.scales for this study (hair et al., 2010) . the six-factor measurement model, developed from the six measures generated during the qualitative study, was evaluated using confirmatory factor analysis (cfa). the proposed hypotheses were tested via structural equation modelling (sem). spss 25 and amos 25 were used to analyse the data related to all the items. tajfel and turner (1986) proposed the social identity theory to explain why individuals instantaneously share news to create awareness among others. they noted that being part of a group boosted the self-esteem of individuals as the groups provided a social identity and a sense of belonging to the social world. to belong to a social network that is updated and well-informed is one of the main reasons that people strive to share information. however, the risk with instantaneous sharing of news is that it may inadvertently lead to dissemination of fake news.relatively recent research finds that people tend to share fake news without authenticating it as they may believe it to be factual (i.e. fake news resembles credible journalism) (hunt, 2016) . further, scholars argue that fake news is made viral through social bots that spread it rapidly, thus severely limiting the receiver's fact-checking capacity (jun et al., 2017) . in other words, smp users may share news as they soon as receive it. the sharing behaviour may be more pronounced with religious news in groups with known members as people exercise caution in expressing opinions on social media only in unfamiliar situations (moe et al., 2014) . thus, online social media groups with largely known members, such as on whatsapp, do not hinder the free expression of opinion. further, the socio-technical model of media effects (marwick, 2018) posits that users share fake news not only because they have been misled by partisan media but also because the fake news may align with their worldviews, social positions and beliefs. thus, both time and religious factors may play a key role in the sharing of fake news. on the basis of this discussion, we hypothesise that ins positively correlates with lt and sr.h2. ins has a positive association with lt.the social distance corollary is another widely discussed aspect of tpe (cohen et al., 1988; mcleod et al., 2001) . according to the corollary, people perceive that those who have a lower status than them or are at some distance from them, physically or psychologically, are more susceptible to negative messages on media and need to be protected. the social distance corollary lays the ground for taking steps against the spread of fake news. the need to protect those at a social distance from oneself may motivate individuals to take corrective action against the spread of fake news. corrective action can be taken in different forms, such as censorship of media (xu and gonzenbach, 2008) and online participation through public comments (chung et al., 2015) . our qualitative study found that social media users engage in two types of corrective action: ac and pc. ac involves advising the sender of fake news to stop sharing and verify the authenticity before sharing as well as raising awareness about the fake news. on the other hand, pc involves reporting or blocking the social media user who sends fake news. taking corrective action (ac and pc) is also in line with the propositions of tpp, which hypothesises that social media users try to protect others from the unfavourable effects of fake news through their corrective action, which may be positive (e.g. advising) or negative (e.g. blocking). smp users engaging in ac and pc are less likely to share such news due to lt and sr. accordingly, we propose the following hypotheses:h3. ac has a negative association with sr.h4. ac has a negative association with lt.h5. pc has a negative association with sr.h6. pc has a negative association with lt.prior literature suggests that tpp has a self-enhancement bias (gunther and mundy, 1993; shen et al., 2015) . in an attempt to project a superior image, guided by the self-enhancement bias, smp users may tend to authenticate news before sharing. they may do so to protect others with whom they make a downward comparison (sun et al., 2008) . this authentication behaviour is also consistent with the fundamental concept of social exchange theory (malinowski, 1922) , which propounds that individuals make decisions based on positive outcomes or long-term benefits. thus, individuals are likely to authenticate news before sharing as it may lead to positive outcomes such as earning the trust of members within their social groups and an improvement in their image. the extant literature also considers trust as the most important variable influencing interpersonal dynamics and group behaviour (golembiewski and mcconkie, 1975) . trust was also identified as important in other online contexts (e.g., talwar et al., 2020a,b) . thus, trust may be seen as a key motivator for smp users to share authenticated information. authenticating news before sharing can earn individuals social approval and enhance their reputation of being trustworthy. users motivated by self-enhancement bias can be expected to be careful while sharing news. therefore, we hypothesise that the social media users who engage in an are less likely to share fake news due to lt and religiosity sr.h7. an has a negative association with sr.h8. an has a negative association with lt.we mapped the seven dimensions of honeycomb framework to the themes derived from the qualitative study a (fig. 3) . one or more of the seven dimensions helped anticipate the behaviour of smp users towards sharing of unauthenticated news. for instance, the "conversation" block (table 2) , captured the need of smp users to sustain conversations in the group by sharing rumours, jokes, wishes, information and news. thus, the conversations on smps may be influenced by the need to entertain and gossip, create awareness or simply share beliefs with social groups. this behaviour has also been discussed previously (e.g., katz et al., 1974; okazaki et al., 2013) . such information-sharing behaviour provides the context for the themes derived from the qualitative study. this block supports ins as one of the aspects of online news sharing. it also explains why people may share fake news because of lt and sr. information on how each measure is grounded in the building blocks is given in table 2 .data for all items were found to be normally distributed since kurtosis and skewness were within the threshold limit of �1. the jarque and bera, 1987 jarque bera test statistics confirmed continuous and multivariate normal distribution of variables. next, we checked for multicollinearity to avoid any increase in the standard error of loadings (kock and lynn, 2012) and found no related issues. the variance inflation factor was below three, and tolerance was greater than 0.1. to detect and control for common method bias, which is a concern with self-reported surveys (podsakoff et al., 2003) , we used both procedural and statistical approaches. to this end, all the questions in the questionnaire were close-ended, responses were collected during face-to-face interactions and the confidentiality of responses was maintained. harman's single factor test (harman, 1976) confirmed that common method bias was not a concern in the current study.the composite reliability (cr) score of all the study measures was above 0.70, indicating sufficient internal reliability (nunnally, 1978) ( tables 3 and 4 ). the average variance extracted (ave) of the measures was above the cut-off value of 0.50, which confirmed their convergent validity (fornell and larcker, 1981 ) (see tables 3 and 4) . discriminant validity was ensured as the square root of ave was higher than the inter-construct correlations, all the diagonal values were greater than the off-diagonal values in the same row and column and the correlation between any two study measures did not exceed 0.80 (fornell and larcker, 1981) . the unidimensional nature of each measure was also confirmed since the item loadings for all the measures were above 0.60, as suggested by hair et al. (2010) (see table 5 ). further, both the data sets returned satisfactory model fit indices (kline, 2016) (table 6) .both models a and b showed satisfactory goodness-of-fit indices (table 6) . model a explained a 20% variance, and model b explained a 13.2% variance in sr. with regard to sharing fake news due to lt, model a explained 10% variance, and model b explained 19.5% variance (figs. 4 and 5) . although human behaviour is difficult to predict than, say, physical processes, r 2 values are considered acceptable, as recommended by falk and miller (1992 results of h3 and h4 revealed a significant negative association between ac with sr in model a (model a: β ¼ à 0.28, p < 0.001) and with lt in models a and b (model a: β ¼ -0.15, p < 0.01; model b: β ¼ -0.24, p < 0.001). however, ac did not share any association with sr in model b.results of h5 and h6 showed that pc did not share any significant association with sr in both the models (model a: β ¼ 0.05, p > 0.05; model b: β ¼ à 0.10, p > 0.05) or with lt in model a (β ¼ à 0.02, p > 0.05). however, it had significant negative association with lt in model b (β ¼ à 0.18, p < 0.01).the results of h7 and h8 showed that an did not share any statistically significant association with sr (model a: β ¼ 0.12, p > 0.05; model b: β ¼ -0.24, p > 0.05) or lt (model a: β ¼ à 0.01, p > 0.05; note: values in diagonal are the square root of ave, and the off-diagonal values are correlations. note: acaf: active corrective action on fake news; pcaf: passive corrective action on fake news; isnca: instantaneous sharing of news for creating awareness; anbs: authenticating news before sharing; sflt: sharing fake news due to lack of time; sfnr: sharing fake news due to religiosity.grounding the emerging themes: the application of the honeycomb framework.identity implies that users disclose information to project themselves in a certain way. thus, users can be expected to instantaneously share news on social media to create awareness (ins) as doing so may enhance their sense of belonging and shape their identities in certain ways.implies that social media users can be expected to keep the conversation on the group going by sharing trending information, sometimes with the purpose of creating awareness or, at other times, for the purpose of remaining active in the group. thus, this block supports the ins measure as one of the aspects of sharing information and news online. it also explains why people may share fake news due to lack of time (lt) and religiosity (sr). sharingimplies that members of social media groups are inclined to keep exchanging information with other users. in their desire to keep sharing content, users may not think of checking all the information they receive and may share it further without authentication, in favour of speed and popularity. thus, this block can explain the behaviour related to sr and lt. presencerefers to the affordances of social media that allow users to know how accessible other users are. this may gratify the social needs of users to connect with others and cause them to manifest sr and lt, knowing that they have an available audience.implies that since the identities of the group members are generally known, it leads to more connectedness and results in the sharing of fake news or gossip, knowingly or inadvertently. further, users can be expected to converse more freely in their known social groups as opposed to sharing information on sites that can be accessed by strangers as well. thus, they might manifest sr and lt. reputation implies a concern for projecting a positive image that could motivate users to take corrective action against fake news circulating in their social network. it also causes users to authenticate news before sharing it, particularly news related to religion. this explains the behaviour of active corrective action on fake news (ac) and passive corrective action on fake news (pc). this argument also justifies why authentication of news before sharing (an) is another aspect of the image-related utility behind the motivation to share factual information on online social media. groupsimplies that in the quest to remain popular within the group, social media users might share fake news, both non-religious and religious. it has been argued that fake news is also more sensational, and sharing it might provide some kind of gratification, e.g., entertainment. thus, this block serves as the basis for anticipating manifestations of sr and lt. model b: β ¼ 0.10, p > 0.05) in both models. the results of the hypotheses testing are presented in table 7 .age and gender are important variables in studies on social media usage (e.g., abel et al., 2016; kircaburun et al., 2018) . the use of control variables increases the robustness of study results (gao and waechter, 2017) . in our research model, we also controlled for age and gender. the age variable influenced sharing of fake news due lt in both models the results across both data sets supported the proposed positive association of ins with sr, implying that users in social media groups share news instantaneously (in accordance with tpe), particularly if it is related to religion, to create awareness among group members. this result supports the findings of previous studies that opinions may be shared more freely in familiar situations like social groups (e.g., moe et al., 2014) . it is also in line with the building blocks of "relationship and sharing" proposed in the honeycomb framework (kietzmann et al., 2011) . it confirms the view that individuals believe and share any religion-related news they receive if it aligns with their views and beliefs, as argued by the sociotechnical model of media effects (marwick, 2018) . finally, the finding also reinforces the tenets of tpe, which suggest that individuals want their group members to know any religion-related news that they believe to be true.the association of ins with lt was supported in both models. this implies that users are likely to share all information and news coming their way on social media, which may lead to the inadvertent sharing of fake news. in other words, people want to share more and more information with their group members as fast as possible, and, in the interests of speed, they might also share fake news that seems true (hunt, 2016) . this outcome is consistent with the tpe hypothesis, the behaviour postulated by the social identity theory (tajfel and turner, 1986) and the interpretation of the building blocks of "identities and conversations" in the honeycomb framework (kietzmann et al., 2011) .the relationship between ac with both sr and lt was hypothesised to suggest that social media users who are mindful of their reputation within their social group may adopt ac measures, such as educating the senders of fake news on how to authenticate it. both hypotheses were supported for model a. this finding lends support to the social distance corollary of tpe (davison, 1983) , which proposes that people act to protect others from harmful media messages, as well as the social exchange theory (malinowski, 1922) , which proposes that people like to make decisions that lead to positive perceptions within their social groups. a positive outcome of taking corrective action is the possibility of greater trust; that is, social media users who make other users aware of the falsehood of a news item can succeed in earning their social group's trust. the same can also be inferred from the "reputation" building block in the honeycomb framework (kietzmann et al., 2011) .in the case of model b, an association of ac with sr was not supported. this may be linked to the location of sample collection. data for model b was collected from a metropolitan city in india, where the young generation is exposed to a more cosmopolitan culture. they are unlikely to participate in religion-related discourse. however, this is a preliminary conclusion, and more data are needed to verify it. on the other hand, support for the association of ac with lt in model b confirms that young users in metropolitan cities who take active corrective action against fake news are conscious of their responsibility to curtail the spread of fake news.the proposed relationship between pc (passive corrective action such as blocking senders of fake news) with sr and with lt was not supported in model a. this finding is in contrast with the behaviour anticipated according to the "reputation" building block of the honeycomb framework (kietzmann et al., 2011) , the social exchange theory (malinowski, 1922) and prior research on the concept of trust. this is possibly because this study focused on young whatsapp users who may note. # measures developed based on a qualitative study. be unwilling to take passive corrective action (such as blocking the fake new sender), as whatsapp groups typically comprise friends and acquaintances, and blocking someone may attract inter-personal problems as well as backlash from other group members. to draw more conclusive inferences, future research should examine a similar hypothesis among other age groups of social media users. interestingly, the association between pc and sr was not supported in model b either. however, the association between pc and lt was supported, which again highlights the importance of the sample location and should be explored in depth in future studies. the support for the hypothesis implies that users who adopt pc measures are not likely to share fake news due to lt, in consonance with the social exchange theory and the "reputation" building block of the honeycomb framework. finally, the hypotheses that users who authenticate any news before sharing it are likely not to share the fake news because of sr and lt were not supported by either model. this result deviates from the "reputation" building block in the honeycomb framework (kietzmann et al., 2011) and the social distance corollary of tpe (davison, 1983) . it is possible that social media users with a tendency to authenticate news are less prone to sharing news in general. our findings are, however, consistent with a recent study by talwar et al. (2019) , who also found that authenticating news before sharing had no significant association with most explanatory variables. like talwar et al. (2019) , we emphasise the need for more investigations on the relationship between authenticating news before sharing and other exploratory variables, which take into account moderating influences.this study explored the different manifestations related to fake-news sharing behaviour of smp users via two research questions. to answer rq1, a qualitative study was conducted, identifying the various behaviours related to sharing of unauthenticated news. the process resulted in the development of six measures that included two forms of coping mechanisms: ac and pc. the other measures were ins, an, lt and sr. as this is an exploratory study, we specially developed scales for various measures and examined whether the behaviours in the qualitative study were in consonance with the results from prior studies. accordingly, we mapped the themes derived from the qualitative study to the honeycomb framework and found that the manifested behaviours were consistent with one or more building blocks of the honeycomb framework. for instance, the "reputation" block explained why users make efforts to take corrective action against the spread of fake news. similarly, the identity block clarified the motivation to share news instantaneously. these linkages corroborate the findings of the qualitative study and lend credibility to the manifestations of sharing fake news.to answer rq2, we explored the associations between different manifestations of fake-news sharing behaviour with the help of the tpe hypothesis. the proposed research model was tested by applying sem to two different data sets collected from two different locations in india. the results showed that ins had a positive relationship with sr and lt, but an shared no association with sr or lt in both data sets. the results also revealed that young users who took positive corrective action were unlikely to share fake news due to lt and sr. further, the path coefficients suggested that users' age had a significant effect on sharing of fake news due to lt, whereas gender had an effect on sharing fake news due to sr. the current study and its findings have some key theoretical and practical implications for organisations, brands, service providers, practitioners and researchers.first, the study extends the application of the honeycomb framework as well as the tpe theory beyond the traditional media to explain the phenomenon of fake news spread through smps. the honeycomb framework is a popular theoretical lens, widely used by practitioners and the scientific community. while it has been mainly used to study social media use behaviour and social media ecology from an organisational perspective, our study introduces a new dimension by applying it to fake news sharing. similarly, we have empirically tested and validated the applicability of seminal theories like tpe in the context of sharing of fake news on smps.second, our study makes a significant contribution to the current knowledge on sharing of fake news on smps by proposing and testing the validity of new and less-known measures. instantaneous sharing of news online, active and passive corrective action against fake-news sharing, authenticating news before sharing and sharing of fake news due to lack of time and religiosity are measures that have not been explored before. the developed measures can potentially help the scholarly community deepen the research on fake-news sharing behaviour, which is currently at a nascent stage.third, these findings have uncovered new facets of fake-news sharing and smp use behaviour. for instance, the six behavioural manifestations of fake-news sharing, along with the honeycomb framework, suggest that the sharing behaviour associated with fake news is no different from general information sharing behaviour on smps. smps offer a sense of social identity and belongingness, which blurs the divide between what should be shared and what is not true. thus, it is likely that the sharing of fake news may not stem from malice but from a psychological need to keep groups informed and to remain connected. this, perhaps, makes the menace of online fake news even more difficult to counter. our study findings on corrective action and authentication of news before sharing suggest that social media affordances provide the basis for socially responsible behaviour as well. positive outcomes such as earning the trust of social group members and enhancement of self-reputation can encourage users to engage in corrective action that will ultimately help in combating the fake news problem. these revelations contribute to the theoretical knowledge in the domain.fourth, our study adopted a mixed-method approach, which is fast becoming a tool for more robust analysis (creswell, 2013) . in this context, the study reinforces the usefulness of a mixed-method approach for grounded theory studies (glaser and strauss, 1967) . further, by testing the research model through multiple data sets collected from different locations, the study opens the debate on whether locational factors influence the sharing of fake news within the same country.finally, this study focuses on smp users living in a developing country. this in itself is a valuable contribution because of the dearth of studies on fake news in such regions. by shifting the attention to developing countries, we open the possibility of initiating future research in diverse geographies, which can yield more globally relevant and authentic results. this is especially useful given the growing use and penetration of social media in developing countries.sharing of news without authentication, especially if it is fake, can have extremely damaging consequences for organisations and brands. for instance, poor reviews on smps can have severe implications for a brand or serve as a source of advertising, particularly in an increasingly connected society, characterised by the rising importance of customer engagement (islam et al., 2019a (islam et al., , 2019b zhou and duan, 2016) . understanding the behaviour of users who share fake news without the appropriate corrective action can help marketers develop strategies to combat its spread. for instance, they can design communication that encourages individuals to take corrective action against the fake news they receive on social media and thus promote positive and relevant information about their brands.second, the negative association between ac and sr in our findings suggests that governments can formulate and spread messages that encourage social media users to undertake corrective behaviour. this can go a long way in mitigating the spread of fake news, especially related to religion or ethnicity, which has become a grave concern globally. note: ac: active corrective action on fake news; pc: passive corrective action on fake news; ins: instantaneous sharing of news for creating awareness; an: authenticating news before sharing; lt: sharing fake news due to lack of time; sr: sharing fake news due to religiosity.third, our results show a positive association of ins with sr and lt, respectively. this indicates that news-sharing instincts push people to forward news items instantaneously. this supports the need for regulatory control of smps to some extent, particularly during a crisis such as the covid-19 global pandemic ( who, 2020), wherein fake news spread can induce fear and panic among the public. this poses an enormous challenge, especially because fake news items may resemble credible journalism (hunt, 2016) , causing people to believe them and act accordingly.finally, our study results suggest that social media users share news and information to gratify their social needs. earlier studies have also discussed the gratifications associated with smp use among various age groups (dhir et al., 2017 (dhir et al., , 2018 . users' social stature and reputation in online social groups can improve significantly if they establish their identities as those who take corrective action against the circulation of fake news. regulators, brands, service providers and organisations could benefit from these findings and utilise them to stem the spread of fake news.despite the use of a mixed-method design approach with a large sample size, the study suffers from the limitations associated with any cross-sectional study that is based on self-reported information, including various methodological biases and lack of information on causality. future studies could address this limitation by adopting longitudinal and experimental research designs.second, our samples consisted of young social media users living in india. this imposes some restrictions on the generalisability of the findings. it would be interesting to replicate these investigations among social media users of other age groups and from different geographies.third, we mainly focused on six behavioural manifestations related to fake-news sharing behaviour. however, exploring other interesting aspects related to fake-news sharing on smps, such as gossip-sharing behaviour, fear of missing out, social media fatigue and the dark side of social media use, could offer interesting insights.lastly, we have not tested the moderating influences of educational background, income or other variables that could have provided more granular results. studies undertaken in future should identify and investigate moderating variables in order to highlight individual differences in fake-news sharing behaviour. despite these limitations, however, this study makes a significant contribution to the emerging research domain of fake-news sharing behaviour.type 2 diabetes is a complex disease that presents beta cell failure in the setting of insulin resistance. at the beginning of the disease, pancreatic beta cells adapt to insulin resistance by increasing their mass and secretory function. nevertheless, the sustained hyperglycaemia and hyperlipidaemia eventually exert a negative impact on beta cell function and lead to impaired insulin secretion and decreased insulin gene expression, ultimately causing beta cell apoptosis [1, 2] . moreover, the follow-up of beta cell mass in diabetic patients and in people strongly at risk for diabetes and their response to pharmacological treatment may be crucial for early diagnosis and treatment selection, making the search for beta cell mass markers a high priority for investigation [3] .transmembrane protein 27 (tmem27) was first described in the kidney as an angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) homologue involved in amino acid transport [4, 5] . in the pancreas, tmem27 is produced in beta cells [6, 7] . however, its biological role in this cell type remains uncertain. while one study established a potential positive role of tmem27 in glucose-stimulated insulin exocytosis [7] , another study linked tmem27 production to beta cell proliferation [6] . the latter study also hypothesised that tmem27, which is cleaved and shed into the extracellular space, might be used as a beta cell mass biomarker. furthermore, adding to the controversy concerning the physiological role of tmem27 in beta cell homeostasis, tmem27-knockout mice exhibited both normal insulin secretion and beta cell mass and replication [8] .in spite of the lack of consensus on the function of tmem27 in beta cells, its suggested roles in cellular proliferation and insulin secretion, together with its potential use as a beta cell mass biomarker, make it an interesting candidate factor in type 2 diabetes that deserves further characterisation. in this study, we characterised tmem27 production in human pancreatic islets, confirming that it is mainly produced in beta cells. importantly, we report that tmem27 expression is decreased in type 2 diabetic islets. in addition, using gene expression analysis in human and rat islets along with gain-of-function experiments in a pancreatic beta cell line and isolated islets, we provide evidence that tmem27 is involved in the regulation of insulin secretion with little if any control of proliferation. finally, we show that tmem27 is cleaved not only by beta cells but also by kidney tubular cells, a finding that rules it out as a beta cell mass biomarker.human pancreas pancreases were obtained from 11 human cadaver organ donors (eight non-diabetic donors and three donors with type 2 diabetes) from the transplant services foundation at the hospital clínic (barcelona, spain) and kept by biobanc hospital clínic-institut d'investigacions biomèdiques august pi i sunyer (idibaps; barcelona, spain), after informed consent from donors' families and approval by the hospital's ethics committee. islets were isolated as previously described [9] . fragmented pancreases were fixed overnight in formaldehyde 4% (vol./vol.; sigma, st louis, mo, usa) at 4°c, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin prior to sectioning.animals the principles of laboratory animal care were followed (european and local government guidelines) and protocols were approved by the animal research committee of the university of barcelona. tungstate treatment has been described previously [10] . briefly, adult male wistar rats (charles river, wilmington, ma, usa) received ad libitum a solution of 2 mg/ml sodium tungstate (carlo erba, rodano, italy) in deionised water for 6 weeks, whereas untreated rats received deionised water alone. at the end of the treatment, a glucose tolerance or insulin sensitivity test was performed, with the injection intraperitoneally of either 2 g glucose/kg weight or 1 u insulin/kg weight, respectively. c57b/6 mice were obtained from charles river and fvb mice from taconic farms (germantown, ny, usa). pancreases were fixed in 10% (vol./vol.) formalin solution (sigma) overnight at 4°c, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin prior to sectioning.immunofluorescence studies pancreatic sections were deparaffinated and rehydrated. antigen retrieval of pancreatic sections was performed with citrate buffer using a microwave oven. primary antibodies were against insulin (dako, glostrup, denmark), tmem27 (alexis, lausen, switzerland), glucagon (dako), glucagon (millipore, billerica, ma, usa), pancreatic polypeptide (mp biomedicals, illkirch, france), somatostatin (dako), proliferating cell nuclear antigen (pcna; sigma) and kidney proximal tubular cells marker fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase 2 [11] (santa cruz biotechnology, santa cruz, ca, usa). hoechst 33258 was used as nuclear marker (sigma). the use of pcna for measuring islet proliferation has been validated in previous studies [10, [12] [13] [14] . images were taken using a leica dmr hc epifluorescence microscope and a leica tcs-sl confocal microscope.rna isolation and real-time pcr islet total rna was isolated using the rneasy mini kit (qiagen, venlo, the netherlands). rna integrity was analysed using a lab-on-achip (agilent technologies, santa clara, ca, usa). rna was reverse-transcribed using superscriptiii (invitrogen). real-time pcr was carried in a 7900ht real time system (applied biosystems, foster city, ca, usa) using sybr green fluorophore. a standard curve for each primer set was generated from serial dilutions of complementary dna (cdna). pcr products were verified by dissociation-curve analysis using sds software (applied biosystems). expression levels were normalised to tata box binding protein (tbp) and represented in arbitrary units. levels of amylase, alpha 2a were determined to ensure islet purity. human and rat primer sequences are provided in electronic supplementary material (esm) tables 1 and 2, respectively.construction of recombinant adenoviruses cdna for tmem27/tmem27 was amplified from human, mouse and rat islet total rna. cdna preparations were myc-tagged at the 3′ end and cloned into the pgemt-easy vector (promega, madison, wi, usa). primer sequences used for amplification are provided in esm table 3 . the different cdna preparations were subcloned into paccmv-plpa plasmid and cotransfected with pjm17 vector in hek 293 cells to generate recombinant adenoviruses as described previously [15] . adenoviruses were titrated by limiting dilution plaque assay. as a control, an adenovirus expressing β-galactosidase was used [15] . transduction efficiency was monitored by β-galactosidase staining, as described previously [16] (esm fig. 1 ).islet isolation, culture and infection islets were obtained from wistar rats, isolated through collagenase perfusion and histopaque gradient (sigma) and cultured as previously described [16] . infection was performed 12 h after isolation.briefly, 50-100 islets were resuspended in 200 µl of recombinant adenovirus stock (1×10 9 plaque-forming units/ml) for 4 h at 37°c. after infection, islets were resuspended in 2 ml of culture medium at 5.5 or 11 mmol/l glucose for insulin secretion and proliferation studies, respectively, and cultured for an additional 48 h period.renal proximal tubule cell isolation and infection renal proximal tubular cells were prepared from 12 fvb mice kidneys as described previously [17] . kidney cortex was digested with collagenase (invitrogen) and tubule fragments were obtained by a percoll gradient (amersham-biosciences, uppsala, sweden). the f4 band of the percoll gradient, composed of proximal tubules, was carefully removed, washed and centrifuged. the final pellet was resuspended in serum-free, hormonally defined culture media [18] and seeded at a density of 1.5 mg pellet/cm 2 in six-well plates coated with rat tail collagen i and human fibronectin (sigma). the culture medium was changed every 48 h. infection was performed when cells reached confluence, covering the wells with 1 ml of recombinant adenovirus stock for 1.5 h at 37°c. after infection, virus-containing medium was replaced and cells were cultured for an additional day.ins cell culture and infection ins-1 832/13 cells (kindly provided by c. b. newgard, duke university, durham, nc, usa) were maintained as described elsewhere [19] , except that they were cultured at 5.5 mmol/l glucose. when required, cells were trypsinised and automatically counted with a countess cell counter (invitrogen). for viral infection, cells were seeded the day before treatment in poly-l-lysine (sigma) treated plates. infection was performed at a multiplicity of infection of 50 for 2 h. virus-containing medium was then replaced and cells were cultured for an additional day or for the time indicated.proliferation assays studies were performed 2 days after infection. islet proliferation was measured as described previously [20] . islets were cultured in groups of 50 and their medium was replaced with a medium containing 12.5 mmol/l hydroxyurea for 24 h. thereafter, islets were washed four times with hanks' balanced salt solution (hbss, sigma), and cultured in a medium supplemented with 3.7×10 5 bq of [methyl-3 h]thymidine (initial specific activity 74 gbq/mmol; ge healthcare, fairfield, ct, usa) for 4 h. then, islets were counted, hand-picked, washed with hbss three times, resuspended and sonicated. to quantify proliferation, islet radiation was measured in a tricarb 2300tr liquid scintillation analyser (perkin elmer packard, waltham, ma, usa). the use of [methyl-3 h] thymidine for measuring islet proliferation has been validated in previous studies [20] [21] [22] [23] . for ins-1 832/13 proliferation analysis, the medium was substituted by a medium containing 5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (sigma) at 10 μmol/l for 2 h. cells were then marked according to the fitc brdu flow kit (becton dickinson, franklin lakes, nj, usa) and proliferation was measured with a facs canto ii (becton dickinson).insulin secretion medium was removed 2 days after infection and cells/islets were washed twice with dulbecco's pbs or hbss (sigma), respectively. thereafter, cells/ islets were incubated in hepes-buffered krebs-ringer medium without glucose for 2 h. then, this medium was substituted by the same medium but supplemented with glucose at 2.2 or 16.7 mmol/l for 1.5 h. at the end of the experiment, the supernatant fraction was recovered, centrifuged to prevent cell contamination and insulin was measured by elisa (mercodia, uppsala, sweden). cells were trypsinised, centrifuged and resuspended in a solution containing tris-hcl (10 mmol/l), edta (1 mmol/l) and nacl (200 mmol/l). these cells were sonicated and dna was quantified by a fluorometer using hoechst (sigma) and a serial dilution of calf thymus dna (sigma). each experiment was performed in triplicate and the results presented are the mean of six to nine experiments.post-transcriptional modification analysis and western blot protein extracts were treated with n-glycosidase f (roche, penzberg, germany), calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (invitrogen) or heparinase i (sigma) according to the manufacturer's instructions. protein lysates were immunoblotted with antibodies against c-myc (sigma), tmem27 (alexis), actin (sigma), phospho-ser-akt (cell signaling, danvers, ma, usa) or akt (santa cruz biotechnology).statistical analysis quantitative data are expressed as mean ± sem. the statistical significance was determined by student's t test and anova, with a tukey's post-hoc test. longitudinal data (esm fig. 2a-c) were analysed as set out in the esm. for correlation analysis, spearman's rank correlation coefficient (ρ) and the associated p value were calculated using r language [24] .tmem27 is diminished in type 2 diabetes and is mainly expressed by beta cells in the pancreas tmem27 immunolocalisation studies performed in human pancreas found that tmem27 production is restricted to islets, mainly in beta cells (fig. 1a, esm fig. 3 and esm fig. 4) . because of the roles reported for tmem27 in insulin secretion and beta cell replication [6, 7] , we wondered whether tmem27 expression and immunolocalisation were affected in diabetic patients. we determined tmem27 gene expression by realtime pcr in isolated human islets from non-diabetic and type 2 diabetic donors, and found that tmem27 mrna levels were significantly diminished in type 2 diabetic islets compared with controls (healthy islets 1.00±0.26, diabetic islets 0.35±0.15 arbitrary units, n=8-3 respectively, p<0.05). on the other hand, no differences in the pancreatic localisation of tmem27 were observed in diabetic donors: tmem27 was produced in insulin-positive cells as described for healthy donors (fig. 1) .tmem27 expression correlates with insulin and snapin expression and not with cell cycle genes in order to define the possible role of tmem27 in human islets, we aimed to establish the correlation between tmem27 expression and the expression of several genes implicated in insulin representative immunofluorescence images of human healthy (a-d) and diabetic (e-h) pancreases using antibodies against tmem27 (a, e), insulin (b, f) and glucagon (c, g). merged images are shown in d and h. all images are at ×40 amplification. no staining was visible in exocrine tissue in either control or diabetic pancreases secretion and proliferation. we observed a significant positive correlation between tmem27 and insulin (fig. 2a) . in addition, tmem27 positively correlated with snapin (fig. 2b) , which encodes a protein related to the soluble n-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (snare) complex with which tmem27 has been shown to interact [7] . as expected, insulin correlated with snapin ( esm fig. 5 ). in contrast, we found no significant correlation between tmem27 and any of the cell cycle genes studied, namely cyclin e1, cdk2, cyclin d1 and cdk6 (fig. 2c-f ).tmem27 is diminished in rats with increased proliferation and decreased insulin secretion to further investigate the relative contribution of tmem27 to insulin secretion regulation as opposed to cell proliferation control, we studied tmem27 expression in islets of wistar rats treated with sodium tungstate [10, 25] . this treatment improves insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance (esm fig. 2a-c) , lowers basal insulinaemia (fig. 3a) and decreases glucosestimulated insulin secretion (fig. 3b) . pancreatic islets from tungstate-treated rats present a higher ratio of pcnapositive cells (fig. 3c) , which is indicative of enhanced proliferation. therefore, tungstate treatment elicits decreased glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and increases islet proliferation, making these animals an interesting model for the analysis of the potential implication of tmem27 in these two cellular functions. in islets from tungstate-treated rats, we found that, despite the increase observed in beta cell proliferation, tmem27 mrna levels were decreased in parallel to those of insulin, with a significant correlation between tmem27 and insulin gene expression (fig. 3d-f ), as we observed previously in human islets.tmem27 overproduction shows that it is mainly involved in insulin secretion tmem27 protein is highly homologous among rats, mice and humans (fig. 4a) . interestingly, fig. 3 tmem27 expression is diminished in islets from rats treated with sodium tungstate. a insulinaemia at the end of 6 weeks' treatment of untreated controls (ut, white bars) and tungstate-treated rats (t, black bars): n=13-14, **p<0.01. b static glucose-induced insulin secretion of isolated islets from untreated (white bars) and tungstatetreated (black bars) rats at the end of 6 weeks' treatment: n=6, **p<0.01 treated vs untreated at 16.7 mmol/l glucose. c number of pcna-and insulin-positive cells per mm 2 of islet at the end of treatment: n=6-8, *p<0.05. d-e tmem27 (d) and insulin (e) mrna levels in islets from rats treated with tungstate (black bars) for the times indicated as compared with untreated controls (white bars). notice that the differences were observed only at the end of the treatment, reflecting a long-term effect of sodium tungstate on gene expression: n=5-6, ** p<0.01, ***p<0.001. f correlation between tmem27 and insulin ρ=0.724, p<0.0001, n=32 when performing immunoblots using islet protein extracts from these species, we noticed different band patterns (esm fig. 6a ), which might indicate the existence of interspecific differences in the processing and/or posttranslational modifications of the tmem27 protein. one possible explanation for this observation was that tmem27 was produced in different endocrine subtypes within the islets. however, immunofluorescence analysis revealed that tmem27 production was mainly localised to beta cells in all three species (esm fig. 7) . next, to establish the importance of the primary sequence of tmem27, we adenovirally expressed rat, mouse and human tmem27/ tmem27 cdna in rat ins-1 cells (esm fig. 6b ). here again, we found characteristic band patterns for each isoform, suggesting that the differences observed were more probably due to the amino acid sequence of tmem27 than to the presence of specific modifying or processing enzymes.we wondered if these discrepancies had an impact on the biological function of the different tmem27 isoforms. we therefore studied the effects of overexpressing rat, mouse and human tmem27/tmem27 on insulin secretion and proliferation in ins-1 cells. all three proteins elicited an increase in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and a slight increase in proliferation (fig. 4b, c) , which was not accompanied by an increase in cell number (fig. 4d) . so the different orthologues appeared to exert similar effects when overexpressed in the same cellular context. finally, in order to rule out a possible artefact from the beta cell line, we tested the effect of overexpressed rat tmem27 in isolated rat pancreatic islets and demonstrated, as in ins-1 cells, a significant enhancement in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion with no changes in proliferation levels (fig. 5) . altogether, our data indicate that tmem27, irrespective of the species of origin, is mainly involved in insulin secretion.tmem27 cleavage is not beta cell specific in view of the finding that tmem27 is exclusively cleaved and shed into the extracellular space in beta cells, the extracellular fraction of tmem27 was proposed as a possible beta cell mass biomarker [6] . here we investigated the cleavage pattern of tmem27 in beta cells and kidney tubular cells, with or without overproduction of rat tmem27 (which harbours a c-terminal myc tag). for this purpose we used two different antibodies: (1) a myc tag antibody which recognises the complete protein and the c-terminal fragment that remains anchored to the membrane after cleavage; and (2) an antibody against the n-terminal of the protein [6] which recognises both the complete protein and the fragment that is released into the extracellular space after cleavage (fig. 6a) . as shown in fig. 6b, 16 h after adenoviral infection of ins-1 cells, overproduced myctagged tmem27 was detected as two different molecular mass bands with anti-myc antibodies. an additional lower molecular mass band (∼20 kda) appeared 4 h later, probably corresponding to the previously described fragment of tmem27 [6] which remains anchored to the fig. 5 tmem27 overproduction in rat islets enhances glucoseinduced insulin secretion without affecting proliferation. a insulin secretion at 2.2 or 16.7 mmol/l glucose of rat islets overproducing rat tmem27 or β-galactosidase (β-gal) as control: n=7-9, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. b cell proliferation measured as incorporation of [methyl-3 h]thymidine in counts per minute in islets overproducing rat tmem27 or β-gal as control. data are expressed relative to the number of β-gal-infected islets, which was set at 100%, n=5 membrane after the cleavage, as it did not change after glycosidase treatment (esm fig. 8a ) and it has a lower apparent molecular mass than the expected size of the complete protein without modifications (27 kda). phosphorylation and the presence of sulphated glycans were also tested and yielded negative results (esm fig. 8 ).next, we studied tmem27 processing in islets and primary proximal kidney tubular cells. our results demonstrate that the smallest band detected with the myc antibody is present in ins-1, islets and proximal tubular cells (fig. 6c) . in addition, we detected the extracellular portion of tmem27 (∼25 kda), which has been cleaved and shed, in the culture media of uninfected and infected ins-1 and proximal tubular cells (fig. 6d) . this fragment can be deglycosylated (esm fig. 9 ), thus confirming that it corresponds to the released fragment of tmem27 as previously described [6] . therefore, our results show that the cleavage of tmem27 is not beta cell specific and consequently cannot be used as a beta cell mass biomarker.tmem27 role in this study, we confirm that human tmem27 pancreatic expression is restricted to islets, and is mainly localised in beta cells. importantly, we show that tmem27 mrna levels are significantly reduced in islets from type 2 diabetic patients. this finding is in accordance with available whole-genome profiling data that show tmem27 as one of the 370 genes differentially expressed between diabetic and control human islets [26] . in the same line, a recent report shows that tmem27 expression is tenfold lower in islets from recent diagnosed type 1 diabetic pancreatic donors as compared with healthy controls [27] . taken together, these data point to tmem27 as a potentially important protein for consideration in beta cell physiology and diabetes in humans.studies in rodents have also shown alterations in the expression of tmem27 in animals with altered glucose homeostasis and/or diabetes. for instance, tmem27 is downregulated in models with islet hypoplasia and hypoinsulinaemia, such as hnf-1α-knockout and transgenic mice overexpressing a human dominant-negative form of hnf-1α (p291fsinsc-hnf-1α) [7] , whereas it is upregulated in models with islet hypertrophia and hyperinsulinaemia such as ob/ob, db/db, ap2-srebp-1c, kkay or high-fat-diet fig. 6 tmem27 cleavage is not beta cell specific. a scheme of the tmem27 protein depicting hypothetical cleavage, n-glycosylation sites and parts of the protein recognised by antibodies used in immunoblot assays: an antibody against the n-terminal portion of tmem27 [5] that recognises the complete protein and the fragment that is shed to the extracellular space after cleavage, and an anti-myc antibody that recognises the myc tag fused at the c-terminus of tmem27 in the adenoviral construct, meaning the complete protein and the membrane-anchored tmem27 fragment that remains after cleavage. b time course for production of adenovirally encoded rat tmem27 in ins-1 832/13 cells. time 0 refers to time of infection. multiple bands corresponding to the tmem27 protein are detected by immunoblot with the c-myc antibody (arrows). beta-actin serves as a loading control. a non-specific band (arrowhead) is sometimes detected in ins-1 832/13 extracts. molecular mass markers are shown on the left. c ins-1 832/13 cells, islets and primary proximal tubular cells were infected with the adenovirus encoding myc-tagged rat tmem27. total protein extracts from non-infected and infected cells were immunoblotted using the anti-c-myc antibody. note that a lowmolecular-mass band (<25 kda) is visible in ins-1 832/13, islets and proximal tubular cells. lanes from untreated cells (negative controls) are included to validate specificity of the bands recognised. d immunoblot of tmem27 (using an antibody against the n-terminal of the protein) in supernatant fractions from primary proximal tubular and ins-1 832/13 cells not infected and infected with the adenovirus encoding rat tmem27. lanes from infected cells (positive controls) are included to validate specificity of the recognised bands obese mice [6, 7] . though all these data might be interpreted as indicative of the existence of a link between tmem27 expression and beta cell dysfunction, the truth is that the role of tmem27 in the physiology of the pancreatic beta cell is still a matter of controversy. one study points towards its implication in insulin secretion as a component of the snare complex [7] , while another indicates that it is mainly involved in beta cell replication [6] . furthermore, another recent study reports that tmem27knockout mice do not display any prominent pancreatic phenotype [8] .to shed some light on the relative contribution of tmem27 to the regulation of insulin secretion and proliferation in beta cells, we investigated the correlations between tmem27 expression and genes implicated in insulin secretion and proliferation in human pancreatic islets. in fact, we found a significant and positive correlation with insulin and snapin but not with cyclins (e1 and d1), cdk2 or cdk6, which suggests that tmem27 expression is more directly correlated to changes in insulin secretion than to beta cell proliferation. while interpretation of these data has obvious limitations, as these studies are restricted to the key regulators of the cell cycle [28] and we cannot rule out the existence of correlations at the level of protein expression, we reached a similar conclusion when we used an experimental rat model based on tungstate treatment [10, 25] . this model offers us the possibility to assess tmem27 expression in a scenario of increased beta cell proliferation and diminished insulin secretion, which is substantially different from the models mentioned above, in which both secretory and proliferative activities were affected in a similar manner. in tungstatetreated rats, we found downregulation of islet tmem27 expression. thus, altogether, our expression data in humans and rats favour a role of tmem27 in insulin secretion rather than cell proliferation.as the above expression data cannot provide a clear-cut answer regarding the biological function of tmem27 in beta cells, we undertook an in vitro gain-of-function approach and adenovirally expressed tmem27/tmem27 in ins-1 cells. because previous studies overexpressing either mouse tmem27 [6] or human tmem27 [7] in insulinoma cells and transgenic mice had reached different conclusions, we wondered whether different tmem27 isoforms were responsible for the discrepancies. in fact, our preliminary observation that rat, mouse and human tmem27 proteins showed different band patterns in immunoblot analysis, not only in protein extracts from isolated islets but also when overproduced in ins-1 cells, provided support for the hypothesis that inter-specific variations in the posttranslational modifications and/or processing of tmem27 proteins might account for the reported differences in function. nevertheless, our data show strikingly similar results when these three isoforms are overexpressed in ins-1 cells: a significant enhancement in glucose-induced insulin secretion with a very modest increase in proliferation, which was not reflected in measurable increases in cell number. likewise, overproduction of the rat isoform in isolated rat islets resulted in modifications in insulin secretion but not in proliferation rates.in summary, the expression data and our gain-offunction studies point to a role for tmem27 in insulin secretion, but little if any contribution to beta cell proliferation.tmem27 as a beta cell mass biomarker currently there are no reliable methods for measuring beta cell mass in living humans. for this reason, most studies are performed in cadaver donors, as the risks of pancreas biopsies outweigh the benefits of research. however, the monitoring of beta cell mass in association with insulin secretion could be extremely useful for describing and predicting the dynamics of beta cell loss and, very importantly, may improve the early diagnosis and treatment of diabetes mellitus [29, 30] . tmem27 was reported to be cleaved and shed (in a constitutive way) into the extracellular compartment only by pancreatic beta cells. because of this reported beta cell specificity, akpinar et al. [6] proposed that the quantification of this protein in serum might be used as an indirect measure of beta cell mass, and thus it would have a role as a beta cell biomarker.while our study confirms that tmem27 is cleaved and secreted into the extracellular space by beta cells, it also shows that this ability is shared by primary kidney proximal tubular cells in which tmem27 was identified and its role in amino acid transport demonstrated [5] . this finding thus challenges the results reported by akpinar et al. [6] . a possible explanation for this inconsistency might be the use of primary cultures in our study, whereas akpinar et al. [6] used immortalised cell lines. our data suggest that circulating tmem27 in serum can have at least two different origins: pancreatic beta cells and kidney proximal tubular cells.we therefore conclude that the extracellular fraction of tmem27 cannot be reliably used as a beta cell mass biomarker. also thank p. l. fernández from the department of anatomical pathology (idibaps/hospital clinic/university of barcelona, barcelona, spain), banco de tumores del biobanco (hospital clínic/ idibaps, barcelona, spain), xarxa de bancs de tumors de catalunya (barcelona, spain) and m. vives from the laboratory of immunobiology for research and applications to diagnosis (research institute germans trias i pujol, badalona, spain) for supplying pancreatic samples.rhinosinusitis is a large and heterogeneous group of diseases. despite the fact that many papers have been published on this topic in the past decade, little is known about the etiology and pathophysiology. nevertheless, the amount of knowledge available in the worldwide literature has changed our understanding of this entity.rhinosinusitis is commonly classified into acute (ars) and chronic rhinosinusitis (crs) based on symptom duration. in ars, an inflammatory reaction characterizes most uncomplicated, mild to moderate cases. therefore, there is no longer an argument to prescribe an antibiotic as the first line of treatment but rather to privilege an anti-inflammatory treatment such as intranasal steroids. in severe and complicated cases, antibiotics combined with topical steroids should remain the treatment of choice. on the other hand, crs is actually subdivided into two distinct entities (crs with and without polyps), as growing evidence indicates that these entities have specific inflammatory pathways and cytokine profiles. this paper is a review of the recent data on rhinosinusitis. the authors hope that this review helps clinicians gain a better understanding of how to manage such conditions. impaired extraocular movements, reduced visual acuity, severe headache or unilateral facial or orbital pain, frontal lump, and neurological signs and deficits. ars is typically preceeded by a viral infection or an allergic reaction.viruses account for at least 80% to 90% of the causative agents of ars. among them, rhinovirus, coronavirus, influenza, respiratory syncitial virus, and parainfluenza virus play a major role [7] [8] [9] . ars becomes a bacterial infection in about 0.5% to 2% of the cases. this is the case when the rs is severe or complicated. in these particular conditions, the "infernal trio" (streptococcus pneumoniae, haemophilus influenzae, and moraxella catarhalis infections) must be considered. anaerobes have been reported in up to 30% of cases.the pathophysiology of ars involves interaction between a predisposing condition (allergic rhinitis, septal deformity, immune deficiency, environmental factors), a viral infection, and a consequent inflammatory response in the mucosal lining of the nose and paranasal sinuses. table 3 summarizes different predisposing factors that can play a role in the development of ars. the inflammatory process leads to the development of edema, engorgement, fluid extravasation, mucus production, and obstruction of the sinus ostium. this ostial obstruction impedes the normal ventilation and drainage of the sinus. there is then a decrease in the partial pressure in oxygen, a decrease in the ciliary clearance, a stasis of secretion, and a secundary bacterial infection. thus, ars is first regarded as an infectious process initiated by a viral infection.when we consider the cytokine profile, ars results from a t-helper type 1 (th1) cytokine polarization associated with a high level of tumor necrosis factor-β and interferon-γ. there is also release of proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (il)-1β, il-6, and il-8. these cytokines are considered very potent chemoattractive agents for neutrophils. figure 1 is a schematic of the inflammatory cascade in the case of a rhinovirus infection.the goals of treatment of ars are to alleviate or minimize symptoms, eradicate pathogens and the underlying cause with therapies that halt inflammation, and promote sinus drainage. it is interesting to point out that 65% of ars cases resolve spontaneously within 2 weeks [6] . table 4 summarizes the different treatment options in cases of ars. in the early phase of ars, symptomatic treatment is sufficient. it consists of nasal douches, decongestants, exspectorants, mucolytics, and painkillers. in moderate ars, monotherapy with an intranasal glucosteroid is recommended [5, 6, 10] .glucocorticoids act on the glucocorticoid receptor to inhibit transcription of proinflammatory mediators, which are upregulated during the inflammatory response. as a consequence, they reduce the mucosal inflammation, edema, cellular infiltration, and nasal congestion; improve ≥3 episodes of acute rhinosinusitis/y the permeability of the sinus ostium; and thus facilitate the ventilation and drainage of the sinus. by reducing the eosinophilia, they can also be of great help in cases of comorbid allergic rhinitis, which occurs frequently in young patients and is a possible predisposing factor for the development of ars. treatment with intranasal steroids (ins) has proven to be safe and well-tolerated, with an incidence of adverse events no greater than those observed with placebo. in moderate to severe cases, topical steroids must be used in association with a broad spectrum antibiotic [11] [12] [13] .many studies including randomized, placebo-controlled trials have demonstrated the clinical effectiveness of such a combination. actually, it provides greater symptomatic improvement than antibiotic therapy alone, shorter time to recovery, and greater regression of imaging abnormalities [12, 13] .the antibiotic is chosen acccording to the local bacterial resistance patterns, effectiveness, and safety. it must be effective against s. pneumoniae and h. influenzae, which are the most common bacteria implicated in uncomplicated, community-acquired acute bacterial rhinosinusitis. that is why in the united states, the first choice is amoxycillin [9, 14, 15] . it is also clear that the use of antibiotics is warranted in patients with severe or rapidly worsening symptoms regardless of the duration of illness, and that referral to an ear, nose, and throat specialist is mandatory in such cases.crs is characterized by chronic inflammation of the nasal and paranasal sinus mucosa, cytokine release and tissue remodeling that includes changes in the extracellular matrix (ecm), protein deposition, and tissue structure [16] .according to the european position paper on rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps document, crs is defined by two or more symptoms associated with signs via nasal endoscopic or ct scan [1] . a ct scan is therefore not required to diagnose crs. crs is also defined by the persistence of symptoms for more than 12 weeks without clinical improvement despite attempts of medical treatments. table 5 lists the criteria to define crs according to the european position paper on rhinosinusitis and nasal polyps document. unlike ars, which is usually infectious, crs is considered an inflammatory condition.based on nasal endoscopy, crs can be subdivided into two categories: crs with and without nasal polyps. in the past, these two entities were considered as the expressions of one single disease, nasal polyposis being considered the end point of the evolution of crs without nasal polyps. nowadays, despite clinical similarities, there is growing evidence that these entities are completely disparate based on distinct inflammatory pathways, cytokine profiles, and different tissue remodeling [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] .crs without polyps accounts for approximately 60% of crs cases [16] . table 6 summarizes the criteria to define crs without polyps. it is a heterogeneous condition in which structural abnormalities, host factors, environmental factors, allergic factors, viruses, bacteria or fungi, biofilms, and superantigens variably contribute to the disease.the symptomatology consists of nasal congestion, anterior and posterior rhinorrhea, reduction of the sense of smell, and recurrent upper respiratory tract infections (urtis). facial pain, pressure and/or fullness are very common in this group in contrast to crs with polyps. the role of the bacteria and fungi in crs is a very tricky issue. they can infect the sinuses or simply colonize them, leading to a complex and aggressive inflammatory reaction. bacterial organisms can infect the paranasal sinuses. they are involved in acute exacerbations of crs. the bacteria encountered are often one of the "infernal trio," but other bacteria have been identified (coagulase-negative staphylococci, staphylococcus aureus, enterobacteriaceae, corynebacterium spp, pseudomonas aeruginosa, and less commonly the gram-negative enteric bacteria). anaerobes can also be present (e.g., propionobacterium spp, bacteroides, or peptococci). when a dental origin is suspected, microaerophilia streptococci must be encountered. these bacteria are usually not present in ars [7, 8, 14, 15, 24, 25] . in crs without polyps, medical treatment is usually not as effective. this can be explained by some "bacteriological" factors.the bacteria are more prone to be resistant to the commonly prescribed antibiotics, such as gram-negative bacteria or methicillin-resistant s. aureus [7, 8, 26] . bacteria can also form biofilms on the sinonasal mucosa of patients with crs. sequestration of bacteria within biofilms allows the bacteria to resist antibiotic treatment and persist as a lowgrade infection within the sinus mucosa. the exact role of biofilms in the pathogenesis of crs is still unclear, but they can explain the persistence of rhinorrhea and crusting despite an in vitro active antibiotic [27, 28] .local osteitis of the underlying bone can also play a critical role in the elaboration of crs by inducing persistent inflammatory changes in the surrounding mucosa [29, 30] . concurrent osteitis can be found in 36% to 53% of patients with crs using radiographic and pathological criteria, respectively. although a causal relationship between osteitis and crs cannot be inferred from these data, these clinical findings correlate well with previous evidence of bone involvement in crs found in animal models, further reaffirming the association between underlying osteitis and the pathogenesis of crs.bacterial colonization with enterotoxin-producing s. aureus is found with increased prevalence in patients with nasal polyps. in contrast, patients with crs without polyps do not have an increased prevalence of enterotoxin-specific ige antibodies [31] .the role of fungi in crs has been debated since the first publication by ponikau et al. [32] advocating that fungi that normally colonize the nose and sinuses could elicit an inflammatory response characterized by an intense eosinophilic infiltration into the nose and sinuses, leading to the development of crs. figure 2 depicts the role of fungi in crs. with a particular method of collecting surgical samples and a specific method of identification, those investigators demonstrated that fungal cultures of nasal secretions were positive in 202 (96%) of 210 consecutive crs patients [33, 34] . allergic mucin was found in 97 (96%) of 101 consecutive surgical cases of crs. allergic fungal sinusitis (afs) was diagnosed in 94 (93%) of 101 consecutive surgical cases with crs based on histopathologic findings and culture results.the group also demonstrated that 1) crs patients react to certain fungal stimuli by producing significantly (p< major symptoms (2 of the following):•nasal congestion or obstruction •nasal discharge (anterior or posterior) ± •facial pain or pressure •olfactory disturbance: reduction or loss of smell and/or endoscopic signs (1 or more of the following):•polyps •mucopurulent discharge from the middle meatus •edema/obstruction at the middle meatus or ct signs (e.g., mucosal changes at ostiomeatal complex and/or in the sinus) 0.05) higher amounts of il-5 and il-13 compared with controls; 2) crs patients have an enhanced humoral response (significantly elevated igg levels to alternaria spp); and 3) crs patients react independently to an igemediated allergy, as evidenced by that fact that nonallergic crs patients also produced il-5 in response to fungal stimuli [35, 36] . finally, they demonstrated the benefits of treatment with topical amphotericin b administrated in nasal lavages for patients suffering from crs [37, 38] .this theory was discussed during the past decade in many international congresses, meetings, and roundtables. unfortunately, some skepticism still exists, as these results have not been confirmed by other studies, particularly the efficacy of amphotericin b [39] [40] [41] . moreover, with an adequate method of identification, fungi are detected in patients with crs and controls [32] [33] [34] 42] . finally, the classic inspissated allergic mucin that is grossly and histopathologically identical to that found in patients with afs can also be seen in some patients without the presence or involvement of fungi [43, 44] .nevertheless, afs is a true universally recognized fungal disease even if the underlying immune process is still under discussion [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] . afs is defined as crs accompanied by the presence of a peanut-buttery extramucosal sinus inspissate called allergic mucin that histopathologically contains masses of pyknotic eosinophils (eosinophil concretions), charcot-leyden crystals (lysophospholipase), and sparse numbers of fungal hyphae highlighted by fungal silver staining. most afs cases involve dematiaceous fungi, such as bipolaris spicifera, curvularia spp, and drechslera spp. afs is a noninvasive form of fungal rhinosinusitis that represents an allergic hypersensitivity (ige mediated in some cases) disorder analogous to allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. afs is a very common disease in countries with warm and humid climates (e.g., united states and india) but is very rare in europe.besides this entity, crs is sometimes an eosinophilic mucin rhinosinusitis and sometimes is associated with a neutrophilic infiltration. the eosinophilic infiltration seems to be more frequent in cases of crs with nasal polyps, whereas a neutrophilic infiltration is associated with crs without polyps. thus, the role of fungi in these two entities is still controversial and needs further investigation. crs is characterized by a chronic inflammation with release of proinflammatory cytokines and subsequent tissue remodeling. remodeling is defined as a process leading to transient or permanent changes in tissue architecture that involves the breakdown of tissue structures such as basement membrane and interstitial stroma, as well as repair [51, 52] . crs without nasal polyps is characterized by a predominant neutrophilic inflammation in the stroma with a lesser concentration of eosinophils.the mucosal lining in crs without polyps is characterized by basement membrane thickening [20, 23, 53, 54] ; goblet cell hyperplasia; glandular hyperplasia; limited subepithelial edema; prominent subepithelial fibrosis; paucity in glands; and chronic monocellular cell infiltration with neutrophils, lymphocytes, mast cells, and plasma cells [55] . mast cells and lymphocytes are sometimes organized in lymphatic follicles.the ecm plays an essential role in tissue integrity, and matrix metalloproteinases (mmps) are the major proteolytic enzymes involved in ecm damage or repair. in crs without polyps, it has been demonstrated that there is an increased concentration of mmp-9 and its natural inhibitor, t-cell immunoglobulin mucin 1. the ratio seems to be counterbalanced. on the other hand, in crs with nasal polyps, there is an increased concentration of mmp-9 and mmp-7, but their inhibitors are not upregulated. this could contribute to the development of pseudocysts seen in nasal polyposis [56] . figure 3 shows the inflammation mediators and tissue remodeling in crs without polyps.the cytokine profile of crs without polyps is mainly a th1 cytokine polarization with cd3, cd25, and cd68 t lymphocytes. the inflammatory infiltrate is made up of mostly neutrophils, with a low percentage of eosinophils, mast cells, and plasma cells. there is an upregulation of fig. 2 role of fungi in chronic rhinosinusitis. fungi (1) elicit an inflammatory response by lymphocytes (2) . the lymphocytes then trigger the release of major basic protein (mbp, 4) by eosinophils (3). the mbp is normally synthesized to destroy foreign agents such as viruses or parasites. in this case, the mbp causes ulcers in the mucus membrane (5) of the nose and sinuses, giving rise to bacterial sinusitis. (adapted from ponikau et al. [32]) proinflammatory cytokines such as interferon-γ, transforming growth factor (tgf)-β1, tgf-β2, and il-1. unlike in nasal polyposis, forkhead box p3 (foxp3), t-box transcription factor (tbet), and gata-binding protein 3 are not significantly elevated compared with controls. there is also a polymorphism within the il receptors and α1 antitrypsin [17, 18, 20, 23, 31, 57, 58] . table 7 reviews the different cytokines, adhesion molecules, and growth factors implicated in the different forms of crs.treatment of crs without polyps is medical and surgical [59] [60] [61] . the first step should be management of the underlying cause and contributing factors [62, 63] . antibiotics are frequently prescribed by general practitioners for crs. the antibiotics are clearly indicated for the treatment of acute bacterial exacerbations of crs. amoxicillin and amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid remain the first choices [64, 65] . the use of fluoroquinolones for urtis has been evoked as acting against gram-negative bacteria. nevertheless, these should not be the first line of treatment of urtis, and we must keep in mind that crs is more a complex, multifactorial inflammatory disease rather than solely an infectious problem. one clear indication to prescribe fluoroquinolone is to treat infection by p. aeruginosa.prolonged use of low-dose macrolides has been proposed [61, 66, 67] due to their anti-inflammatory effects. the duration of the treatment varies from 6 to 12 weeks.nasal douches with intranasal saline was shown to decrease nasal symptoms in chronic sinusitis [68] . they improve quality of life among patients with crs and reduce the amount of secretions, postnasal drip, and load of mediators in the secretions.glucocorticoids administered topically, intranasally, or systemically are the foundation of the treatment of crs in association with antibiotics. several randomized, doubleblind studies have shown glucocorticoids to be effective in the treatment of crs with or without polyps [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] . however, these studies demonstrate only minor improvement without concomitant surgery. this was partially explained by a lack of penetration into the sinuses by topically applied drugs. in crs with eosinophilic inflammation, topical steroids are routinely prescribed for at least 3-6 months, with few reports of systemic or local adverse events. table 8 reviews the different options for the medical treatment of crs with and without polyps.surgery should be considered when there is persistence or partial relief of the symptomatology despite a maximal medical treatment. surgery may also be required to improve sinus aeration and nasal access for topical therapy. surgery should be functional. the concept is to restore the aeration and drainage of the paranasal cavities while preserving healthy mucosa on the ethmoid roof and lamina papyracea. postoperatively, most patients experience significant reductions in headache, nasal obstruction, and postnasal drip, and have improved quality-of-life scores [76] [77] [78] . in patients with asthma, functional endoscopic sinus surgery improves peak expiratory flow and reduces the use of inhaled and systemic glucocorticosteroids [79] [80] [81] [82] [83] . some publications suggest the use of topical steroids in the postoperative period to improve wound healing [84] .nasal polyposis is a subgroup of crs. it remains one of the most difficult challenges in otolaryngology, as its etiology and pathophysiology are still unclear, medical treatment is unsatisfactory, and because of frequent recurrences, repeated surgical procedures are often necessary. nasal polyps present as edematous, semitranslucent masses originating from the mucosal linings of the sinuses and prolapsing into the nasal cavities. nasal endoscopy shows them to be bilateral. they are lateral to the middle turbinates in the middle meatus and are frequently present in the superior meatus. when the polyposis is unilateral, another diagnosis must be considered (e.g., a schneiderian papilloma or a tumor in adults, or a dermoid cyst, meningoencephalocele, or nasal glioma in children).the symptomatology is similar to that of crs without polyps (table 5) , with frequent nasal congestion, anterior and posterior nasal discharge, and recurrent episodes of respiratory tract infection. reduction or loss of the sense of smell is a very important symptom in patients with nasal polyps. headache and facial pain/pressure are less common than in crs without polyps.concerning the bacteriology, all the organisms described in the section "chronic rhinosinusitis without polyps" can infect a nasal polyposis. the "infernal trio" can be associated with recurrence of the polyposis during an acute bacterial exacerbation of sinusitis. antibiotic-resistant organisms, biofilms, and osteitis also can be associated with the polyposis. a specific item to discuss in case of nasal polyposis is the role of bacterial colonization by s. aureus-producing enterotoxins [31, [85] [86] [87] .enterotoxins from s. aureus act locally as superantigens on t lymphocytes and induce a multiclonal b-cell activation. release of cytokines (il-5) from th2 cells results in an eosinophilic activation with release of eosinophilic cationic protein (ecp). ecp causes tissue damage, edema formation, and albumin accumulation. b-cell activation will result in the production of multiclonal ige by plasma. in contrast, in patients with crs without polyps, there is no evidence of increased prevalence of enterotoxin-specific ige antibodies. figure 4 shows the possible role of enterotoxins producing s. aureus in the pathophysiology of nasal polyps. nasal polyposis constitutes a heterogeneous group of diseases. based on the type of inflammatory infiltrate, we can subdivide the nasal polyps into two groups: eosinophilic and neutrophilic. table 9 lists the different subpopulations of nasal polyps.nasal polyposis affects about 4% of the general population in western countries. it is not more common in atopic individuals than in healthy controls. it is interesting to note that 29% of the belgian population is sensitized to at least one aeroallergen [88] . more than 40% of nasal polyposis is associated with nonallergic asthma.about 25% of nasal polyposis is associated with aspirin sensitivity (samter's triad). aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease represents a subset of patients with severe recalcitrant nasal polyposis and asthma in the setting of aspirin sensitivity. the underlying pathophysiology appears to be dysregulation in the eicosanoid metabolism pathway, leading to increased production of cysteinyl leukotrienes and decreased levels of prostaglandins.churg-strauss syndrome, or allergic granulomatous angiitis is characterized by inflammation of the small arteries and veins in individuals with a history of asthma or allergy. besides inflammation of the blood vessels, there is also an increase in the number of eosinophils and inflammatory nodular lesions. nasal polyps are present in about 50% of patients. afs is associated with nasal polyposis in more than 80% of cases.histologically, polyps are covered by respiratory pseudostratified columnar epithelium with some areas of squamous metaplasia. there is frequent epithelial damage (epithelium shedding) and variable stages of thickened basement membrane. pseudocyst formation and edema are two major characteristics of nasal polyps. these pseudo-cysts contain albumin and other plasma proteins. the number of vessels and glands is reduced, and there is virtually no neuronal structure. fibroblasts and infiltrating inflammatory cells are localized around pseudocyst formations. eg2 + (activated) eosinophils are usually located around vessels and glands and are predominant in about 80% of patients with nasal polyps. the number of degranulating epithelial mast cells is high [51, 53, 55, 89] .in nasal polyps, the ecm is severely damaged. this can be explained by the fact that the balance between mmps and tissue inhibitors of mmps has been shown to be displaced in favour of mmps, especially mmp-9 and mmp-7 [56] . it also has been demonstrated that there are modifications in the angiogenesis in nasal polyps via the vascular endothelial growth factor [90] .the vascular endothelial growth factor plays a role in inducing edema, angiogenesis, and fibrosis. it was demonstrated that it is intensively expressed in nasal polyps, mainly in inflammatory cells but also in epithelial cells. tgf-β1 upregulates its secretion.nasal polyposis in caucasian patients has a predominantly th2-biased eosinophilic inflammation (table 7) [17, 18, 20, 23, 57, 58, [91] [92] [93] . this is associated with high levels of il-5, rantes (regulated on activation, normal tcell expressed and secreted), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and eotaxin that play a role in the recruitment and activation of eosinophils and decrease their apoptosis [94] [95] [96] .concentrations in ecps are high. there is an upregulation of cysteinyl-leukotriene synthesis, but no significant differences in polyps were found between patients with and without samter's triad and asthma. this can explain some benefit observed with a treatment with anti-leukotriene modifiers in nasal polyposis [97] .there is a decrease in foxp3 expression accompanied by upregulation of tbet and gata-binding protein 3 and a downregulation of tgf-β1 [57] . after treatment with ins, foxp3 expression is increased [58] .elevated levels of total and specific ige in the polyp tissue are another major characteristic in nasal polyposis.their concentrations may be very high (>1,000 ku/l) but are often unrelated to serum ige levels and to skin prick test positivity, which is in contrast to allergic rhinitis. the production is very heterogeneous. bachert et al. [31, 91, 98, 99] demonstrated three different categories of patients: nasal polyposis group 1 demonstrated no measurable specific ige; nasal polyposis group 2 selected specific ige; and the third group demonstrated a multiclonal table 7 eosinophil cationic protein increased local interleukin-5 production multiclonal production of ige specific ige, including ige to s. aureus enterotoxins, a high total ige level, and a high prevalence of asthma. in this latter group, patients are usually sensitized to aspirin [31, 91, 98, 99] .before considering the treatment, it is interesting to note that chinese patients have neutrophilic and not eosinophilic polyps. such polyps are also seen in inherited diseases such as primary ciliary diskinesia and cystic fibrosis. chinese patients with polyps are characterized by b-and t-cell activation, a minor eosinophilic inflammation compared with polyps from white individuals, and a decrease in tgf-β1 in comparison with controls. one third of patients with polyps showed an ige response to s. aureus enterotoxins [100] . figure 5 shows the putative mechanisms, cells, and mediators implied in crs with polyps and chinese polyps.the management of nasal polyps is extremely individual and must be discussed case by case, as the expectations of one patient are not necessary the same as those of others. the treatment can be medical and surgical [101, 102] .the goals of treatment are to re-establish the nasal airway and nasal breathing, minimize symptoms, improve the sense of smell, treat co-existing diseases such as asthma, improve quality of life, and prevent complications [103] . before starting any therapy, it is important to inform patients that nasal polyposis is a chronic sinus disease that is impossible to cure, but that we can potentially stabilize it with different medications. recurrence is the rule, but observance of (compliance with) the treatment can postpone for as long as possible the relapse of the disease. in samter's triad, it is important to avoid definitively any form of acetylsalicylic acid and nsaids.corticosteroids are the first-choice treatment approach for an eosinophilic polyposis, as they can suppress many phases of the inflammatory process. for example, they inhibit the liberation of vasoactive mediators, reducing vasodilatation, fluid extravasation, edema, and local deposit of mediators. they also reduce recruitment of inflammatory cells, fibroblast proliferation, and synthesis of extracellular matrix proteins.systemic application affects all polyp tissue within the nose and sinuses but has the disadvantage of systemic adverse effects when used for long-term treatment. hissaria et al. [104] demonstrated with a randomized, placebocontrolled trial the efficacy of a 14-day course of 50 mg of prednisolone on patients' symptoms, quality of life, and endoscopic score. nevertheless, from a clinical point of view, some patients may experience a "rebound effect" after a course of systemic corticosteroids [104] [105] [106] .topical application of corticosteroids dramatically reduces the risk of systemic side effects [107] . many studies have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of ins in nasal polyposis even if the intrasinus portion of the polyps is not reachable with a nasal spray [108] [109] [110] [111] [112] . among all the specialities, mometasone furoate and fluticasone furoate are the newest and safest molecules with the lowest bioavailability.in nasal polyposis, antibiotics at full dose are recommended to treat acute bacterial exacerbation of sinusitis, but in recent years, considerable evidence has emerged to suggest that macrolide antibiotics at low dose could play a role in the treatment of nasal polyposis [113] [114] [115] [116] [117] [118] [119] [120] . macrolides have immunomodulatory properties in addition to their well-established antimicrobial activity. indeed, macrolide antibiotics inhibit synthesis and/or secretion of proinflammatory cytkines (il-5, il-8, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, tgf-β, il-6, il-8, tumor necrosis factor). they have many effects on neutrophils: they decrease the neutrophil oxidative burst, inhibit neutrophil migration to inflammatory sites, increase the apoptosis of the neutrophils, and inhibit the neutrophil adhesion. they also decrease the eosinophilic inflammation, reduce the goblet cell secretion, and decrease bronchoconstriction.all the studies confirm clinical efficacy with a significant reduction in the size of the polyps and reduction in symptoms (nasal obstruction, nasal discharge, purulence, headache), and the relapse of the polyps seems to be delayed. however, all the studies demonstrated the necessity of long-term use (3-12 months) and the slow onset. after 2 weeks of treatment, only 5% of patients indicated improvement, while after 4 weeks, 48% were improved, after 8 weeks, 63% were improved, and after 12 weeks, 71% were improved.when we consider such a long-term treatment, gastrointestinal intolerance can be a problem for the observance of the treatment. moreover at low dose, emergence of antibioticresistant bacteria should be taken into consideration.antihistamines are typically one of the medications of choice to treat allergic rhinitis. despite several theoretical pharmacologic properties applicable for the treatment of nasal polyposis (consensus group on new-generation antihistmaines [conga] [121] ), little has been published about such an indication [122] [123] [124] [125] [126] [127] . anti-leukotrienes have shown some effects on nasal polyposis [128, 129] .changes in the arachidonic acid metabolism have been suggested to be involved in the pathogenesis of nasal polyposis, especially in aspirin-sensitive individuals, and cysteinyl leukotrienes have been found in increased levels in nasal tissue from those patients, whereas concentrations of prostaglandin e 2 were decreased. furthermore, the leukotriene c 4 synthase was found to be upregulated in patients with nasal polyps, as were as the number of leukocytes expressing the cysteinyl leukotriene 1 receptor as compared with their non-aspirin-sensitive counterparts. thus, the use of leukotrienes antagonists, especially in aspirin-sensitive nasal polyp patients, seems appropriate. however, large-scale, controlled trials in clearly characterized patients-with or without aspirin sensitivity-are lacking thus far. in patients with aspirin sensitivity, aspirin desensitization can be recommended [130, 131] .aspirin desensitization consists of administering incremental oral doses to reach a maintenance dose of greater than 650 mg/d, then inducing a refractory period of a few days. continuous treatment over years may lead to a significant reduction in number of sinus infections per year, improvement in olfaction, and a reduction in use of systemic corticosteroids. treatment with daily aspirin may be a therapeutic option for patients who do not respond to topical and systemic cortico-steroids. as new treatment options, we must consider doxycycline, anti-il-5, and anti-ige.doxycycline is an antibiotic that also inhibits the synthesis of mmps and mmp-9 activity in vitro. however, doxycycline does not affect the mmp-9 inhibitors (tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 1 and 2) [132] . a doubleblind, placebo-controlled study demonstrated in 32 patients a significant decrease in the endoscopic nasal polyp score 4-12 weeks after the start of the doxycline treatment compared with placebo. the concentrations of ige, myelo- fig. 5 putative mechanisms, cells, and mediators implied in white patients with chronic rhinosinusitis (crs) with polyps (a) and polyps of chinese patients (b). treatments are indicated in the frames. in white patients, nasal polyposis is thought to be orchestrated by thelper type 2 (th2) cells, with interleukin (il)-5 as the major cytokine. il-5 has a critical role in the activation of eosinophils and the production of ige. steroids, anti-leukotrienes (lts), antihistamines, and anti-ige (omalizumab) may inhibit polyps disease at different levels. downregulation of transforming growth factor (tgf)β is observed in asian and white individuals with nasal polyps. the predominant t-effector cell in asian patients is the th17 cell, which secretes il-17, resulting in a predominance of neutrophils. inflammation mediators and tissue remodeling in crs without polyps are shown. tgf-β is thought to play a critical role in the development of crs without polyps. tgf-β stimulates fibroblast proliferation and collagen deposition and inhibits matrix metalloproteinases (mmps) by enhancing tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases. ecp-eosinophil cationic protein; gm-csf-granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor; ifn-interferon; mpo-myeloperoxidase peroxidase, mmp-9, and ecp decreased significantly in nasal secretions of doxycycline-treated patients. in a clinical setting, the use of doxycycline offers an additional advantage of providing antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory effects, resulting in a decrease in nasal polyp size [133] .as il-5 is increased in polyp tissue and related to eosinophilic inflammation, and anti-il-5 monoclonal antibody treatment in vitro induced eosinophil apoptosis, this cytokine was a reasonable target for antibody therapy in nasal polyps. different humanized anti-il-5 monoclonal antibodies have been developed and studied in asthma, and a pilot study in nasal polyposis has provided promising results [134, 135] . considering the marked local production of ige antibodies in nasal polyps and their relation to severity of disease, it appears that local ige is functional and involved in the regulation of chronic inflammation. thus, strategies to antagonize ige could be relevant. treatment of allergic asthma and rhinitis with omalizumab, a humanized anti-ige monoclonal antibody, causes a marked reduction in circulating free ige levels. no studies in nasal polyposis have been published. however, at least two teams have already thought about possible clinical applications of anti-ige in severe nasal polyposis regardless of whether it is associated with corticodependent asthma [85, 136] .the management of nasal polyposis usually involves medical treatment and frequently surgery as an adjunct to the medical treatment. surgical removal of nasal polyps is indicated for patients not responding adequately to medical management, those with continued or recurrent infections, as well as patients who are developing mucoceles or other complications of sinusitis. patients with polyps and asthma may benefit from surgery by reduction of one trigger of asthma.the type of surgery to perform is the subject of debate in europe. what is the respective place of endoscopic-guided polypectomy versus functional endoscopic sinus surgery versus nasalization as recommended by dr. jankowski from nancy? is functional endoscopic sinus surgery still the gold standard? must we open all the ethmoid compartments? must we clear the frontal recess completely? must we do a large sphenoidotomy in all cases? all these questions remain unanswered.as long as a complete ethmoidectomy is recommended, powered instrumentation with microdebrider appears particularly helpful in extensive polyposis [137] [138] [139] [140] . it allows a precise removal of the polyps under a good visual control with preservation of the anatomy. it minimizes mucosal trauma and stripping and guarantees minimal crust formation, a rapid mucosal healing, and a low incidence of synechiae formation.in revision surgery, because the anatomy can be highly distorted, but even in huge polyposis, the surgery can be conducted with a navigation system [141] [142] [143] . this gives the surgeon more confidence, particularly for the frontal sinus area and the sphenoid sinus, and seems to reduce the rate of complication.endoscopic sinus surgery has been shown to lead to significant improvement in total nasal resistance as measured with rhinomanometry, in nasal volume as measured by acoustic rhinometry, in ciliary beat frequency, in mucociliary clearance as measured by saccharin test, and in olfaction as measured by university of pennsylvania smell identification test. increasing evidence also indicates that management of polyposis has a benefit for the lower airway and for the patient's health-related quality of life [80, 82, 83, [144] [145] [146] [147] [148] [149] [150] [151] [152] [153] . however, surgery, as complete as it can be, is not the final and definitive step to treat a nasal polyposis that remains as long as we know a chronic inflammatory disease whose etiology and pathophysiology are still poorly understood. long-term treatment with topical steroids after surgery remains a rule for eosinophilic polyps to reduce the incidence of polyp recurrences or prolong the symptom-free time interval [154] [155] [156] .rhinosinusitis represents a very large and heterogeneous group of diseases. ars is mainly an inflammatory disorder initiated by a viral infection. ins seem to be the best first option for treatment of mild to moderate cases.crs without polyps is a mainly a neutrophilic inflammation. antibiotics combined with ins is the first choice of treatment, but functional sinus surgery is usually necessary to improve the patient. crs with polyps is the most frustrating disease for clinicians, as recurrences are the rule. asthma and aspirin intolerance are the most common comorbidities. in caucasian patients, it is associated with an eosinophilic infiltration. fungi or s. aureus enterotoxins could play a role in the pathophysiology. glucocorticoids associated with large sinus surgery were for a long time the only treatment, but new treatment options seem promising, specifically doxycycline, anti-il-5, or anti-ige.disclosure no potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.sars-cov-2, a novel coronavirus first reported in december 2019, rapidly developed into a global pandemic, with more than 1.8 million cases and 100,000 deaths reported worldwide. 1 clinical manifestations of covid-19, the disease caused by sars-cov-2, range from asymptomatic infection to mild upper respiratory tract symptoms or viral pneumonia. the most severe cases of covid-19 can lead to respiratory failure, multiorgan system failure and death. 2, 3 mortality rates between 2-3% have been reported in the general population. 4 death is more common in those with preexisting conditions, including hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. 4 due to chronic immunosuppression, transplant recipients are at increased risk both of acquiring infections and developing more severe clinical disease. additionally, there is a high burden of comorbid disease in the transplant population. several case reports and single-center series have described covid-19 in transplant patients, with most series describing kidney transplant patients who were sick enough to require hospitalization. [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] to date, there have been no reports of covid-19 in pancreas transplant (pt) recipients. we report here our experience with covid-19 disease in four pt recipients in new york, the epicenter of the outbreak in the united states.four simultaneous pancreas-kidney (spk) transplant recipients, representing 4.3% of all patients with functioning pt followed by our program, were diagnosed with covid-19 disease between march 22, 2020, and april 11, 2020. three patients tested positive by nasopharyngeal swab for sars-c0v-2 after presenting to the hospital for evaluation. the fourth patient received a clinical diagnosis of covid-19 based on symptoms; due to a critical shortage of testing supplies during the epidemic, outpatient confirmatory testing was not able to be offered. cases are described below and summarized in table 1; case 4 was also included in a large multi-center cohort that was previously reported but did not include patient level data. 9 this study was approved by the columbia university medical center institutional review board.case 1:this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved a 53 year-old man end-stage renal disease (esrd) secondary to type 1 diabetes presented to an outside hospital for evaluation 107 months after receiving his second spk. his immunosuppression regimen was tacrolimus monotherapy. presenting symptoms included fever and cough. creatinine on presentation was 0.9 mg/dl; other lab results are not available. he tested positive for sars-c0v-2. due to normal oxygen saturation, he was discharged home with outpatient monitoring. his tacrolimus was held for two days, and he was prescribed azithromycin. he did not develop dyspnea at home, and his symptoms gradually resolved over 18 days. he monitored his fingerstick glucose intermittently at home and never developed hyperglycemia.five weeks after initial symptom resolution, he remains asymptomatic with normal fingersticks. outpatient labs have not been rechecked due to his desire to avoid health care settings.a 40 year-old man with esrd secondary to type 1 diabetes presented for telehealth evaluation 20 months after receiving an spk. his immunosuppression regimen was tacrolimus and mycophenolate. post-transplant course was notable for uncontrolled hypertension, for which he had undergone angioplasty of the transplant renal artery three weeks earlier, during the first week of the covid-19 outbreak in new york. presenting symptoms included fever, headache, anosmia, chest pain, diarrhea and myalgias. a clinical diagnosis of covid-19 disease was made. due to the absence of respiratory symptoms he was not referred to the emergency department and did not receive confirmatory testing for sars-c0v-2 infection. mycophenolate was discontinued and he was monitored at home with daily telehealth check-ins. outpatient labs were not checked during this period. his fevers persisted at home for 15 days before his symptoms resolved completely. he did not monitor his fingerstick glucose during his illness but reported no symptoms of hyperglycemia. his mycophenolate was resumed five days after symptom resolution. five weeks later, he remains asymptomatic, with normal glucose readings. his creatinine is 1.24 and lipase 42 u/l.a 60 year-old woman with esrd secondary to type 1 diabetes, presented for telehealth evaluation 8 months after receiving an spk. her immunosuppression regimen was tacrolimus and mycophenolate. presenting symptoms included fever, cough, dyspnea, headache, anosmia and diarrhea. her mycophenolate was discontinued and she was monitored at home with frequent check-ins. glucose readings over the next 10 days were 120-130, similar to her baseline. due to worsening dyspnea and the development of hypoxia 10 days after symptom onset, she was referred to her local hospital. her room air oxygen saturation was 89% accepted article and she was started on supplemental oxygen. she tested positive for sars-c0v-2. admission labs were notable for white blood cells 1.3x10 3 , absolute lymphocyte count 200, creatinine 0.96 mg/dl, and random glucose 118 mg/dl; pancreas enzymes were not checked. other values are shown in table 1. chest x-ray showed bilateral infiltrates. she was treated with hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin and methylprednisolone.glucose while on methylprednisolone ranged from 71-206. she had hypoxic respiratory failure 22 days after symptom onset and died 3 days later. creatinine was 0.6 prior to the respiratory arrest.a 36 year-old woman with esrd secondary to type 2 diabetes, presented to our hospital three months after receiving an spk. her immunosuppression regimen was tacrolimus and mycophenolate. presenting symptoms included fever, cough and myalgias. she tested positive for sars-c0v-2. admission labs were notable for white blood cells 6.24x10 3 , absolute lymphocyte count 310, creatinine 1.9 mg/dl, random glucose 114 mg/dl, and lipase 351 u/l. other values are shown in table 1. chest x-ray showed bilateral hazy opacities in the lower lung fields. her room air oxygen saturation was 94-100%, and she did not require supplemental oxygen during her 7-day hospital stay. her fevers resolved after 1 week and her cough was slowly resolving after 2 weeks.during her admission, her creatinine ranged from 1.9-2.2 mg/dl, her glucose ranged from 71-114 mg/dl, and her lipase ranged from 248-351 i/l. she was restarted on mycophenolate 1 week after her last fever. five weeks later, she remains asymptomatic, with fingersticks 95-110, creatinine 1.34, lipase 211 u/l and hemoglobin a1c 5.3%.we present here the first four cases of covid-19 disease reported in pt recipients, with one case being a presumptive diagnosis based on suggestive symptoms and known nosocomial exposure in the absence of confirmatory pcr testing for sars-cov-2. our cases show several notable findings and raise several key management questions. first, the main presenting symptoms in our pt recipients (fever in 100%, cough in 75%) were similar to what is reported in the non-transplant population. 2,3 diarrhea is reported in <5% of nontransplant patients, but was found in 2 of our patients, including one without respiratory symptoms. diarrhea may be more commonly reported in transplant patients with covid-19 than in the general population. 9 whether this finding is due to the concurrent use of transplant medications known to cause diarrhea or other accepted article factors is unclear. second, similar to the non-transplant population, pt recipients presented with a spectrum of disease severity ranging from mild illness managed at home to more severe disease requiring hospitalization and need for supplemental oxygen. 4 three of our 4 patients had mild-moderate disease, characterized by no pneumonia or mild pneumonia, which is similar to the 74% rate of mild-moderate disease reported in solid organ transplant recipients and the 80% rate of mild disease reported in the non-transplant population. 4,9 one patient initially had mild disease but developed respiratory failure 10 days after initial symptom onset and expired. this symptom progression is similar to the biphasic disease course described in non-transplant patients, in whom worsening respiratory status can develop around 7-10 days after symptom onset. 10, 11 third, in patients for whom glucose levels were available there was no change in glycemic control compared with their premorbid glucose control. finally, the duration of symptoms in the 3 cases that have resolved was 14-18 days.the clinical deterioration of patient 3 after 10 days highlights the importance of close monitoring of suspected or confirmed covid-19 in pt recipients followed in the outpatient setting until complete symptom resolution. as the pandemic worsened in new york, most patients without dyspnea or hypoxia were not admitted due to the surge in hospitalized patients. ambulatory clinics were reduced due to staff redeployment and transition to telemedicine to support social distancing policies, making follow-up challenging. we managed our outpatient covid-19 pt recipients with frequent check-ins to discuss symptom progression and review vital signs, including pulse oximetry when available. patients with worsening dyspnea or hypoxia were referred to the emergency department for in-patient management.in all 3 of our pt patients who have recovered from covid-19 infection, symptoms lasted for at least 2 weeks.despite persistence of symptoms, none of these patients experienced worsening respiratory status.transplant providers caring for pt recipients with covid-19 should be aware that a prolonged disease course in these patients does not imply that a clinical deterioration is inevitable. due to uncertainty regarding the duration of viral shedding and infectivity in recovered transplant patients, to avoid exposing covid negative patients and staff in our transplant center to the virus we have limited follow-up for our covid-19 pt recipients to either video visits or in-person visits scheduled for hours that our transplant center has dedicated specifically to follow-up for covid-19 patients. unfortunately, due to limited availability of testing,this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved we were unable to perform serial sars-cov2 rna tests to document time to resolution of viral shedding. we have reached out to the 3 surviving patient to arrange for testing for the development of anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies.immunosuppression is usually decreased in the setting of other systemic infections, typically with dose reduction or elimination of the antimetabolite. when our patients informed us of symptoms consistent with covid-19 infection, we held mycophenolate in 3 of our patients and temporarily held tacrolimus in 1 patient on monotherapy, a strategy similar to that employed in other solid organ transplant recipients at our center.the effect of commonly used antirejection medications on sars-cov-2 is unknown, although both tacrolimus and mycophenolate have been shown to inhibit the growth of other coronaviruses. 12, 13 mycophenolate, in combination with interferon-ß, was shown to limit viral replication in vivo but was associated with higher levels of viral shedding in vivo. 14, 15 it is unknown whether reduction of immunosuppression at disease onset will affect the likelihood of developing cytokine storm syndrome nor is it known when it is safe to reintroduce immunosuppression in patients who recover from covid-19 infection. we restarted mycophenolate in 2 patients 5-7 days after resolution of fevers, without any recurrence of symptoms over the next 5 weeks.at the time these cases were diagnosed, there were limited data on the efficacy of various antivral therapies against sars-cov-2, including hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, both of which had been used as adjunctive therapy in covid-19 infection. 12 three of our patients with treated with hydroxychloroquine and/or azithromycin. two of these patients were treated at hospitals away from our center, and decisions as to whether and which adjunctive agent to use were made based on institution-specific protocols in place at the time of presentation. subsequent studies have suggested an absence of benefits of these adjunctive agents against sars-cov-2, and we have stopped using these agents in our pt and other solid organ transplant recipients. 9, 16 whether there is a role for other potential therapies, such as remdesivir or convalescent plasma, in the treatment of sars-cov-2, remains unknown. ongoing studies of these therapies are being conducted at our hospital, and we have enrolled solid organ transplant recipients when eligible.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved ace2, the receptor which sars-cov-2 uses to enter cells, is expressed in the small intestine, pancreas and kidney, and autopsies from non-transplant patients with sars-cov-2 have found virus particles in the kidney. [17] [18] [19] it is not known whether the virus may also be found in the donor duodenum or pancreas of pt recipients. although glucose and lab monitoring were not uniform in our patients, we did not observe any the authors declare that that have no financial conflicts of interest to disclose. purpose to describe and compare primary patency rates in patients undergoing endovascular femoropopliteal interventions with standard or interwoven nitinol stents or drug-coated balloons. methods a cohort of 1292 patients was treated for symptomatic femoropopliteal occlusive disease classified as rutherford category ≥ 1 at a large vascular center between june 2006 and august 2013 using either standard nitinol stents (sns; n=432), interwoven nitinol stents (ins; n=470), or drug-coated balloons (dcb; n=390). primary patency rates were assessed by ultrasound or angiographic readings for over 3 years of follow-up. propensity score-matched pairs were formed to compare each treatment with another using survival analysis. results survival curves of primary patency favored ins compared with sns in 368 propensity score-matched pairs (p<0.001). kaplan-meier estimates at 1, 2, and 3 years were 86.6%, 76.4%, and 68.9%, respectively, in the ins group vs 60.5%, 46.1%, and 42.1%, respectively, in the sns group. no significant difference (p=0.232) was seen for the comparison of sns vs dcb in 284 matched pairs over long-term follow-up (primary patency estimates at 1, 2, and 3 years were 79.8%, 53.8%, and 32.9%, respectively, in the dcb group vs 60.5%, 44.8%, and 40.3%, respectively, in the sns group). survival curves of primary patency favored ins over dcb in 254 matched pairs (p<0.001). kaplan-meier estimates at 1, 2, and 3 years were 79.0%, 51.2%, and 30.1%, respectively, in the dcb group vs 89.0%, 76.9%, and 66.2%, respectively, in the ins group. conclusion propensity score-based analysis of primary patency suggests profound differences in restenosis rates between various treatment modalities for femoropopliteal disease for over 3 years of follow-up.midterm patency after femoropopliteal interventions: a comparison of standard and interwoven nitinol stents and drug-coated balloons in a single-center, propensity score-matched analysis.a spatio-temporal analysis for exploring the effect of temperature on covid-19 early evolution in spain álvaro briz-redón a, ⁎, ángel serrano-aroca b, ⁎⁎ a statistics office, city council of valència, spain b centro de investigación traslacional san alberto magno, universidad católica de valencia san vicente mártir, spain• no evidence of a relationship between covid-19 cases and temperature was found. • results should not be extrapolated to other temperature ranges. • these results should be interpreted carefully due to data uncertainty and confounders. • it is important to account for nonmeteorological, spatial and temporal effects.a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f ohistory has demonstrated that pathogens may cause devastating consequences in our health and economy. thus, the rapid spread of the new sars-cov-2 pathogen, causing the coronavirus disease 2019 science of the total environment j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / s c i t o t e n v (covid-19) is a clear current example. in this regard, the director-general of the world health organization (who) has recently declared covid-19 a global pandemic on 11 march 2020 starting in wuhan, hubei province, china in december 2019 (who, 2020c) . according to the who, the current covid-19 outbreak situation has confirmed 1,812,734 cases and 113,675 deaths involving 213 countries (who, 2020a) where spain is one of the leading countries of this global health crisis with 172,541 confirmed cases and 18,056 confirmed deaths (isciii, 2020) (data reported on april 14th 2020) in a population of about 47 million people. nonetheless, experts are warning that there could be many more cases that have not been detected and/or informed, especially in undeveloped countries. this strain continues to spread globally, overwhelming intensive care units and health system capacity. the present outbreak of this coronavirus-associated acute respiratory disease is the third documented spillover of an animal coronavirus to humans in only two decades and has been identified as a zoonotic coronavirus, similar to sars coronavirus and mers . thus, sars-cov-2 is closely related (88-89% similarity) to two bat-derived severe acute respiratory syndrome-like coronaviruses, bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21 (lai et al., 2020) . however, it is more distant from sars-cov (~79% similarity) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) (~50% similarity) lu et al., 2020; ren et al., 2020) . the sars-cov-2 coronavirus is stable from several hours to days in aerosols and on surfaces, according to a new study from the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases, centers for disease control and prevention, ucla and princeton university scientists (van doremalen et al., 2020) . these scientists have found that sars-cov-2 was detectable in aerosols for up to 3 h, up to 4 h on copper, up to 24 h on cardboard and up to two to three days on plastic and stainless steel. these results provide key information about the stability of this strain and suggest that people may acquire the virus through the air and after touching contaminated objects. thus, this pathogen is easily spread by human-to-human transmission via droplets or direct contact, and this type of infection has shown a basic reproduction number of about 2.24-3.58 (lai et al., 2020; remuzzi and remuzzi, 2020) . it is often spread via coughing, sneezing, touching or even breathing, and those who do not exhibit symptoms can also spread the illness (american lung association, 2020). in fact, this coronavirus has been reported to spread faster than its two ancestors sars-cov and mers-cov (vellingiri et al., 2020) , probably due to the high transmission rate produced by asymptomatic carriers (bai et al., 2020; singhal, 2020) . standard recommendations to prevent infection spread include regular hand washing and covering mouth and nose when coughing and sneezing. it has also been recommended to avoid close contact with anyone showing symptoms of respiratory illness such as coughing and sneezing and keep a distance of 1-2 m from them (who, 2020b).the lockdown for the sars-cov-2 epidemic in italy and spain after one month follow up has shown positive results in flattening the epidemic curve (tobías, 2020) . however, even though these unprecedented containment and mitigation policies implemented to limit the spread of covid-19 in most countries, including travel restrictions, screening and testing of travellers, isolation and quarantine, and school and university closures, the new sars-cov-2 coronavirus continues to spread. indeed, a recent study has demonstrated that under certain combinations of an individual patient's physiology and environmental conditions, such as humidity and temperature, the gas cloud and its payload of pathogen-bearing droplets of all sizes can travel 7-8 m (bourouiba, 2020) . viruses can be transmitted by being influenced by several factors, including climatic conditions (temperature and humidity), and population density (dalziel et al., 2018) . in this regard, previous studies have suggested a correlation between weather and covid-19 pandemic in a similar way that it occurs with other viral infectious diseases such as influenza (ficetola and rubolini, 2020; liu et al., 2020; ma et al., 2020; oliveiros et al., 2020; tosepu et al., 2020) . however, other studies have reported contradictory results showing that meteorological conditions may not be associated with covid-19 in terms of absolute humidity or temperature (jamil et al., 2020; xie and zhu, 2020) . according to these last authors, the previous results showing evidence for a correlation between meteorological factors with covid-19 transmission was likely to be an artifact, reflecting the pathways of spread. in fact, several of these previous studies have been performed considering only meteorological factors, without accounting for non-meteorological variables that might be more decisive.spatio-temporal spread of covid-19 has been recently reported for china kang et al., 2020) and italy (giuliani et al., 2020) . in the present paper, we focus on the case of spain. spain is located in a temperate zone of the world. however, it is the most climatically diverse country in europe and it is classified within the 10 most climatically diverse countries in the world (ministerio de medio ambiente y medio rural y marino. aemet, 2011). spain is currently a country with the third-highest life expectancy of the world (who, 2020b), which explains somehow the high impact which is causing covid-19 in this country, especially in old people for whom this disease represents a major threat (morley and vellas, 2020) . in addition, according to the world tourism organization, spain was the country in the world with the second highest international tourist arrivals in 2019 (unwto, 2019). the climate in spain varies across the entire country with five main climatic zones: the hot-summer mediterranean climate, which is dominant on the iberian peninsula; the warm-summer mediterranean climate in parts of north-western spain and mostly inland the centralnorthern spain; the oceanic climate in the northern part of spain; the semiarid climate in the south-eastern part of the country; the warm-summer continental climate in many areas of the northeastern zones located over 1000 m above sea level (kottek et al., 2006) .in this study, a spatio-temporal analysis of the early evolution of covid-19 across the provinces of spain is carried out. the main goal is to explore the existence of a relationship between temperature at the province level and the evolution of the accumulated number of covid-19 cases for approximately the first month of the epidemic in spain.the provinces of spain located in the iberian peninsula have been considered for the analysis. the balearic and canary islands were discarded for the analysis in order to focus entirely on a more homogeneous area. for the same reason, the cities of ceuta and melilla, which are located in the north of africa, were also not included in the analysis.covid-19 data corresponding to the provinces of spain was downloaded from a repository publicly available and accessible through this link: https://code.montera34.com:4443/numeroteca/covid19. this repository is being maintained by multiple volunteers that are extracting and homogenising covid-19 data from multiple web sources belonging to both official and private media.february 25th 2020 has been chosen as the starting date for this early evolution study because it was when the first covid-19 cases were identified in spain. the study period spans from this date to march 28th 2020, which corresponds to two weeks after spain's lockdown started. hence, for each province belonging to the study area, a time series of length 33 (days) with the number of daily accumulated covid-19 cases is formed.temperature data has been obtained from 172 automatic weather stations installed across the study area. the data was downloaded from the opendata platform of the state meteorological agency (aemet) via the api provided by this institution. concretely, the daily mean, minimum and maximum temperatures (in°c) measured by each of these weather stations from the beginning of february to the end of march have been collected for the analysis. temperature data at the province level has been estimated in two stages. first, ordinary kriging (cressie, 1988 ) was used to estimate temperature values over a spatial grid of points covering the whole area under investigation. points within the grid were separated by 5 km, resulting in a total of nearly 20,000 points. secondly, province-level daily estimations for the variables of interest have been obtained as the average of the estimations corresponding to points of the grid lying within the province. table 1 displays a summary of the three temperature-related variables that have been investigated at the province level. fig. 1 shows the province-level estimations corresponding to mean, minimum and maximum temperatures for three days within the period under investigation.since this coronavirus has shown a mean incubation period of approximately 5 days (ranging from 2 to 14 days) (nishiura et al., 2020; rasmussen et al., 2020) , the effect of these temperature-related variables has been considered with a time delay of 2 to 14 days. hence, these temperature-related variables are referred to as temporallylagged variables in subsequent sections.in addition to the effect of temperature on the accumulated number of covid-19 cases, other covariates unrelated to meteorological conditions available at the provincial level were also included in the analysis. population data by age group corresponding to the start of the year 2020 has been obtained from the spanish statistical office (ine) at the province level. the total population has been used to obtain the population density (in hab/km 2 ) for each province. the population by age group has been utilised to estimate the expected number of covid-19 cases in each province on march 28th 2020, according to the age distribution of all the cases that had been recorded in spain by this date. following the official reports that are being published by the ministry of health from spain, the number of expected cases for province i (on fig. 1. minimum (a-c) , mean (d-f) and maximum (g-i) temperatures estimated at the province level for three days within the period under investigation. march 28th 2020), which is denoted by e i , was estimated as follows (carella, 2020) :where p ij is the population of province i corresponding to age group j, and f j is the incidence of cases in the age group j for the whole population of the country. as covid-19 affects the elderly population more severely, the probability of testing and hence detecting covid-19 among people from certain age groups is higher. hence, accounting for the age structure of each province is convenient for data modelling purposes. finally, the number of travellers that have stayed in each province during february 2020 and the number of companies by province were also obtained from the ine. the number of travellers was estimated by the ine through survey procedures. in this analysis, a traveller is consider someone that came from other province or country to spend at least one night in the corresponding province during the month of reference. thus, a higher number of travellers arriving at some provinces in february 2020 could have increased the risk of the spread of covid-19 in subsequent weeks. similarly, the fact that a province has a higher number of active companies can induce intranational mobility during working days.the r programming language (r core team, 2020) has been used to carry out the statistical analyses involved in the present investigation. in particular, the r packages automap (hiemstra et al., 2008) , ggplot2 (wickham, 2016) , gstat (pebesma, 2004; gräler et al., 2016) , inla (rue et al., 2009; lindgren and rue, 2015) , rgdal (bivand et al., 2019) , spdep (bivand et al., 2008) were required for the analysis.the number of accumulated covid-19 cases at the province level has been investigated through spatio-temporal modelling techniques. specifically, the accumulated number of covid-19 cases detected in each province, i, on a day, t, from february 25th 2020 to march 28th 2020 has been assumed to follow a poisson distribution with mean e i μ it , where e i represents the expected number of cases (on march 28th 2020, following eq. (1)), and μ it the relative risk for province i on day t. several fixed and random effects are considered to model the natural logarithm of the relative risk, which finally yields to the following modelling structure used for the analysis:where o it represents the accumulated number of cases recorded for province i (i=1,...,47) on day t (t=1,...,33), e i is the expected number of cases for province i (log(e i ) is the offset term of the linear predictor), α is the global intercept of the model, β k the fixed effect that covariate x i k defined at the province level has on μ it , p( ⋅ ,3) represents a third-degree polynomial that allows establishing a non-linear relationship between temporally-lagged covariates, x it−lag j , and μ it , s i is a spatially-structured effect for province i, u i is a spatially-unstructured effect for province i, δ t is a temporally-structured effect for day t and ε t is a temporallyunstructured effect for day t.the statistical model described in eq.(2) has been fitted using the integrated nested laplace approximation (inla) (rue et al., 2009; lindgren and rue, 2015) (which approximates bayesian inference for latent gaussian models). this model has enabled us to consider several fixed and random effects of a different nature. non-meteorological province-level covariates can be included as fixed effects, each of whom is represented by a β k parameter. the temperature-related covariates are temporally-lagged for their inclusion in the model. this specification allows establishing a direct relationship between relative risks on the day t, μ it 's, and the values of temperature that were measured some days before (lag days before), which correspond to the moment at which some of the covid-19 cases detected on the day t were actually infected by the virus. following the existing literature on the incubation time of covid-19, the parameter lag was varied from lag=2 to lag=14 days. the use of a third-degree polynomial allows the model to capture non-linear relationships between the covariate and the number of accumulated covid-19 cases.the rest of the parameters appearing in eq.(2) (s i , u i , δ t , ε t ) represent pure spatial and temporal random effects. the inclusion of these effects is rather convenient to account for unobserved spatial heterogeneity (unavailable or non-measurable variables at the province level) or temporal trends. the spatially-structured effect, s i , follows the besag's spatial model (besag et al., 1991) . this effect accounts for the spatial dependence between the provinces of spain, which is measured through a binary neighbourhood matrix that represents the contiguity relationships between provinces (two provinces are defined as neighbours if they share a common geographical border). the temporallystructured effect δ t is defined through a second-order random walk. finally, the spatially-unstructured (u i ) and the temporally-unstructured effect (ε t ) were defined as two different independent and identically fig. 3 . the solid line represents the third-degree polynomial that is defined by the three estimated coefficients (corresponding to first-, second-and third-order terms) that are found following the statistical model described by eq. (2), considering mean (a-b), minimum (c-d) and maximum temperatures (e-f). dotted lines represent the two polynomials that are defined by the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of the posterior distributions associated to each of the coefficients of the polynomial. distributed gaussian random effects to account for specific provincelevel and daily-level variability that may be skipped by the two structured effects, s i and δ t .the model described by eq. (2) allows for the inclusion of several non-meteorological (population density, number of visitors and number of companies) and lagged meteorological covariates (mean, minimum and maximum temperature) considered for this study. furthermore, the age structure of each province is accounted through the offset term, e i . however, some of these covariates are highly correlated to each other, for which reason it is convenient to use them separately, or to make a selection of them, to avoid multicollinearity issues. population density, the number of visitors and the number of companies all show a pearson's correlation above 0.85 at the province level (table 2 ). fitting three independent models with each of these covariates alone yielded very similar results. therefore, population density was chosen for being the most common and accessible variable of the three. similarly, the three temperature-related covariates are also highly correlated, which led us to define three different models each of whom only included one of them. the rest of the random effects indicated in eq. (2) were considered for the three models. fig. 2 shows the accumulated number of covid-19 cases observed for three days within the period under study, and the accumulated number of cases predicted by the model that considers mean temperature and lag=14 days. the model correctly captures the evolution of the epidemic across the provinces of spain. fig. 3 shows the third-degree polynomials that were estimated by each of the three models, considering lag=7 and lag=14 days. the results for other lag values are very similar, so only these two are displayed. the range of temperatures displayed in each of the six plots provided in fig. 3 covers the 95% of the mean, minimum or maximum temperatures available in the dataset. the solid curves in each of them correspond to the polynomial that can be built according to the coefficients of the first-, second-and third-degree terms that are estimated by the model in each case. the dotted lines correspond to the polynomials that are defined by the 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of the posterior distributions of these three coefficients. no trend is observed neither with increasing mean, minimum nor maximum temperature. specifically, the fact that the dotted lines do not lie consistently within the upper (or lower) half-plane indicates that there is no clear evidence of a contribution to relative risks by any range of the temperaturerelated variables.the analysis of how certain meteorological conditions may have affected the initial spread of covid-19 at the country, city or regional level has become an important line of research in recent weeks. in many of these studies, non-meteorological factors have not been included in the analysis. we highlight the need for considering nonmeteorological factors, such as population density, to get more reliable results. in addition, we have also accounted for the age structure of each region under study, which seems very convenient because of the existing age-group differences in detection rates.in this study, no consistent evidence has been found regarding the existence of a relationship between the accumulated number of covid-19 cases in the provinces of spain and temperature values at the province level. this conclusion is in good agreement with a previous study on the association between mean temperature and covid-19 spread performed in 122 cities of china . although the authors of this study found that mean temperature was positively associated with newly confirmed cases when temperature was below 3°, this association was not observed for temperatures above 3°, which is close to the range of mean temperature measured in spain for the period that we have investigated: 95% of the daily mean temperature values observed ranged from 5°to 18°. in this regard, it is important to note that the period under study is months ahead from the summer season, where temperatures will be considerably higher. future studies may lead to different findings, but no extrapolation to warmer periods should be done from current investigations.in conclusion, further research would be needed to better elucidate the role of several meteorological variables on the expansion of the covid-19 epidemic, for several reasons. currently available data on the epidemic is subject to a large degree of uncertainty. the number of confirmed cases is globally underestimated, and comparisons across countries, cities or regions are difficult to be determined due to differences in data collection procedures or health policies, among others. under these circumstances, every statistical analysis of covid-19 data needs to be interpreted with caution (royal statistical society, 2020). it is also important to remark that measuring the effect of weatherrelated covariates on the virus transmission is highly complex. indeed, weather usually affects several aspects of human daily life such as commuting choices or leisure activities, among many others. therefore, the interaction between weather conditions and human behaviour can be a confounder of the true relationship between environmental conditions and virus propagation.álvaro briz-redón: conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, software, investigation, writing -original draft, writingreview & editing. ángel serrano-aroca: conceptualization, methodology, investigation, writing -original draft, writing -review & editing.the authors declare no conflict of interest.. typical cases of two non-severe (left) and two severe (right) patients with covid-19, where infections often occur in small regions of the lungs in ct images. the similar imaging biomarkers (e.g., ground glass opacities, mosaic sign, air bronchogram and interlobular septal thickening) of both cases (denoted by red boxes) make the non-severe and severe images difficult to distinguish.the performance of severity assessment. extensive experiments were performed on a real covid-19 ct image dataset consisting of 666 chest ct images, with results suggesting the effectiveness of our proposed method compared to several state-of-the-art methods. golden standard for covid-19 is the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) test, the effectiveness of those imaging-base applications is limited. moreover, approximately 80% of patients with covid-19 have only mild to moderate symptoms [9] , while the remaining patients have severe symptoms. based on previous studies [5] , [10] , the imaging-based characters of covid-19 patients are distinct to related diseases, e.g., viral pneumonia. therefore, the severity assessment of the disease is of high clinical value, which helps effectively allocate medical resources such as ventilator. among various radiological examinations, chest ct imaging plays an essential role in fighting this infectious disease by helping early identify lung infections and assess the severity of the disease. previous studies show that computed tomography (ct) has the ability to provide valuable information in the screening and diagnosis [10] . in this work, ct help the clinicians to evaluate the condition of the patients in advance, by which necessary measures or treatments could better proceed, especially for severe patients in time.however, automatically assess the severity of covid-19 in ct images is a very challenging task. first, infections caused by covid-19 often occur in small regions of the lungs and are difficult to identify in ct images, as shown in fig. 1 . second, imaging biomarkers of covid-19 patients caused by an infection are similar in some severe and non-severe cases are similar, including ground-glass opacities (ggo), mosaic sign, air bronchogram, and interlobular septal thickening (fig. 1 ). in addition, there are large inter-case variations in ct images of covid-19 patients (fig. 2) , because these images are usually acquired by multiple imaging centers with different scanners and different scanning parameters.several recent methods have been proposed for the diagnosis of covid-19 [2] [3] [4] , with only some specifically designed for severity assessment of the disease. in several studies [5] [6] [7] , segmentation of lung or lung lobe is used as a prerequisite procedure for diagnosis purposes.however, most of these methods treat the lung lobe segmentation and disease diagnosis as two separate tasks, ignoring their underlying association. note that the segmentation of lung lobe can provide rich information regarding spatial locations and tissue types in ct images. therefore, it is intuitively reasonable to jointly perform lung lobe segmentation and severity assessment/prediction, where the context information provided by segmentation results can be used to improve the prediction performance. the joint learning scheme is obviously faster than the two-stage framework, since detecting and cropping the lung field are not needed. besides, as demonstrated by related works of class activation maps (cams) [11] , the classification task raises high signal responses in lung lobe area, where the infection patterns of lung lobe in disease progression could also provide useful guidance for the segmentation of lung lobes.moreover, most of the previous works are based on 2d image slices [2] [3] [4] . however, the annotation of 2d ct slices is a heavy workload for radiologists. it is interesting to directly employ 3d ct images for automated severity assessment of covid-19, which is desired for real-world clinical applications.to this end, in this paper, we propose a synergistic learning framework for automated severity assessment of covid-19 in 3d ct images, by jointly performing severity assessment of covid-19 patients and lung lobe segmentation. the proposed method extends the previous conference work [12] to deal with 3d images, and makes substantial methodological improvements for the task of covid-19 severity assessment. specifically, considering that only a few slices in ct images are related to severity assessment, each input ct image is represented by a bag of 2d image patches, each of which is randomly cropped from a specific slice. furthermore, each slice is represented by a bag of infection regions represented by intermediate embedding features. with each bag as input, a multi-task multi-instance deep neural network (called m 2 unet) is developed, including 1) a shared patchlevel encoder, 2) a segmentation sub-network for lung lobe segmentation, and 3) a classification sub-network for severity assessment of covid-19 patients (i.e., severe or non-severe) using a hierarchical multi-instance learning strategy. here, the segmentation results are used to provide context information of input ct images to boost the performance of severity assessment. extensive experiments have been performed on a real-world covid-19 dataset with 666 chest ct images, with the results demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed method compared to several state-of-the-art methods.the contributions of this work are three-fold:• a multi-task multi-instance learning framework is proposed to jointly assess the severity of the covid-19 patients and segment lung lobes in chest ct images, where the segmentation task provides context information to aid the task of severity assessment in chest ct image. • a unique hierarchical multi-instance learning strategy is developed to predict the severity of patients in a weakly supervised manner. • we evaluate the proposed method on a real clinical dataset with 666 3d ct images of covid-19 patients, achieving promising results in severity assessment compared to several state-of-the-art methods. the rest of the paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we introduce the related works for the segmentation and diagnosis of ct images of covid-19 patients, as well as related studies on deep multi-instance learning. then, we introduce the proposed method in section 3. in section 4, we present the materials, experimental setup, and experimental results. finally, we conclude this paper and present several future research directions in section 5.in this section, we briefly review the most relevant studies from the following three aspects: 1) lung segmentation of ct images with covid-19, 2) automated diagnosis of covid-19 patients, and 3) deep multi-instance learning.segmentation of lung or lung lobe has been used as a common pre-requisite procedure for automatic diagnosis of covid-19 based on chest ct images. several deep learning methods have been proposed for the segmentation of lung in ct images with covid-19. for instance, u-net et al . [13] has been widely used for segmentation of both lung regions and lung lesions in covid-19 applications [7] , [14] [15] [16] . qi et al . [7] use u-net to delineate the lesions in the lung and extract radiometric features of covid-19 patients with the initial seeds given by a radiologist for predicting hospital stay. also, several variants of u-net have been applied to the diagnosis or severity assessment of covid-19. jin et al . [6] design a two-stage pipeline to screen covid-19 in ct images, and they utilize u-net++ [17] to detect the whole lung region and to separate lesions from lung regions. besides, v-net [18] is also used in various segmentation applications. shan et al . [5] integrates human-in-the-loop strategy into the training process of vb-net (a variant of v-net). the human-aided strategy is an intuitive way to address the issue of lacking manual labels during segmentation in ct images.both x-rays [19] and ct images [10] can provide effective information for the computer-assisted diagnosis of covid-19. compared with x-rays, chest ct imaging contains hundreds of slices, which is clearer and more precise but has to take more time for specialists to diagnose. therefore, there is a great demand to use ct images for automated diagnosis of covid-19. in general, the existing methods for covid-19 diagnosis based on ct images can be roughly divided into two categories: 1) classification; 2) severity assessment. in the former category, many studies have been conducted to determine whether patients are infected with covid-19 disease. for example, chen et al . [2] exploits a unet++ based segmentation model to segment covid-19 related lesions in chest ct images of 51 covid-19 patients and 55 patients with other diseases, and finally determine the label (covid-19 or non-covid-19) of each image based on the segmented lesions. ying et al . [3] propose a ct diagnosis system, namely deeppneumonia, which is based on the resnet50 model to identify patients with covid-19 from bacteria pneumonia patients and healthy people. in the second category, tang et al . [4] proposed to first adopt vb-net to separate the lung into anatomical sub-regions, and then use these sub-regions to compute quantitative features for training a random forest (rf) model for covid-19 severity assessment (with labels of being non-severe or severe).the scenario of multi-instance learning (mil) [20] [21] [22] or learning from weakly annotated data [23] arises when only a general statement of the category is given, but multiple instances can be observed. mil aims to learn a model that can predict the label of a bag accurately, and many recent studies have focused on implementing mil via deep neural networks. for instance, oquab et al . [23] train a deep model with multiple image patches of multiple scales as input, and aggregate the prediction results of multiple inputs by using a max-pooling operation. besides, many studies [24] [25] [26] propose to formulate image classification as a mil problem so as to address the weakly supervised problem. moreover, mil is particularly suitable for problems with only a limited number (e.g., tens or hundreds) of training samples in various medical image-based applications, such as computer-assisted disease diagnosis [27] [28] [29] [30] . for instance, yan et al . [29] propose a two-stage deep mil method to find discriminative local anatomies, where the first-stage convolutional neural network (cnn) is learned in a mil fashion to locate discriminative image patches and the second-stage cnn is boosted using those selected patches. more recently, a landmark-based deep mil framework [30] ct image is first pre-processed, and multiple 2d image patches (with each patch from a specific slice) are then extracted to construct an instance bag for representing each input ct scan. this bag is then fed into the proposed multi-task multi-instance unet (m 2 unet) for joint lung lobe segmentation and severity assessment of covid-19, consisting of a shared patch-level encoder, a segmentation sub-network, and a classification sub-network for severity assessment. here, the segmentation task can provide location and tissue guidance for the task of severity assessment that employs a hierarchical multi-instance learning strategy.since there are only a limited number of cases at hand, it is desirable to employ the multi-instance learning strategy for severity assessment of covid-19 patients in chest ct images.the framework of the proposed method is illustrated in fig. 3 , where the input is the raw 3d ct image and the output is the lung segmentation and severity assessment of covid-19 patients (i.e., severe or non-severe). specifically, each 3d ct image is processed via several image pre-processing steps. then, a set of 2d image patches is randomly cropped from the processed image to construct an instance bag, and each bag represents a specific input ct image. this bag is regarded as the input of the proposed multi-task multi-instance u-net (m 2 unet). the m 2 unet is designed to learn two tasks jointly, i.e., severity assessment of a covid-19 patient and segmentation of the lung lobe.as shown in fig. 3 , in m 2 unet, an encoding module is first used for patch-level feature extraction of 2d patches in each input bag, followed by two sub-networks for joint severity assessment and lung lobe segmentation. specifically, in the classification sub-network, these extracted patch-level features are fed into a feature embedding module and an image-level feature learning module to capture the local-toglobal volume representation of the input ct image. with the learned volume features, a classification layer is finally used to assess the severity of each covid-19 patient (i.e., severe or non-severe). in the segmentation sub-network, those patchlevel features are fed into a decoding module to perform lung lobe segmentation for each patch in the input bag. since these two sub-networks are trained jointly with a shared patch-level encoder, the context information provided by the segmentation results can be implicitly employed to improve the performance of severity assessment.to eliminate the effect of the background noise in each raw 3d ct image, we crop each scan to only keep the region containing the human body, by using a threshold-based processing method. specifically, we first binarize the image using the threshold of zero, through which the human tissues and the gas regions will be separated. then, the human body region is cropped according to the binary mask. each body region image has a size of at least 256 × 256 for the axial plane in this work.while image resampling is commonly used in many deep learning methods for segmentation and classification [31] , [32] , we do not resample the raw ct images in order to preserve their original data distributions. since our method is clinical-oriented with inconsistent imaging qualities, ct images used in this study are not as clean as those in benchmark datasets [33] . for example, the physical spacing of our data has large variation, e.g., from 0.6 mm to 10 mm between slices, because of the use of different ct scanners and scanning parameters. using a common interpolation method (e.g., tri-linear interpolation) to resample a ct image into 1 mm, one will introduce heavy artifacts to the image. besides, only a few infection regions in each ct image are related to severity assessment. to this end, we employ the weakly supervised multi-instance learning (mil) strategy for handing these inconsistent ct images. specifically, for each preprocessed ct image, we randomly crop a set of 2d patches sampled from 2d slices (with each patch from a specific slice) in each image to construct an instance bag, and each bag is used to represent a specific ct image and treated as the input of the subsequent m 2 unet. in this way, the inter-slice/patch relationships can be implicitly captured by our m 2 unet. in addition, this mil strategy represents each 3d image through a set of 2d image patches rather than sequential slices. this can partially alleviate the problem of data inconsistency, so our method has high practical value in real-world applications.as shown in fig. 3 , using each bag (consisting of a set of 2d image patches) as the input data, the proposed m 2 unet first employs an encoding module for patch-level feature extraction. based on these features, the classification and segmentation sub-networks are then used to jointly perform two tasks, respectively, i.e., 1) severity assessment of the patients, and 2) segmentation of lung lobes in each patch. specifically, the classification sub-network uses a unique hierarchical mil strategy to extract the local-to-global representation of each input image, with an embedding-level mil module, an imagelevel mil module, and a classification module. the segmentation sub-network contains a decoding module to segment lung lobes of 2d image patches in each bag.the detailed network architecture is listed in table i . the combination of the encoder and decoder is u-net like, with four down-sampling blocks in the encoder and four upsampling blocks in the decoder. the outputs of the same level blocks in the encoder and decoder are concatenated and fed into the next block of the decoder. limited by computational resources, all the convolutional layers in the encoder and decoder have the same number (i.e., 64) of kernels, except the last block in the encoder. the last block of encoder outputs 512 dimensional features to help build a more robust classification for severity assessment. the decoder outputs the corresponding segmentation mask of five types of lung lobes for each image patch.while infection regions of the lung, related to covid-19 (e.g., nodule and ggo) are usually located in regions of the ct image, the category of each ct image is labeled at the entire image level, rather than the region-level. that is, many regions are actually unrelated to the classification task for severity assessment.multi-instance learning (mil) provides a useful tool to solve such a weakly supervised problem. conventional mil represents a 2d image as a bag, and each bag consists of multiple regions of the input image (i.e., instances). their overall prediction is made at the bag-level by roughly two kinds of methods, i.e., the embedding-level methods and the instance-level methods. the former learns the relationship among instances by projecting them into a new embedding space. the latter directly generates the bag-level predictions by performing voting on the instance predictions. however, both methods are inapplicable for the classification of 3d images, as 3d images contain multiple 2d image slices, and the class labels are also related to some local regions of the slices. in this work, based on the previous study on pathological images [12] , we propose a hierarchical mil strategy in the classification sub-network of our m 2 unet to perform severity assessment of covid-19 in 3d ct images, as shown in fig. 3 . as mentioned in section iii-b, we represent each input 3d volumetric image as a bag consisting of a set of 2d image patches, and these patches are regarded as the instances in the mil problem settings. formally, we first construct a bag with n 2d patches cropped from the regional slices to represent each input ct image. denote the i-th and the j-th 3d ct image as x i and x j , respectively, where x i = {φ ins i1 , φ ins i2 , · · · , φ ins ini } and x j = {φ ins j1 , φ ins j2 , · · · , φ ins jnj }. here, φ ins kl ∈ r d (k = 1, 2, · · · , n k ) indicates the l-th instance of the k-th image. then, these 2d patches (size: height × width) are fed into the encoding module for patch/instance-level feature extraction. these instance-level features are further fed into an embedding-level mil module, which will be introduced later. after obtaining the instance-level features, the bag/image-level feature φ i are then generated by our proposed global contrast pooling (gcp) layer in the image-level mil module.as illustrated in fig. 4 , the proposed gcp layer aims to make the instance features closer to the relevant concepts, and also push those irrelevant instance features and concepts away from each other. in this work, the term 'concept' denotes the to-be-learned feature of gcp layer that is discriminative for severity assessment. theoretically, the concept is a normalized weight to map features in instance feature space to an ordered embedding space. specifically, in the gcp layer, we assume the bag-level feature φ i is represented by the relationship between instance features and p concepts. here, these concepts are learned to reveal the data structure in a global perspective. the bag-level feature is then denoted as a p dimensional feature vector, with each dimension denoting the maximum similarity between one concept and all instance features. we use the cosine function to measure such relationships. thus, the bag feature and the similarity can be written aswhere s im (m = 1, · · · , p) is the maximum similarity between the instance features of the i-th bag and the m-th image-level concept w m . r(·) denotes the commonly used regularization term used in deep networks. with eqs. (1)-(2), one can observe that the proposed gcp layer can automatically learn the concepts that are related to those discriminative instances, thus reducing the influence of those irrelevant instances. note such a gcp layer can be also used in other weakly supervised problems, where only a small portion of regions in an image are related to the task at hand (such as mri-based brain disorder diagnosis [30] ).we further use an embedding-level mil module (with a gcp layer) to learn embedding-level representations, by regarding each image patch as a bag and the intermediate patch-level features produced by the encoder as instances. in this way, the relationships among small regions in each patch can be modeled by our method. based on the embedding-level features, an image-level mil module (with a gcp layer) is further used to generate the volume features. based on the volume features, we use a fully-connected layer followed by a cross-entropy loss to predict the severity score (i.e., severe or non-severe) of each input ct image. the final loss function in the proposed hierarchical mil network for severity assessment can be formulated aswhere f c(·) denotes the mapping function of the fullyconnected layer, and y denotes the severity type confirmed by clinicians.the segmentation task is supervised by the aggregation of cross-entropy loss and dice loss as followswherep c n and l c n denote the predicted and ground-truth segmentation masks for the n-th patch in the c-th category. in this work, we segment c = 7 categories, including five parts of lung lobes and the background. it is worth noting that most of the cases in our dataset do not have groundtruth segmentation masks. for these cases, we simply avoid calculating the segmentation loss for them.finally, the losses in eqs. 3 and 4 are trained simultaneously in a multi-task learning manner, and the overall loss of the proposed method is written aswhere λ is the trade-off parameter used to balance the contributions of these two tasks. in this work, λ is empirically set to 0.01.the proposed method is implemented based on the opensource deep learning library pytorch. the training of the network is accelerated by four nvidia tesla v100 gpus (each with 32 gb memory). for feasible learning of the lung region images, we clamp the intensities of the image into [−1200, 0], which indicates that we use the width of 1200 and the level of −600 for the pulmonary window. then, the data is normalized to the value of [0, 255], as used by other deep learning methods. the dataset is highly imbalanced as the number of severe patients is much fewer than the nonsevere patient. the ratio of the severe patient is less than 20% in our dataset. therefore, we augmented the data by directly duplicated the severe cases in the training set. this can be done because the proposed method uses a random cropping strategy to construct the inputs. this makes the duplicated cases not the same to each other for the training of the network. we also use the random cropping strategy in the testing stage, by assuming that the data distribution is already well learned in training. other cropping strategies, e.g., center cropping, may not be suitable here, as the center of pulmonary is dominated by the trachea and other tissues.in both training and testing stage, we randomly crop 200 image patches from each input 3d ct image to construct the image-level bag (i.e., with the bag size of n = 200). and we use the output of the encoder to construct the embeddinglevel bag that contains 8 × 8 feature maps. we train m 2 unet using the learning rate of 0.01 with a decay strategy of 'poly' (with the power of 0.75). the network is optimized by a standard stochastic gradient descent (sgd) algorithm with 100 epochs. and the weights are decayed by a rate of 1×10 −4 with the momentum of 0.9.in this section, we first introduce the materials, competing methods, and experimental setup. we then present the experimental results achieved by our method and several state-ofthe-art methods. we finally investigate the influence of two major strategies used in our method. more results on parameter analysis can be found in the supplementary materials.the real covid-19 dataset contains a total of 666 3d chest ct scans acquired from 242 patients who are confirmed with covid-19 (i.e., rt-pcr test positive). these ct images are collected from seven hospitals with a variety of ct scanners, including philips (ingenuity ct idose4), ge (bright speed s), siemens (somatom perspective), hitachi (eclos), and anke (anatom 16hd). the images are of large variation in terms of the image size of 512 × (512 ∼ 666) × (23 ∼ 732), and the spatial resolution of 0.586 ∼ 0.984 mm, 0.586 ∼ 0.984 mm and 0.399 ∼ 10 mm. obviously, diagnosis based on these images is a very challenging task. the severity of the patient is confirmed by clinicians, following the guideline of 2019-ncov (trail version 7) issued by the china national health commission. the severity of the patient is categorized into four types, i.e., mild, moderate, severe, and critical. in clinical practice, patients are often divided into two groups with different treatment regimens, i.e., severe and non-severe. the segmentation of 152 out of 666 images were delineated by an ai-based software and confirmed by experienced radiologists. in this work, we employ this partitioning strategy. that is, mild and moderate are treated as non-severe, while severe and critical are regarded as severe. therefore, the task of severe assessment is formulated into a binary classification problem. therefore, the dataset is partitioned into 51 severe and 191 non-severe patients.we first compare the proposed m 2 unet with four stateof-the-art methods in [4] , [34] [35] [36] for severity assessment of covid-19 patients. the first two methods [4] , [36] are both based on hand-crafted features of ct images, while the last two [34] , [35] are deep learning-based methods that can learn imaging features automatically from data. specifically, tang et al . [4] first segment the lung, lung lobe and lesions in ct images. then, the quantitative features of covid-19 patients, e.g., the infection volume and the ratio of the whole lung, are calculated based on the segmentation results. the prediction is done by a random forest method. yang et al . [36] propose to aggregate infection scores calculated on 20 lung regions for severity assessment. besides, the resnet50+max method [34] is also compared for patch-wise classification. resnet50+max is a non-mil method, which has a resnet-50 network architecture and performs image-level classification through max-voting. in addition, we apply the gated att. mil method proposed in [35] on our dataset, which is a one-stage mil method with an attention mechanism. for fair comparison, this method shares the same multi-instance pool as our m 2 unet.we further compare our method with two state-of-the-art methods for lung lobe segmentation, including 1) unet [13] , and 2) unet++ [17] . the parameter settings for these five competing methods are the same as those in their respective papers.to evaluate the influence of the proposed multi-task learning and hierarchical mil strategies used in m 2 unet, we further compare m 2 unet with its two variants: 1) m 2 unet with only the classification sub-network (denoted as clas. only), 2) m 2 unet with only the segmentation sub-network (denoted as seg. only).a five-fold cross-validation (cv) strategy is used in the experiments for performance evaluation. specifically, the whole dataset is first randomly partitioned into five subsets (with approximately equal sample size of subjects). we treat one subset as the testing set (20%), while the remaining four subsets are combined to construct the training set (70%) and validation set (10%). the validation set here is used for selecting the hyper-parameters. this process is iterated until each subsets serve as a testing set once. the final results are reported on the test set. two tasks are included in the proposed method, i.e., classification of severity assessment, and 2) segmentation of the lung lobe. for performance evaluation, two sets of metrics are used in these two tasks, with the details given below.1) metrics for classification: we use five commonly used metrics to evaluate the classification performance achieved by different methods in the severity assessment task, i.e., accuracy, precision, recall, f1 score, and the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (auc).p recision = t p t p + f p , recall = t p t p + f n ,where tp, tn, fp and fn denote true positive, true negative, false positive and false negative, respectively.2) metrics for segmentation: we use three metrics, i.e., dice similarity coefficient (dsc), positive predict value (ppv) and sensitivity (sen), to evaluate the segmentation performance of different methods, with the definitions given below.where v gt and v seg represent the ground-truth and predicted segmentation maps for each scan, respectively. d. comparison with state-of-the-art methods 1) results of severity assessment: we first report the performance of six different methods in the task of severity assessment for covid-19 patients, with the results shown in table ii . note that the results from the competing methods are directly obtained from the respective papers. as can be seen, four deep learning-based methods usually outperform two hand-crafted feature-based methods in most cases. for some specific metrics, the method in [4] achieves the recall of 0.933, which is significantly better than the non-mil method resnet50+max. the conventional mil-based method in [35] gets a performance improvement in terms of accuracy by 8%. three mil methods (i.e., [35] , cls. only, and m 2 unet) yield satisfying performance, and the proposed m 2 unet achieves the best results (e.g.., the accuracy of 98.5% and f1 score of 99.1%). however, the proposed method with multiple instances in multi-instance learning achieves the accuracy of 98.5% and f1 score of 99.1%. the receiver operating characteristic (roc) curves of six competing methods are illustrated in fig. 6 . note that this roc curve is plotted based on the results on one fold testing data, which is slightly different from the average performance on five-folds in table ii. table ii and fig. 6 clearly suggest that our m 2 unet generates the overall best performance in the task of severity assessment of covid-19 patients based on chest ct images.2) results of lung lobe segmentation: we then report the results of lung lobe segmentation achieved by four different methods in table iii . comparing seg. only and the conventional u-net, the former dramatically reduces the parameter from 131.71mb to 14.37mb. as a consequence, the performance in terms of dsc and ppv is also decreased by 1.7% and 4.9%, respectively. by using multi-task learning, m 2 net improves the performance, from 0.759 to 0.785 in terms of dsc, which also outperform the performance of conventional u-net, with a decreasing of parameters, from 131.71 to 15.32. the proposed m 2 unet also achieves a slightly higher performance compared with u-net++.the visualization of segmentation results achieved by three different methods on two subjects is shown in fig. 5 . from this figure, we can see that m 2 unet generates the overall best segmentation masks, while u-net and u-net++ usually yield under-segmentation results on these cases. these results further show the advantage of our m 2 unet.we further evaluate the influence of two major strategies used in our m 2 unet, i.e., 1) the hierarchical mil strategy for classification, and 2) the multi-task learning strategy for joint severity assessment and lung lobe segmentation.1) influence of hierarchical mil strategy: to evaluate the effectiveness of the hierarchical mil strategy, we compare the variant of the proposed m 2 unet (i.e., cls. only without the segmentation subnetwork) with a non-mil method (i.e., resnet50+max) and a one-stage mil method (i.e., gated att. mil [35] ). the classification results of these three methods in the task of severity assessment are reported in table iv . as shown in table iv , two mil methods (i.e., gated att. mil 2) influence of multi-task learning strategy: our m 2 unet can jointly learn the segmentation task and the classification task in a multi-task learning manner. here, we also investigate the influence of such a multi-task learning paradigm, by comparing m 2 unet with its two single-task variants, i.e., 'cls. only' for classification and 'seg. only' for segmentation. the performance comparison in two tasks for severity assessment and lung lobe segmentation are reported in table v and  table vii , respectively. table v suggests that, compared with cls. only, the multi-task learning paradigm used in m 2 unet helps to improve the classification accuracy by 1.6%, while increasing the precision score by over 5% and the f1 score by 2.5%. notably, the f1 and precision of the cls. only method are already higher than 90%, which are hard to be improved. this is more valuable in this classification scheme, as the f1 score is more representative in evaluating such an imbalanced classification task.as can be observed from table vii , although m 2 unet is not specifically designed for lung lobe segmentation, it still improves the overall segmentation performance in terms of three metrics, compared with its single-task variant (i.e., seg. only). this implies that the proposed multi-task learning strategy is useful in boosting the learning performance of both tasks of severity assessment and lung lobe segmentation.we further investigate the performance of our method using different size of bags, and the results are shown in table vi . specifically, we vary the bag size within {50, 80, 100, 150, 200}. as shown in the table, the performance of m 2 unet for classification changes along with the bag size. the proposed method achieves the best performance with the bag size of 200. another observation is that, the table suggests the performance of the proposed ai-based severity assessment model is not sensitive with the bag size when larger than 100, indicating that at least 100 patches are required for the proposed method to achieve an acceptable result.v. conclusion and future work in this paper, we propose a synergistic learning framework for automated severity assessment and lung segmentation of covid-19 in 3d chest ct images. in this framework, we first represent each input image by a bag to deal with the challenging problem that the severity is related to local infected regions in the ct image. we further develop a multitask multi-instance deep network (called m 2 unet) to assess the severity of covid-19 patients and segment the lung lobe simultaneously, where the context information provided by segmentation can be employed to boost the performance of severity assessment. a hierarchical multi-instance learning strategy is also proposed in m 2 unet for severity assessment. experimental results on a real covid-19 ct image dataset demonstrate that our method achieves promising results in severity assessment of covid-19 patients, compared with several state-of-the-art methods.in the current work, the severity assessment of covid-19 only relies on one time-point data, without considering longitudinal imaging biomarkers. it is interesting to perform a longitudinal study to investigate the progression of the disease, which is one of our future work. since annotations for lung lobe in 3d ct images are usually tedious and error-prone, only a small number of subjects in our dataset have groundtruth segmentation. therefore, it is highly desired to develop automated or even semi-automated image annotation methods, which will also be studied in the future.severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), potentially fatal atypical pneumonia, first appeared in guangdong province of china in november 2002 and soon afterward, within six months, spreaded all over the world (30 countries including china, singapore, vietnam, canada, and usa), killing more than 700 people (1) . in less than four weeks after the global outbreak, a novel member of coronaviridae family, namely sars coronavirus (sars-cov), was identified in the blood of respiratory specimens and stools of sars patients, and confirmed as the causative agent of disease according to the koch postulates (2) . soon afterwards, first fully sequenced genomes of viral isolates were published (3, 4) . in 2005 the number of fully sequenced viral isolates exceeds one hundred (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez). sars-cov probably originated due to genetic exchange (recombination) and/or mutations between viruses with different host specificities (5, 6) . since coronaviruses are known to relatively easily jump among species, it was hypothesized that the new virus might have originated from wild animals. the analysis of sars-cov proteins supports and suggests possible past recombination event between mammalianlike and avian-like parent viruses (6) . common sequence variants define three distinct genotypes of the sars-cov: one linked with animal [palm civet (paguma larvata)] sars-like viruses and early human phase, the other two linked with middle and late human phases, respectively (7, 8) . sars-cov has a deleterious mutation of 29 nucleotides relative to the palm civet virus, indicating that if there was direct transmission, it went from civet to human, because deletions occur probably more easily than insertions (5) . however, more recent reports indicate that sars-cov is distinct from the civet virus and it has not been answered so far whether the sars-cov originated from civet, or civet was infected from other species (9, 10) . the genome is relatively stable, since its mutation rate has been determined to be between 1.83×10 -6 and 8.26×10 -6 nucleotide substitutions per site per day (11) .the sars-cov genome is approximately 30 kb positive single strand rna that corresponds to polycistronic mrna, consisting of 5' and 3' untranslated regions (utrs), 13 to 15 open reading frames (orfs), and about 10 intergenic regions (igrs) (9, 12, 13) .its genome includes genes encoding two replicate polyproteins (rna-dependant-rnapolymerase, i.e., pp 1a and pp 1ab), encompassing two-thirds of the genome, and a set of orfs at 3' end that code for four structural proteins: surface spike (s) glycoprotein (1,256 a.a.), envelope (e, 77 a.a.), matrix (m, 222 a.a.), and nucleocapsid (n, 423 a.a.) proteins. it also encodes for additional 8-9 predicted orfs whose protein product functions are still under investigation (14; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez).the s protein is the main surface antigen of the sars-cov and is involved in virus attachment on susceptible cells using mechanism similar to those of class i fusion proteins. the receptor for the sars-cov s protein is identified as angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace-2), which is a metallopeptidase (15) . the receptor-binding domain (rbd) has been determined to lay between a.a. postions 270-625 in recent studies (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) .several epitope sites, defined by polyclonal or monoclonal antibodies, have been identified on the s protein, depending on experimental conditions, all lying within wide or narrow regions between a.a. 12-1,192 (20-31) . defining conserved immunodominant epitope regions of the s protein is of crucial importance for future anti-sars vaccine development.the main goal of this work was twofold: to perform mutation analysis of sars-cov viral genomes, with special attention to the s protein; and to group them according to different aspects of sequence similarity, eventually pointing to phylogeny and epidemiological dynamics of sars-cov.nucleotide content nucleotide content of sars-cov isolates favors t and a nucleotides. the corresponding percentages of letters in non-utr regions of all the 96 isolates were found to be as follows: t (30.7940%), a (28.4246%), g (20.8121%), c (19.9535%), n (g, a, t, c; 0.0143%), r (pur; 0.0005%), k (g or t; 0.0001%), m (a or c; 0.0002%), s (g or c; 0.0001%), w (a or t; 0.0002%), and y (pyr; 0.0004%). the overall ratio of (a,t)/(g,c) in the dataset was almost 3:2 (1.45). the ratio of pur vs. pyr nucleotides was almost 1 (0.97).the distribution of nucleotides (nt) over sequences of length 250 nt is given in figure s1 (supporting online material). it exhibits three peak-regions of t nucleotide in the second quarter of the genome (orf 1a), and rather stable behavior in the third quarter of the genome (orf 1b), as also observed by pyrc et al (32) for a group of coronaviruses (hcov-nl63, hcov-229e, sars-cov, and hcov-oc43). deviation of percentage of nucleotides over 250-nt blocks from the corresponding percentage in the whole dataset is given in figure s2 . except for 3' utr where t nucleotide is underrepresented with even about -13%, the highest excess from the average is about +10% in four peaks, which is exhibited again by t nucleotide, three of them being between positions 7,000 and 11,000 (orf 1a), complementary with the nucleotide a represented with -10%, and the fourth one in the s protein. otherwise the nucleotides' offset oscillates rather regularly between -5% and +5% from the average.all the isolates had high degree of nucleotide identity (more than 99% pair wise). still, they could be differentiated on the basis of their genome polymorphism, i.e., the number and sites of snvs and insertions and deletions (indels). analysis of genomic polymorphism of the isolates resulted in the following two facts (tables 1, s1, and s2). firstly, two isolates, hsr 1 and as, coincided with the "profile" on all the "non-empty" positions (see materials and methods) up to the poly-a sequence. secondly, three isolates had large number of undefined nucleotides (n), either as contiguous segments (sin3408 in orfs 8a, 8b; sin3408l in orf 1b), or as scattered individual nucleotides or short clusters (sinp2) ( table s2 ). isolate sin3408 was the only one that has a 34-nt longer 5' utr as compared with the "profile". thus these three isolates were not considered to be reliably compared with others. shaded entries correspond to annotated isolates. identification (label and id) is given in accordance with the labels and identifiers from table s1. the four snvs columns correspond to: the total number of snvs, the number of snvs in genes, in 5' and 3' utrs, and in igr. the seven columns named indels include the number of deletions at the 5' end (5' del), the length of long insertions (longins) and long deletions (longdel), the number and length of short insertions (shortins) and short deletions (shortdel) in the form a × b where b denotes the length and a denotes the number of occurrences, the number of deletions at the 3' end (3' del), and the length of a poly-a sequence at the 3' end (3' poly-a). classification includes two columns. the type column corresponds to the nine-locus nucleotides that are given in the form nnnn/nnnnn and represent nucleotides at (relative to clustal x output) positions 9,420, 17,604, 222,274, 27,891 / 3,861, 9,495, 11,514, 21,773, 26,534, respectively (absolute hsr 1 positions 9,404, 17,564, 22,222, 27,827 / 3,852, 9,479, 11,493, 21,721, 26,477) . the last column, group, reflects grouping of isolates.there were 446 snv sites and 1,006 snvs in total in the dataset, with the substitution rate 1.49%, which is about three times higher (both the number of snvs and the substitution rate) than the corresponding findings (33) for 17 isolates. an average number of snvs per isolate was 10.48, giving an error rate of 3.6×10 -4 substitutions per nucleotide copied.there was only one site with multiple base substitutions (the original nucleotide base on that position being t): at the relative (clustal x) position 8,441 (orf 1a), isolate zmy 1 has the nucleotide c (absolute position 8,403), and isolates shanghaiqxc1, shanghaiqxc2 have the nucleotide a (absolute positions 8,312 and 7,733, respectively).the smallest distance between the two neighboring snv sites in the whole dataset was 1; the largest one was 23,988 (in case of tw3 and tw1), while an average distance between the neighboring snv sites in the whole dataset was 1,987 positions ( figure s3 ). the distribution of isolates per snv number (outside 5', 3' utrs) showed regularity for up to 11 snvs (almost gaussian distribution) and irregular decrease for number of snvs >11 ( figure s4 ). thus the number of snvs less than or equal to 11 per isolate was considered as a "small" number of snvs, and the number of snvs greater than 11 was considered as a "large" number of snvs. most snvs are clustered within two regions in orf la and one region at the 3' end of the viral genome that predominantly consists of small orfs, leaving two small regions within orf 1a, and a region that corresponds to orf 1b as the most conservative ones ( figure 1b) .the entropy of each genome nucleotide position was calculated, showing that the most conserved sites are the ones with the smallest entropy and that the least conserved sites are the ones with the highest entropy (34; figure s5 ). the nine loci used for classification can be found among the sites with the highest entropy. analysis of the sars-cov genome showed that long indels were concentrated close to the 3' end (except for the 579-nt deletion in the shanghaiqxc2 isolate at the position 5,834, located in orf 1a), while indi- firstly, although the sars-cov genome has the established length of 29,727 nt (12), most isolates were shorter at the 5' end (for the first 15 positions, majority of isolates were "empty"), and had various length "poly-a" strings at the 3' end, or both (table  1) . several isolates had some short deletions inside the sequence, e.g., sin2677, sin2748, twc, pumc02, pumc03, twj, whu, sino1-11, sino3-11, tw11, and sinp5.secondly, there was a group of isolates that had insertions of length 29 nucleotides (gd01, sz3, sz16, gz02, hsz-bb, hsz-bc, hsz-cb, and hsz-cc) at the relative position 27,995 (absolute position 27,869 in sz3, sz16, hsz-cc, and hsz-bc; protein bgi-pup gz29-nt-ins, orf 8a). two of them were isolates from palm civet (sz3 and sz16) and the other six were isolates from human patients. this specific insertion is also treated as a deletion in all the other isolates, evolved from this early group (10) . figure 3 ).fourthly, a large number of individual indels were identified in zj01, zmy 1, sinp2, and sinp3 (tables 1 and s2, figure 3 ).while the distribution of nucleotides over different distances from snv sites did not exhibit any regularities, the distribution of different nucleotides on distance 1 left to snv sites (-1) did exhibit significant difference from their overall percentage in the dataset. the corresponding right (+1) distance distribution of nucleotides is almost uniform ( table 2 ). figure s7 represents differences between the percentage of nucleotides at a given position and in the whole genome, for up to the distance 10 left and right from snv sites. figures s8a and b represent distribution of substitutions preceded by different nucleotide bases, and followed by different nucleotide bases, respectively. it can be seen that on the substitutions, both are favored by the preceding a and the following t (almost 40% of all the substitutions; figure 2 ), while the substitution is almost prohibited by the preceding t (only 3%). clustered substitutions of length 2 are rare the distribution of nucleotides on distance 1 left to snv sites (-1) and right to snv sites (+1) is presented in total number of nucleotides, percentage, and difference from their overall percentage in the dataset.analysis of distribution of individual nucleotides over the three codon positions in annotated orfs of all the annotated isolates showed that, except for short proteins such as e, m, and presumptive orfs, all the codons exhibit the same tendency of t nucleotide dominating at the third codon position, and the g nucleotide dominating at the first codon position, while a and c appearing more often at the second codon position than elsewhere. figure s9 represents distribution of nucleotides over the three codon positions in individual orfs, and in total.analysis of codon usage demonstrated the same facts as the distribution of nucleotides over the three codon positions. in total, the third nucleotide favored t (40.10%) over a (24.83%), c (18.90%), and g (16.16%). it was especially true for four-codon families a.a. (thr, pro, ala, gly, and val). the same held for four-codon subsets of six-codon families (arg, leu, and ser), differring at the third codon position only. the above was true for the orf lab, s and n proteins, but not for another two structural proteins (e and m). the codon usage for sars-cov genome proteins is represented by table s3 , and it is consistent with the results obtained for another human cov genome, hcov-nl63 (32) .besides the number of snvs, isolates differed in positions of snvs, too. table s4 represents there were 31 synonymous multiple substitution sites and 60 non-synonymous ones, with substitution rate 0.31% (91/29,228) and non-synonymous substitution rate 0.21%, which is consistent with the corresponding findings for 17 sasr-cov isolates (33) . the number of multiple substitutions was for about 30% lower than the number of the overall substitutions, and so were the substitution rate and nonsynonymous substitution rate. table s5 summarizes the above findings. it represents the number of transition and transversion sites and the number of snvs (in the form n 1 /n 2 ) per position in codon and per mutation type, as well as the percentage of snvs, and the number of silent mutation sites and silent snvs.concerning non-synonymous sites, 35 (only for two-or-more substitution sites, and only in annotated isolates).the s protein is of particular interest for mutation analysis, being the key for host range determination. multiple sequence alignment of the s protein in all the 96 sars-cov isolates showed that five of them, namely zmy 1, sinp2, sinp3, sinp4, and sin3408l, had large discrepancies with all the others due to individual insertions or deletions in them. since such significant mismatches in the s protein sequence seemed to be the result of erroneous sequencing, we eliminated these five isolates and analyzed the s protein in the remaining 91 isolates.there were 34 isolates without snvs in the s protein: tw2-tw11, sino3-ll, as, lc1, whu, twc3, pumc01-pumc03, cuhk-ag01, cuhk-ag3, taiwan tc1-3, twc, sin2748, sin2500, sin2677,  cuhk-su10, hku-39849, twh, twj, twk, twy, and hsr 1. there were 62 snv sites with 208 snvs in total, and no multiple mutations. table s6 represents snv sites and all the snvs in the s protein of the 91 isolates, along with nucleotides, type of mutation (transition/transversion), a.a. position in the protein, a.a. change, a.a. properties change, nucleotide position in codon, and number of snvs at each snv site. these findings overlap with the results reported in song et al (ref. 7; concerning snvs with multiple occurrences, in 103 s protein genes, some of which being nucleotide-identical, with 80% in common with our dataset), and are consistent on the intersecting data. table 3 summarizes the results from  table s6 .s proteins in 91 isolates are considered. the number of transition and transversion sites and the number of snvs (in the form n 1 /n 2 ) per position in codon and per mutation type, as well as the percentage of snvs, and the number of silent mutation sites and silent snvs (in the form n 1 /n 2 ), are presented.out of 62 snv sites, 19 were observed to be synonymous, with 58 synonymous snvs in total, and 43 were observed to be non-synonymous substitution sites, with 150 non-synonymous snvs in total (table  s6) . substitution rate was 1.65% (62/3,768) and nonsynonymous substitution rate was 1.14% (43/3,768), which is consistent with findings for the whole genome in the enlarged dataset, and is about three times table 4 . these values indicated that the s gene was subjected to the darwinian selection during virus evolution (transmission from animals to humans), which is consistent with the analysis performed by yeh et al (36) , for 28 human isolates and the sz3 palm civet as the outgroup, giving the corresponding ratio value of 1.657, and with the analysis performed by he et al (8) , indicating that the s gene showed the strongest positive selection pressures initially, with eventual stabilization. phylogenetic tree, drawn using the phylodraw program for the clustal x output of aligning the 96 isolates, is represented in figure 5 . its close relationship to the classification proposed in the paper suggests that classification of sars-cov isolates might be obtained by applying the computational analysis based on genome polymorphism. all the isolates were classified according to their genome polymorphism-snvs and indels, the procedure being proposed in our previous paper (57). since snv contents turned out to be a more distinguishable property than the presence of indels, as the first classification criterion we took the number and positions of snvs. for the "profile" isolate, as the referent isolate, number of snvs for different isolates varied from 0 (hsr 1, as) to 78 (zmy 1) ( table 1) . all the isolates were classified into two groups based on the number of snvs with the "profile"-those with less than or equal to 11 snvs, and those having more than 11 snvs. thus, the first classification criterion resulted in two groups (table 1) :group a-isolates with less than or equal to 11 snvs (tables 1 and s2) ;group b-isolates with more than 11 snvs relative to the "profile" isolate.positions of snvs moved several isolates between the two groups (sod from b to a, since the most of its snvs are in 3' utr; cuhk-w1 from a to b, since its number of snvs with the "profile" of the a group is larger than the one of the b group; whu from b to a; gz50 from a to b; gd69 from b to a; and gz-c from b to a).the second classification criterion was presence and position of long indels inside the basic a, b groups. we identified the following subgroups:a2, b2-subgroups of the a, b groups, respectively, with long insertions. a2 remained empty, while b2 contained 8 isolates with 29-nt insertions.a3, b3-subgroups of the a, b groups, respectively, with long deletions. a3 group consisted of 3isolate subgroup (lc2, lc3, and lc5) with a deletion of length 386, sin852 with a deletion of length 57, 2isolates subgroup (gz-b and gz-c) with a deletion of length 39, sin849 (deletion of length 49, embedded), and sin846 (137, overlapping). b3 subgroup consisted of the isolates zs-a (zs-b) and zs-c with the deletion of length 53.a4 and b4 were the subgroups with many individual indels ( table 1 ). the rests of the a, b groups were denoted as a1 and b1, respectively.it can be noted that proposed grouping of 96 isolates, based on snv and indel contents, conserved the earlier classification t-t-t-t/c-g-c-c (38) , and partially coincided with the extension of this classification (39, 40) . the four loci (9,404, 17,564, 22,222, and 27,827) , as the basis for this classification, fitted nicely into our grouping (basically a1 group coincided with t-t-t-t type, while b1 group coincided with c-g-c-c type), expressing two inter-types: t-g-c-c [isolates gz50, hzs2-d, hzs2-e, hzs2-c, hgz8l2, hsz2-a, ns-1(bj04), hzs2-fc, hzs2-fb, and tjf] and c-g-t-t (isolates shanghaiqxc1 and shang-haiqxc2) ( figure 5 ). we found that another five loci, which are among the most represented snvs' loci (po- there were two basic nine-locus types: tttt/ttcgg and cgcc/ttcat, mostly coinciding with the a1, b1 groups, and the two intergroups: an inter-(a-b)-group had the inter-type tgcc/ttcgt, and a subgroup of the group b1 (two shanghai isolates) represented another intertype cgtt/ttcgt ( figure 5 ). the proposed extension to the two main sequence variants (tttt, cgcc) for an enlarged set of isolates, is in accordance with the new insights into possible epidemiological spread, both in space and time (36, 38, 41) . grouping of isolates is based on genome polymorphism, and classification is based on nine distinguished loci, mapped onto the bootstrapped phylogenetic tree obtained using clustal x and neighbor joining method, and drawn using phylodraw programs. bootstrapping is performed with random number generated seed 111 and number of trials in bootstrap 1000. the two basic groups, a and b, are represented in yellow and blue, respectively. types obtained according to the nine genome loci (9,404, 17,564, 22,222, 27,827 / 3,852, 9,479, 11,493, 21,721, 26,477) table 1 and figure 5 .as compared to genotype clustering of sars-cov covering the epidemics from 2002 to 2004 (7, 8) , it can be noticed that the grouping we proposed was at most in accordance with it. namely, the following correspondence between the two grouping schemes may be established: firstly, genotype class cgcc/tccat (covering b2 and b3 subgroups), corresponded to human patients' isolates from the early phase 2002-2003 (zs, hsz, gd01, gz02-guangzhou, china), and palm civet isolates (sz3, sz16-hong kong).secondly, genotype class tgcc/ttcgt, tgcc/ttcat (small part of a1 group), as well as cgcc/ttcat (b1 group), corresponded to human patients middle phase 2002-2003 (positions 3,852, 9,479, 11,493, 26,477 the two basic groups, a and b, were rather contiguously mapped onto the phylogenetic tree, showing a high degree of accordance among the proposed grouping and the phylogenetic relationships. exceptions represented the two isolates of the b4 group, with large number of snvs and individual insertions (zmy 1, zj01), as well as the two isolates of the bl group (shanghai qxc1 and qxc2), all of which being at large root-distances ( figure s10 ).dataset nucleotide sequences of 103 sars-cov complete genomes were taken from the pubmed ncbi entrez database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez) in genbank and fasta formats. since there were 7 pairs of nucleotide-identical isolates, we considered the dataset to consist of 96 isolates (tables 1 and  s1 ). all the sequences are between 29,013 (shang-haiqxc2) and 29 the clustal x program, version 1.83 (42) has been applied to all the isolates from the dataset. the overall clustal x output had length of 29,903 nt. then 5' utr and 3' utr were identified based on positions in annotated isolates. coding region encompassed the interval (301, 29,528), and had the length of 29,228 nt.we developed a program in perl language for analysis of a clustal x output. the program first calculated an "average" isolate, the so called "profile" , by counting, for each position in the clustal x output, the number of occurrences of each different letter (including dash), and by choosing the most represented one; positions containing dashes in the "profile" are called "empty positions", all the others being "non-empty" ones. the program then counted snvs, indels, and calculated their absolute and relative positions, for every isolate with respect to the "profile", and for different genome regions (orfs, 5' utr, 3' utr, and igrs).substitution rate for the sars-cov genome and for the s protein for all the sequences in the dataset was calculated by dividing the total number of snv sites by the length of the corresponding nucleotide sequence; non-synonymous substitution rate for the s protein was calculated by dividing the total number of non-synonymous snv sites by the length of the s protein.the entropy of each site has been calculated based on number of snvs at that site, in order to estimate the sites' conserveness. if we denote by p(b)-probability of occurrence of the nucleotide b (b being a, c, g, or t), and under assumption of sites being independent, we calculated the entropy of positions by the following formula (43): e = -sum p(6)* log[p(6)] (sum over b). in this definition, p(b)* log[p (6) ] is taken to be zero if p(6) = 0.the first type of classification was performed the same way as in pavlovic-lazetic et al (37) . it is based on genome polymorphism (snvs and indels). the distribution of isolates per snv numbers (outside 5', 3'utrs) was analyzed and the isolates were primarily classified into two groups-isolates with "small" number of snvs and isolates with "large" number of snvs. the isolates "close to border" were further tested (on the number of snvs) against the profile isolates of each of the two groups, resulting in some isolates changing the group. a sub-classification was then performed on the presence of long or short in-dels inside each of the two groups.the second type of classification was performed based on contents of the most represented snv sites. except for earlier identified positions (9, 404, 17, 564, 22, 222, 27, 827) classifying isolates into tttt/cgcc genotypes (38, 39) , some other positions (genotypes) were identified as potential bases for subclassification.in order to compare the two classification schemes developed, with the existing programming systems for phylogenetic analysis, phylogenetic bootstrapped tree was produced using clustal x program and the neighbor joining (nj) method. the nj method, as well as parsimony and the probabilistic models, produces unrooted trees. in order to produce the consensus tree, bootstrapping is performed with random number generated seed 111 and number of trials in bootstrap 1000. the tree is drawn using the phylo-draw program (44) and the proposed classification schemes were mapped onto it.annotation and analysis of the s protein all the s protein sequences (those extracted from annotated isolates and the others we annotated using the publicly available program from pubmed tools for data mining; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ gorf/gorf.html) have been aligned using clustal x program. then the s protein was analyzed using the same methods as for the complete isolates.non-synonymous nucleotide substitution per nonsynonymous site (ka) and synonymous nucleotide substitution per synonymous site (ks) were calculated using the dnasp 4.0 program (45) . it is based on a method defined by nei and gojovori (46) that estimates the numbers of synonymous and nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions between two dna sequences by counting the number of such substitutions in the corresponding pairs of codons. it also takes into account different evolutionary pathways between pairs of codons. the dnasp program may run with or without an outgroup. the ratio ka/ks is considered as a selection parameter (ka/ks > 1 is usually interpreted as an indicator of positive selection). the coefficients ka, ks, as well as the ratio ka/ks were calculated first for the s protein in all the isolates in the dataset, without an outgroup. since among the 91 isolates there were 89 human patients' isolates and 2 palm civet isolates (sz3, sz16), we then calculated the ka and ks coefficients and the ratio ka/ks for the 89 human patients' isolates only, without an outgroup, too. eventually, we ran the program for all the human patients' isolates and each of the palm civet isolates as the outgroup, in order to test the hypothesis that the s gene was subjected to positive selection during virus transmission from animals to humans.severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), potentially fatal atypical pneumonia, first appeared in guangdong province of china in november 2002 and soon afterward, within six months, spreaded all over the world (30 countries including china, singapore, vietnam, canada, and usa), killing more than 700 people (1) . in less than four weeks after the global outbreak, a novel member of coronaviridae family, namely sars coronavirus (sars-cov), was identified in the blood of respiratory specimens and stools of sars patients, and confirmed as the causative agent of disease according to the koch postulates (2) . soon afterwards, first fully sequenced genomes of viral isolates were published (3, 4) . in 2005 the number of fully sequenced viral isolates exceeds one hundred (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez). sars-cov probably originated due to genetic exchange (recombination) and/or mutations between viruses with different host specificities (5, 6) . since coronaviruses are known to relatively easily jump among species, it was hypothesized that the new virus might have originated from wild animals. the analysis of sars-cov proteins supports and suggests possible past recombination event between mammalianlike and avian-like parent viruses (6) . common sequence variants define three distinct genotypes of the sars-cov: one linked with animal [palm civet (paguma larvata)] sars-like viruses and early human phase, the other two linked with middle and late human phases, respectively (7, 8) . sars-cov has a deleterious mutation of 29 nucleotides relative to the palm civet virus, indicating that if there was direct transmission, it went from civet to human, because deletions occur probably more easily than insertions (5) . however, more recent reports indicate that sars-cov is distinct from the civet virus and it has not been answered so far whether the sars-cov originated from civet, or civet was infected from other species (9, 10) . the genome is relatively stable, since its mutation rate has been determined to be between 1.83×10 -6 and 8.26×10 -6 nucleotide substitutions per site per day (11) .the sars-cov genome is approximately 30 kb positive single strand rna that corresponds to polycistronic mrna, consisting of 5' and 3' untranslated regions (utrs), 13 to 15 open reading frames (orfs), and about 10 intergenic regions (igrs) (9, 12, 13) .its genome includes genes encoding two replicate polyproteins (rna-dependant-rnapolymerase, i.e., pp 1a and pp 1ab), encompassing two-thirds of the genome, and a set of orfs at 3' end that code for four structural proteins: surface spike (s) glycoprotein (1,256 a.a.), envelope (e, 77 a.a.), matrix (m, 222 a.a.), and nucleocapsid (n, 423 a.a.) proteins. it also encodes for additional 8-9 predicted orfs whose protein product functions are still under investigation (14; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez).the s protein is the main surface antigen of the sars-cov and is involved in virus attachment on susceptible cells using mechanism similar to those of class i fusion proteins. the receptor for the sars-cov s protein is identified as angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace-2), which is a metallopeptidase (15) . the receptor-binding domain (rbd) has been determined to lay between a.a. postions 270-625 in recent studies (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) .several epitope sites, defined by polyclonal or monoclonal antibodies, have been identified on the s protein, depending on experimental conditions, all lying within wide or narrow regions between a.a. 12-1,192 (20-31) . defining conserved immunodominant epitope regions of the s protein is of crucial importance for future anti-sars vaccine development.the main goal of this work was twofold: to perform mutation analysis of sars-cov viral genomes, with special attention to the s protein; and to group them according to different aspects of sequence similarity, eventually pointing to phylogeny and epidemiological dynamics of sars-cov.nucleotide content nucleotide content of sars-cov isolates favors t and a nucleotides. the corresponding percentages of letters in non-utr regions of all the 96 isolates were found to be as follows: t (30.7940%), a (28.4246%), g (20.8121%), c (19.9535%), n (g, a, t, c; 0.0143%), r (pur; 0.0005%), k (g or t; 0.0001%), m (a or c; 0.0002%), s (g or c; 0.0001%), w (a or t; 0.0002%), and y (pyr; 0.0004%). the overall ratio of (a,t)/(g,c) in the dataset was almost 3:2 (1.45). the ratio of pur vs. pyr nucleotides was almost 1 (0.97).the distribution of nucleotides (nt) over sequences of length 250 nt is given in figure s1 (supporting online material). it exhibits three peak-regions of t nucleotide in the second quarter of the genome (orf 1a), and rather stable behavior in the third quarter of the genome (orf 1b), as also observed by pyrc et al (32) for a group of coronaviruses (hcov-nl63, hcov-229e, sars-cov, and hcov-oc43). deviation of percentage of nucleotides over 250-nt blocks from the corresponding percentage in the whole dataset is given in figure s2 . except for 3' utr where t nucleotide is underrepresented with even about -13%, the highest excess from the average is about +10% in four peaks, which is exhibited again by t nucleotide, three of them being between positions 7,000 and 11,000 (orf 1a), complementary with the nucleotide a represented with -10%, and the fourth one in the s protein. otherwise the nucleotides' offset oscillates rather regularly between -5% and +5% from the average.all the isolates had high degree of nucleotide identity (more than 99% pair wise). still, they could be differentiated on the basis of their genome polymorphism, i.e., the number and sites of snvs and insertions and deletions (indels). analysis of genomic polymorphism of the isolates resulted in the following two facts (tables 1, s1, and s2). firstly, two isolates, hsr 1 and as, coincided with the "profile" on all the "non-empty" positions (see materials and methods) up to the poly-a sequence. secondly, three isolates had large number of undefined nucleotides (n), either as contiguous segments (sin3408 in orfs 8a, 8b; sin3408l in orf 1b), or as scattered individual nucleotides or short clusters (sinp2) ( table s2 ). isolate sin3408 was the only one that has a 34-nt longer 5' utr as compared with the "profile". thus these three isolates were not considered to be reliably compared with others. shaded entries correspond to annotated isolates. identification (label and id) is given in accordance with the labels and identifiers from table s1. the four snvs columns correspond to: the total number of snvs, the number of snvs in genes, in 5' and 3' utrs, and in igr. the seven columns named indels include the number of deletions at the 5' end (5' del), the length of long insertions (longins) and long deletions (longdel), the number and length of short insertions (shortins) and short deletions (shortdel) in the form a × b where b denotes the length and a denotes the number of occurrences, the number of deletions at the 3' end (3' del), and the length of a poly-a sequence at the 3' end (3' poly-a). classification includes two columns. the type column corresponds to the nine-locus nucleotides that are given in the form nnnn/nnnnn and represent nucleotides at (relative to clustal x output) positions 9,420, 17,604, 222,274, 27,891 / 3,861, 9,495, 11,514, 21,773, 26,534, respectively (absolute hsr 1 positions 9,404, 17,564, 22,222, 27,827 / 3,852, 9,479, 11,493, 21,721, 26,477) . the last column, group, reflects grouping of isolates.there were 446 snv sites and 1,006 snvs in total in the dataset, with the substitution rate 1.49%, which is about three times higher (both the number of snvs and the substitution rate) than the corresponding findings (33) for 17 isolates. an average number of snvs per isolate was 10.48, giving an error rate of 3.6×10 -4 substitutions per nucleotide copied.there was only one site with multiple base substitutions (the original nucleotide base on that position being t): at the relative (clustal x) position 8,441 (orf 1a), isolate zmy 1 has the nucleotide c (absolute position 8,403), and isolates shanghaiqxc1, shanghaiqxc2 have the nucleotide a (absolute positions 8,312 and 7,733, respectively).the smallest distance between the two neighboring snv sites in the whole dataset was 1; the largest one was 23,988 (in case of tw3 and tw1), while an average distance between the neighboring snv sites in the whole dataset was 1,987 positions ( figure s3 ). the distribution of isolates per snv number (outside 5', 3' utrs) showed regularity for up to 11 snvs (almost gaussian distribution) and irregular decrease for number of snvs >11 ( figure s4 ). thus the number of snvs less than or equal to 11 per isolate was considered as a "small" number of snvs, and the number of snvs greater than 11 was considered as a "large" number of snvs. most snvs are clustered within two regions in orf la and one region at the 3' end of the viral genome that predominantly consists of small orfs, leaving two small regions within orf 1a, and a region that corresponds to orf 1b as the most conservative ones ( figure 1b) .the entropy of each genome nucleotide position was calculated, showing that the most conserved sites are the ones with the smallest entropy and that the least conserved sites are the ones with the highest entropy (34; figure s5 ). the nine loci used for classification can be found among the sites with the highest entropy. analysis of the sars-cov genome showed that long indels were concentrated close to the 3' end (except for the 579-nt deletion in the shanghaiqxc2 isolate at the position 5,834, located in orf 1a), while indi- firstly, although the sars-cov genome has the established length of 29,727 nt (12), most isolates were shorter at the 5' end (for the first 15 positions, majority of isolates were "empty"), and had various length "poly-a" strings at the 3' end, or both (table  1) . several isolates had some short deletions inside the sequence, e.g., sin2677, sin2748, twc, pumc02, pumc03, twj, whu, sino1-11, sino3-11, tw11, and sinp5.secondly, there was a group of isolates that had insertions of length 29 nucleotides (gd01, sz3, sz16, gz02, hsz-bb, hsz-bc, hsz-cb, and hsz-cc) at the relative position 27,995 (absolute position 27,869 in sz3, sz16, hsz-cc, and hsz-bc; protein bgi-pup gz29-nt-ins, orf 8a). two of them were isolates from palm civet (sz3 and sz16) and the other six were isolates from human patients. this specific insertion is also treated as a deletion in all the other isolates, evolved from this early group (10) . figure 3 ).fourthly, a large number of individual indels were identified in zj01, zmy 1, sinp2, and sinp3 (tables 1 and s2, figure 3 ).while the distribution of nucleotides over different distances from snv sites did not exhibit any regularities, the distribution of different nucleotides on distance 1 left to snv sites (-1) did exhibit significant difference from their overall percentage in the dataset. the corresponding right (+1) distance distribution of nucleotides is almost uniform ( table 2 ). figure s7 represents differences between the percentage of nucleotides at a given position and in the whole genome, for up to the distance 10 left and right from snv sites. figures s8a and b represent distribution of substitutions preceded by different nucleotide bases, and followed by different nucleotide bases, respectively. it can be seen that on the substitutions, both are favored by the preceding a and the following t (almost 40% of all the substitutions; figure 2 ), while the substitution is almost prohibited by the preceding t (only 3%). clustered substitutions of length 2 are rare the distribution of nucleotides on distance 1 left to snv sites (-1) and right to snv sites (+1) is presented in total number of nucleotides, percentage, and difference from their overall percentage in the dataset.analysis of distribution of individual nucleotides over the three codon positions in annotated orfs of all the annotated isolates showed that, except for short proteins such as e, m, and presumptive orfs, all the codons exhibit the same tendency of t nucleotide dominating at the third codon position, and the g nucleotide dominating at the first codon position, while a and c appearing more often at the second codon position than elsewhere. figure s9 represents distribution of nucleotides over the three codon positions in individual orfs, and in total.analysis of codon usage demonstrated the same facts as the distribution of nucleotides over the three codon positions. in total, the third nucleotide favored t (40.10%) over a (24.83%), c (18.90%), and g (16.16%). it was especially true for four-codon families a.a. (thr, pro, ala, gly, and val). the same held for four-codon subsets of six-codon families (arg, leu, and ser), differring at the third codon position only. the above was true for the orf lab, s and n proteins, but not for another two structural proteins (e and m). the codon usage for sars-cov genome proteins is represented by table s3 , and it is consistent with the results obtained for another human cov genome, hcov-nl63 (32) .besides the number of snvs, isolates differed in positions of snvs, too. table s4 represents there were 31 synonymous multiple substitution sites and 60 non-synonymous ones, with substitution rate 0.31% (91/29,228) and non-synonymous substitution rate 0.21%, which is consistent with the corresponding findings for 17 sasr-cov isolates (33) . the number of multiple substitutions was for about 30% lower than the number of the overall substitutions, and so were the substitution rate and nonsynonymous substitution rate. table s5 summarizes the above findings. it represents the number of transition and transversion sites and the number of snvs (in the form n 1 /n 2 ) per position in codon and per mutation type, as well as the percentage of snvs, and the number of silent mutation sites and silent snvs.concerning non-synonymous sites, 35 (only for two-or-more substitution sites, and only in annotated isolates).the s protein is of particular interest for mutation analysis, being the key for host range determination. multiple sequence alignment of the s protein in all the 96 sars-cov isolates showed that five of them, namely zmy 1, sinp2, sinp3, sinp4, and sin3408l, had large discrepancies with all the others due to individual insertions or deletions in them. since such significant mismatches in the s protein sequence seemed to be the result of erroneous sequencing, we eliminated these five isolates and analyzed the s protein in the remaining 91 isolates.there were 34 isolates without snvs in the s protein: tw2-tw11, sino3-ll, as, lc1, whu, twc3, pumc01-pumc03, cuhk-ag01, cuhk-ag3, taiwan tc1-3, twc, sin2748, sin2500, sin2677,  cuhk-su10, hku-39849, twh, twj, twk, twy, and hsr 1. there were 62 snv sites with 208 snvs in total, and no multiple mutations. table s6 represents snv sites and all the snvs in the s protein of the 91 isolates, along with nucleotides, type of mutation (transition/transversion), a.a. position in the protein, a.a. change, a.a. properties change, nucleotide position in codon, and number of snvs at each snv site. these findings overlap with the results reported in song et al (ref. 7; concerning snvs with multiple occurrences, in 103 s protein genes, some of which being nucleotide-identical, with 80% in common with our dataset), and are consistent on the intersecting data. table 3 summarizes the results from  table s6 .s proteins in 91 isolates are considered. the number of transition and transversion sites and the number of snvs (in the form n 1 /n 2 ) per position in codon and per mutation type, as well as the percentage of snvs, and the number of silent mutation sites and silent snvs (in the form n 1 /n 2 ), are presented.out of 62 snv sites, 19 were observed to be synonymous, with 58 synonymous snvs in total, and 43 were observed to be non-synonymous substitution sites, with 150 non-synonymous snvs in total (table  s6) . substitution rate was 1.65% (62/3,768) and nonsynonymous substitution rate was 1.14% (43/3,768), which is consistent with findings for the whole genome in the enlarged dataset, and is about three times table 4 . these values indicated that the s gene was subjected to the darwinian selection during virus evolution (transmission from animals to humans), which is consistent with the analysis performed by yeh et al (36) , for 28 human isolates and the sz3 palm civet as the outgroup, giving the corresponding ratio value of 1.657, and with the analysis performed by he et al (8) , indicating that the s gene showed the strongest positive selection pressures initially, with eventual stabilization. phylogenetic tree, drawn using the phylodraw program for the clustal x output of aligning the 96 isolates, is represented in figure 5 . its close relationship to the classification proposed in the paper suggests that classification of sars-cov isolates might be obtained by applying the computational analysis based on genome polymorphism. all the isolates were classified according to their genome polymorphism-snvs and indels, the procedure being proposed in our previous paper (57). since snv contents turned out to be a more distinguishable property than the presence of indels, as the first classification criterion we took the number and positions of snvs. for the "profile" isolate, as the referent isolate, number of snvs for different isolates varied from 0 (hsr 1, as) to 78 (zmy 1) ( table 1) . all the isolates were classified into two groups based on the number of snvs with the "profile"-those with less than or equal to 11 snvs, and those having more than 11 snvs. thus, the first classification criterion resulted in two groups (table 1) :group a-isolates with less than or equal to 11 snvs (tables 1 and s2) ;group b-isolates with more than 11 snvs relative to the "profile" isolate.positions of snvs moved several isolates between the two groups (sod from b to a, since the most of its snvs are in 3' utr; cuhk-w1 from a to b, since its number of snvs with the "profile" of the a group is larger than the one of the b group; whu from b to a; gz50 from a to b; gd69 from b to a; and gz-c from b to a).the second classification criterion was presence and position of long indels inside the basic a, b groups. we identified the following subgroups:a2, b2-subgroups of the a, b groups, respectively, with long insertions. a2 remained empty, while b2 contained 8 isolates with 29-nt insertions.a3, b3-subgroups of the a, b groups, respectively, with long deletions. a3 group consisted of 3isolate subgroup (lc2, lc3, and lc5) with a deletion of length 386, sin852 with a deletion of length 57, 2isolates subgroup (gz-b and gz-c) with a deletion of length 39, sin849 (deletion of length 49, embedded), and sin846 (137, overlapping). b3 subgroup consisted of the isolates zs-a (zs-b) and zs-c with the deletion of length 53.a4 and b4 were the subgroups with many individual indels ( table 1 ). the rests of the a, b groups were denoted as a1 and b1, respectively.it can be noted that proposed grouping of 96 isolates, based on snv and indel contents, conserved the earlier classification t-t-t-t/c-g-c-c (38) , and partially coincided with the extension of this classification (39, 40) . the four loci (9,404, 17,564, 22,222, and 27,827) , as the basis for this classification, fitted nicely into our grouping (basically a1 group coincided with t-t-t-t type, while b1 group coincided with c-g-c-c type), expressing two inter-types: t-g-c-c [isolates gz50, hzs2-d, hzs2-e, hzs2-c, hgz8l2, hsz2-a, ns-1(bj04), hzs2-fc, hzs2-fb, and tjf] and c-g-t-t (isolates shanghaiqxc1 and shang-haiqxc2) ( figure 5 ). we found that another five loci, which are among the most represented snvs' loci (po- there were two basic nine-locus types: tttt/ttcgg and cgcc/ttcat, mostly coinciding with the a1, b1 groups, and the two intergroups: an inter-(a-b)-group had the inter-type tgcc/ttcgt, and a subgroup of the group b1 (two shanghai isolates) represented another intertype cgtt/ttcgt ( figure 5 ). the proposed extension to the two main sequence variants (tttt, cgcc) for an enlarged set of isolates, is in accordance with the new insights into possible epidemiological spread, both in space and time (36, 38, 41) . grouping of isolates is based on genome polymorphism, and classification is based on nine distinguished loci, mapped onto the bootstrapped phylogenetic tree obtained using clustal x and neighbor joining method, and drawn using phylodraw programs. bootstrapping is performed with random number generated seed 111 and number of trials in bootstrap 1000. the two basic groups, a and b, are represented in yellow and blue, respectively. types obtained according to the nine genome loci (9,404, 17,564, 22,222, 27,827 / 3,852, 9,479, 11,493, 21,721, 26,477) table 1 and figure 5 .as compared to genotype clustering of sars-cov covering the epidemics from 2002 to 2004 (7, 8) , it can be noticed that the grouping we proposed was at most in accordance with it. namely, the following correspondence between the two grouping schemes may be established: firstly, genotype class cgcc/tccat (covering b2 and b3 subgroups), corresponded to human patients' isolates from the early phase 2002-2003 (zs, hsz, gd01, gz02-guangzhou, china), and palm civet isolates (sz3, sz16-hong kong).secondly, genotype class tgcc/ttcgt, tgcc/ttcat (small part of a1 group), as well as cgcc/ttcat (b1 group), corresponded to human patients middle phase 2002-2003 (positions 3,852, 9,479, 11,493, 26,477 the two basic groups, a and b, were rather contiguously mapped onto the phylogenetic tree, showing a high degree of accordance among the proposed grouping and the phylogenetic relationships. exceptions represented the two isolates of the b4 group, with large number of snvs and individual insertions (zmy 1, zj01), as well as the two isolates of the bl group (shanghai qxc1 and qxc2), all of which being at large root-distances ( figure s10 ).dataset nucleotide sequences of 103 sars-cov complete genomes were taken from the pubmed ncbi entrez database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez) in genbank and fasta formats. since there were 7 pairs of nucleotide-identical isolates, we considered the dataset to consist of 96 isolates (tables 1 and  s1 ). all the sequences are between 29,013 (shang-haiqxc2) and 29 the clustal x program, version 1.83 (42) has been applied to all the isolates from the dataset. the overall clustal x output had length of 29,903 nt. then 5' utr and 3' utr were identified based on positions in annotated isolates. coding region encompassed the interval (301, 29,528), and had the length of 29,228 nt.we developed a program in perl language for analysis of a clustal x output. the program first calculated an "average" isolate, the so called "profile" , by counting, for each position in the clustal x output, the number of occurrences of each different letter (including dash), and by choosing the most represented one; positions containing dashes in the "profile" are called "empty positions", all the others being "non-empty" ones. the program then counted snvs, indels, and calculated their absolute and relative positions, for every isolate with respect to the "profile", and for different genome regions (orfs, 5' utr, 3' utr, and igrs).substitution rate for the sars-cov genome and for the s protein for all the sequences in the dataset was calculated by dividing the total number of snv sites by the length of the corresponding nucleotide sequence; non-synonymous substitution rate for the s protein was calculated by dividing the total number of non-synonymous snv sites by the length of the s protein.the entropy of each site has been calculated based on number of snvs at that site, in order to estimate the sites' conserveness. if we denote by p(b)-probability of occurrence of the nucleotide b (b being a, c, g, or t), and under assumption of sites being independent, we calculated the entropy of positions by the following formula (43): e = -sum p(6)* log[p(6)] (sum over b). in this definition, p(b)* log[p (6) ] is taken to be zero if p(6) = 0.the first type of classification was performed the same way as in pavlovic-lazetic et al (37) . it is based on genome polymorphism (snvs and indels). the distribution of isolates per snv numbers (outside 5', 3'utrs) was analyzed and the isolates were primarily classified into two groups-isolates with "small" number of snvs and isolates with "large" number of snvs. the isolates "close to border" were further tested (on the number of snvs) against the profile isolates of each of the two groups, resulting in some isolates changing the group. a sub-classification was then performed on the presence of long or short in-dels inside each of the two groups.the second type of classification was performed based on contents of the most represented snv sites. except for earlier identified positions (9, 404, 17, 564, 22, 222, 27, 827) classifying isolates into tttt/cgcc genotypes (38, 39) , some other positions (genotypes) were identified as potential bases for subclassification.in order to compare the two classification schemes developed, with the existing programming systems for phylogenetic analysis, phylogenetic bootstrapped tree was produced using clustal x program and the neighbor joining (nj) method. the nj method, as well as parsimony and the probabilistic models, produces unrooted trees. in order to produce the consensus tree, bootstrapping is performed with random number generated seed 111 and number of trials in bootstrap 1000. the tree is drawn using the phylo-draw program (44) and the proposed classification schemes were mapped onto it.annotation and analysis of the s protein all the s protein sequences (those extracted from annotated isolates and the others we annotated using the publicly available program from pubmed tools for data mining; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ gorf/gorf.html) have been aligned using clustal x program. then the s protein was analyzed using the same methods as for the complete isolates.non-synonymous nucleotide substitution per nonsynonymous site (ka) and synonymous nucleotide substitution per synonymous site (ks) were calculated using the dnasp 4.0 program (45) . it is based on a method defined by nei and gojovori (46) that estimates the numbers of synonymous and nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions between two dna sequences by counting the number of such substitutions in the corresponding pairs of codons. it also takes into account different evolutionary pathways between pairs of codons. the dnasp program may run with or without an outgroup. the ratio ka/ks is considered as a selection parameter (ka/ks > 1 is usually interpreted as an indicator of positive selection). the coefficients ka, ks, as well as the ratio ka/ks were calculated first for the s protein in all the isolates in the dataset, without an outgroup. since among the 91 isolates there were 89 human patients' isolates and 2 palm civet isolates (sz3, sz16), we then calculated the ka and ks coefficients and the ratio ka/ks for the 89 human patients' isolates only, without an outgroup, too. eventually, we ran the program for all the human patients' isolates and each of the palm civet isolates as the outgroup, in order to test the hypothesis that the s gene was subjected to positive selection during virus transmission from animals to humans.die erfolgreiche therapie von infektionskrankheiten setzt in vielen fällen eine sachgerecht durchgeführte mikrobiologische diagnostik voraus. dabei werden die diagnostischen möglichkeiten im klinisch-mikrobiologischen labor entscheidend von der präanalytik beeinflusst. sie wird ergänzt durch die bestimmung klinisch-chemischer parameter, die häufig erst den anlass für eine entsprechende weitere diagnostik geben.im rahmen der infektionsprävention und zur dokumentation einer einwandfreien medizinprodukteaufbereitung werden untersuchungen von unbelebten materialien wie wasser, luft, oberflächen oder kontaminierten prüfkörpern durchgeführt.in allen fällen sollte auf eine standardisierte probenentnahme geachtet werden. dies beginnt bei der auswahl geeigneter transportgefäße, setzt sich fort in der korrekten entnahme und -falls notwendig -lagerung des materials und endet mit dem möglichst raschen transport in das labor.die gewinnung mikrobiologischer proben ist ein wichtiger schritt in der diagnosti k und therapie von infektionskrankheiten. fehler, die bei der probengewinnung gemacht werden, kann auch das beste labor nicht ausgleichen. nicht selten werden im klinischen alltag proben eingeschickt, die keinen diagnostischen wert haben, z. b. oberflächliche abstriche von chronischen wunden.grundsätzlich sollten die angaben des labors, in das die proben versandt werden, beachtet werden. dieses sollte detaillierte angaben zu probengewinnung, -lagerung und -transport in einem kompendium zur präanalytik zur verfügung stellen. in zweifelsfällen sollte, insbesondere bei schwer zu gewinnenden proben, bereits vor entnahme kontakt mit dem labor aufgenommen werden. beachtet werden sollten insbesondere hinweise zu folgenden punkten (schoerner et al. 2009 das anforderungsformular sollte sorgfältig ausgefüllt werden und neben den persönlichen daten des patienten auch folgende informationen liefern (schoerner et al. 2009 , rüden et al. 1989 : 5 art der probe 5 angaben zum einsender, v. a. bei notfallproben inkl. telefon-oder funkernummer 5 entnahmeort 5 entnahmezeitpunkt 5 klinische (verdachts-)diagnose bzw. symptome 5 infektiologisch relevante angaben zum patienten, z. b. fieber, immunsuppression, schwangerschaft, therapie mit antiinfektiva, immunglobulinen oder zytostatika 5 fragestellung, gewünschte untersuchungen 5 bei hygienisch-mikobiologischen untersuchungen z. b. angaben zur aufstellung von sedimentationsplatten oder luftkeimsammlern, entnahmeort von trinkwasserproben, ggf. gemessene physikalisch-chemische parameter wie ph-wert oder temperatur.es muss an dieser stelle darauf hingewiesen werden, dass das korrekte ausfüllen der anforderungsformulare keine bürokratische fleißaufgabe ist. vielmehr beeinflussen die angaben auch die verarbeitung des materials, die beurteilung der untersuchungsergebnisse sowie die erstellung der befundinterpretation. mikrobiologische proben sollten vor beginn einer antibiotischen therapie entnommen werden. hierdurch darf es jedoch nicht zur verzögerung des therapiebeginns bei kritisch kranken, insbesondere bei schwerer sepsis und septischem schock, kommen.proben sollten stets so schnell wie möglich ins labor transportiert werden, idealerweise innerhalb von 2 h. der transport erfolgt grundsätzlich bei raumtemperatur. es werden immer kürzere turnaround-zeiten durch den einsatz moderner diagnostischer verfahren gefordert, die oft hohe kosten verursachen. die transportdauer von mikrobiologischen proben, die erheblich zur gesamtdauer der diagnostik beiträgt, sollte jedoch ebenfalls immer wieder kritisch beurteilt werden. proben sollten an zentralen orten, z. b. am pflegestützpunkt, gesammelt werden. für den transport sind die proben so zu verpacken, dass eine kontamination der umgebung oder eine gefährdung des transportpersonals ausgeschlossen werden kann. erforderlich sind neben einem stabilen, auslaufsicheren probengefäß (primärverpackung) ein schutzgefäß (sekundärverpackung) sowie eine außenverpackung, davon muss eine ebenfalls auslaufsicher und mit einer saugfähigen einlage ausgestattet sein.für den postversand von klinischen proben zur mikrobiologischen diagnostik ist gemäß der verpackungsanweisung p650 für den transport diagnostischer proben nach un-nr. 3373 neben dem probengefäß und dem schutzgefäß mit saugfähiger einlage ein transportkarton mit entsprechender kennzeichnung erforderlich: »biologischer stoff, kategorie b« oder »biological substance, category b« und die bezeichnung »un 3373« in einer raute (europäisches übereinkommen über die internationale beförderung gefährlicher güter auf der straße).eine längere lagerung der probe sollte nur dann stattfinden, wenn ein rascher transport nicht möglich ist. die lagerung führt zur verfälschung von untersuchungsergebnissen durch das absterben besonders empfindlicher keime und durch änderungen der quantitativen zusammensetzung der vorgefundenen keime. daraus können sowohl falsch-negative als auch falsch-positive befunde entstehen. zur richtigen lagerung der proben gibt es nur wenige wissenschaftliche untersuchungen, weshalb dem schnellen transport ins labor unbedingt vorrang einzuräumen ist. generell können die in . tab. 8.1 aufgeführten lagerungsbedingungen empfohlen werden. primär sterile materialien, die auch anspruchsvolle und empfindliche keime enthalten können, sollten bei raumtemperatur aufbewahrt werden. materialien, bei denen mit einer überwucherung durch flora zu rechnen ist, sollten dagegen gekühlt gelagert werden.bei klinischer symptomatik (pollakisurie, dysurie, flankenschmerzen, fieber) mit verdacht auf harn-wegsinfekt. zusätzlich bei rezidivierenden und nosokomialen harnwegsinfektionen, bei ausbleibender klinischer besserung unter antibiotikatherapie sowie bei fieber und sepsis unklarer genese, insbesondere bei kindern unter zwei jahren.ein generelles »urin-screening« klinisch unauffälliger patienten ist nicht gerechtfertigt. ausnahmen sind schwangere oder patienten vor interventionellen eingriffen der harnwege. gelegentlich wird zwei bis drei tage nach beginn der antimikrobiellen therapie eine routinekontrolle des urins zur überprüfung der wirksamkeit veranlasst. dies ist nicht sinnvoll und sollte unterbleiben. die beurteilung der therapieeffektivität erfolgt aufgrund klinischer kriterien. antigen-elisa weist jedoch einige schwächen bei der sensitivität auf. daher sollte als suchtest im antigen-elisa der glutamatdehydrogenase-(gdh-)nachweis erfolgen, der eine hohe sensitivität aufweist. ist dieser test positiv, muss jedoch ein toxin a/b-elisa oder eine entsprechende pcr angeschlossen werden, da die gdh als gemeinsames antigen auch bei nicht toxinproduzierenden c. difficile und anderen clostridien nachweisbar ist.aus der mitteilung, dass eine blutkultur positiv geworden ist, und dem ergebnis der untersuchung des grampräparats lassen sich häufig bereits erste schlüsse auf die ätiologie der erkrankung des patienten ziehen. zudem kann eine anpassung der antibiotikatherapie vorgenommen werden, insbesondere bei befunden, die in der empirischen therapie nicht unbedingt berücksichtigt werden (z. b. grampositive stäbchen bei listerieninfektion). die mikroskopischen befunde werden durch zusätzliche untersuchungsergebnisse, die direkt aus der bewachsenen blutkultur gewonnen wurden, untermauert (z. b. hinweis für mrsa oder n. meningitidis). der gleichzeitige nachweis desselben erregers in einer blutkultur und an der katheterspitze gilt als hinweis auf das vorliegen einer katheterassoziierten blutstrominfektion. viele dieser erkrankungen werden durch eine bakterienart verursacht. sie betreffen in der regel definierte hautschichten. tiefe infektionen sind nicht selten durch aerob-anaerobe mischinfektionen bedingt, die durch den relativen sauerstoffmangel ermöglicht werden. eine übersicht zeigt . tab. 8.4.toxische reaktionen der haut können durch bakterielle toxine bedingt sein. eine übersicht zeigt . tab. 8.5.hauterkrankungen durch viren treten entweder als lokalisierte infektionen oder als symptome systemischer viruserkrankungen in erscheinung. eine übersicht findet sich in . tab. 8.6.operationswunden werden im rahmen des eingriffs bzw. kurz danach mit bakterien besiedelt. einfache postoperative wundinfektionen verzögern in der regel die wundheilung und zeigen eine sachgerechte entnahme und hautdesinfektion vorausgesetzt, sind erregernachweise aus primär sterilen kompartimenten in der regel ätiologisch bedeutsam. in der kultur können typische erreger unterer atemwegsinfektionen wie pneumokokken, moraxella catarrhalis, haemophilus influenzae, enterobakterien oder pseudomonas aeruginosa gut angezüchtet werden. der nachweis in potenziell kontaminierten materialien korreliert häufig mit der klinik, die unterscheidung zwischen infektion und kolonisation muss jedoch in der zusammenschau aller befunde durch den kliniker erfolgen.beweisend ist hingegen der nachweis aus primär sterilen materialien, wie z. b. aus einem pleurapunktat oder einer blutkultur. bei spezifischen erregern, die physiologischerweise nicht im respirationstrakt vorkommen, wie beispielweise mycobacterium tuberculosis oder legionella pneumophila, weist der nachweis ebenfalls sehr sicher auf eine entsprechende infektion hin. serologische verfahren beruhen auf dem nachweis von spezifischen antikörpern oder erregerantigenen.antikörper werden bei kontakt mit entsprechenden antigenen mit einigen tagen bis wochen verzögerung gebildet, sodass sie in vielen fällen für die akute diagnostik nicht geeignet sind. aufgrund der einfachen materialgewinnung werden antikörperuntersuchungen jedoch häufig durchgeführt und sind für die beantwortung spezifischer fragestellungen auch sehr hilfreich. grundsätzlich kann beim nachweis einmalig erhöhter titer oder eines mindestens vierfachen titeranstiegs von einem ersten oder erneuten kontakt mit den erregern ausgegangen werden. auch die antikörperklassen sind, abhängig von der jeweiligen erkrankung, für die differenzialdiagnostik von großer bedeutung. in der regel werden bei akuten infektionen iga oder igm gebildet. indikationen für antikörperuntersuchungen sind: 5 ätiologische klärung von infektionen, insbesondere auch nach abklingen der entsprechenden klinischen symptome 5 nachweis bzw. ausschluss von folgeerkrankungen nach bakteriellen oder viralen infektionen, z. b. bei reaktiver arthritis, guillain-barré-syndrom oder erythema nodosum 5 klärung epidemiologischer fragestellungen einige mikrobielle antigene werden über den urin ausgeschieden, sodass sie dort nachgewiesen werden können. am häufigsten werden tests zum nachweis von legionella-und pneumokokken-antigenen angewandt.5 einfache probengewinnung 5 kurze untersuchungsdauer von etwa 15 min 5 antigene über mehrere tage auch unter antibiotikatherapie nachweisbar 5 relativ einfache handhabung, keine laborausrüstung notwendig 5 testkits meist lange haltbar.5 meist teurer als herkömmliche diagnostische methoden 5 liefern nur qualitative ergebnisse. das lipopolysaccharid (lps) aus der zellwand der bakterien ist bereits 24 h nach infektion nachweisbar und wird über wochen ausgeschieden. aufgrund der langfristigen ausscheidung ist der test nicht zur therapiekontrolle geeignet. da das antigen bei anderen bakterien nicht vorhanden ist, ergibt sich für alle kommerziell erhältlichen tests eine hohe spezifität von über 99,9 %. in den meisten tests werden jedoch nur antikörper gegen l. pneumophila serogruppe 1 verwendet, sodass für infektionen mit dieser serogruppe eine hohe sensitivität von 80 % bis zu über 97 % besteht. kreuzreaktionen zu anderen serogruppen kommen gelegentlich vor, weisen jedoch eine niedrige sensitivität auf. ein nachweis von infektionen durch non-pneumophila-spezies ist nicht möglich.infektionen durch l. pneumophila serogruppe 1 geeignet. sie verursachen mehr als 85 % der ambulant erworbenen und über 95 % der reiseassoziierten erkrankungen.nosokomiale infektionen hingegen sind zur hälfte durch andere serogruppen bedingt, daher sollten in diesem fall zusätzliche diagnostische methoden wie kulturelle und pcr-verfahren aus respiratorischen proben veranlasst werden. eine kulturelle anzucht ist auch bei epidemiologischen fragestellungen und gehäuftem auftreten von erkrankungen sinnvoll. der nachweis des legionella-antigens im urin ist beweisend für eine legionellenerkrankung. der test kann jedoch nicht nur bei einer legionellenpneumonie, sondern auch in fällen von pontiac-fieber positiv sein. da die antigenausscheidung variiert, ist eine legionellose bei einem negativen testergebnis nicht ausgeschlossen. bei anhaltendem klinischem verdacht sollte die untersuchung daher wiederholt werden.der nachweis von legionella-antigen im urin ist nach § 7 infektionsschutzgesetz meldepflichtig.das c-polysaccharid von streptococcus pneumoniae wird, vor allem bei bakteriämischen erkrankungsverläufen, im urin ausgeschieden. es sind auch testkits verfügbar, die den nachweis von pneumokokken in liquor, nasopharyngealen sekreten oder pleuraflüssigkeiten ermöglichen. der test ist als zusätzliches, schnelles diagnostisches verfahren bei der diagnose der ambulant erworbenen pneumonie von erwachsenen sinnvoll, wird jedoch in den s3-leitlinien zur ambulant erworbenen pneumonie (cap) und zur nosokomialen pneumonie nicht als routinediagnostik empfohlen, da pneumokokken im spektrum der antibiotischen therapie enthalten sind (höffken et al. 2009 , dalhoff et al. 2012 . kinder und kleinkinder sind in bis zu 20 % pneumokokkenträger, daher sind urin-antigentests bei ihnen häufig falsch-positiv.die sensitivität beträgt 50-80 %, die spezifität liegt bei über 90 %. der test ist damit als alleiniges verfahren ungeeignet und sollte durch kulturelle untersuchungen von respiratorischen materialien und blutkulturen ergänzt werden. dies ist auch sinnvoll, um eine resistenztestung durchführen zu können, da die verbreitung penicillin-resistenter stämme zunimmt.ein positiver befund kann zur fokussierung der antibiotischen therapie beitragen, wobei die möglichkeit falsch-positiver befunde und polymikrobieller infektionen zu bedenken sind. auf der anderen seite schließt ein negativer test eine pneumokokkenpneumonie nicht aus und sollte daher bei weiter bestehendem klinischem verdacht ggf. wiederholt bzw. durch weitere untersuchungen ergänzt werden.die diagnostik entzündlicher prozesse umfasst die analyse der leukozytenzahl und des differenzialblutbilds, der blutkörpersenkungsgeschwindigkeit und bei vorliegen septischer erkrankungen die analyse von parametern der gerinnungsaktivierung und fibrinolyse. darüber hinaus hat sich eine reihe von biomarkern zur diagnostik mikrobieller erkrankungen etabliert.das c-reaktive protein (crp) ist ein akute-phase-protein, dessen plasmakonzentrationen bei systemischen entzündungsreaktionen durch proinflammatorische zytokine wie interleukin-6 (il-6) stimuliert wird. es wird in der leber synthetisiert und gelangt über das plasma zum ort der entzündung. dort nimmt es als teil des angeborenen immunsystems an der immunabwehr teil. es kann potenziell toxisches material aus gewebeschädigungen oder strukturen von mikroorganismen binden. anschließend wird deren abräumung veranlasst.die crp-konzentrationen steigen im rahmen von infektiösen prozessen, aber auch bei gewebeschädigungen wie z. b. operativen eingriffen, bei malignen tumoren oder malignen systemerkrankungen sowie bei einigen autoimmunerkrankungen an.der referenzwert des crp liegt bei <5 mg/l und steigt innerhalb von 6 h nach beginn der infektion an. der maximalwert ist nach operativen eingriffen meist nach 48 h erreicht und fällt dann mit einer halbwertszeit von 24-48 h wieder ab. bei infektionskrankheiten können die werte ohne adäquate therapie für tage bis wochen erhöht sein. je nach infektionserreger bzw. krankheitsverlauf werden unterschiedliche typische crp-anstiege beobachtet (. tab. 8.9) . tät beobachtet werden (bouadma et al. 2010 , nobre et al. 2008 . da der gebrauch von antibiotika als starker trigger für die entwicklung (multi)resistenter bakterien gilt, ist dies ist aus krankenhaushygienischrt sicht sehr positiv zu werten. pct-basierte algorithmen haben sich auch bei infektionen der unteren atemwege als sehr hilfreich erwiesen. sie sind hier sowohl bei der indikationsstellung als auch bei der beendigung einer antibiotikatherapie sinnvoll einsetzbar. auch hier zeigen erste studien, dass es zu einer reduktion der antibiotikaanwendung kommt, ohne dass mortalität und outcome sich verschlechtern (schuetz et al. 2012 ).das lipopolysaccharid-bindende protein (lbp) bindet den lipid-a-anteil des lipopolysaccharids gramnegativer bakterien. erhöhte werte finden sich bei bakterieller sepsis und pilzsepsis, aber auch bei schweren traumata, nicht jedoch bei viralen infektionen. die kinetik entspricht der des crp.die proinflammatorischen zytokine tumornekrosefaktor-α (tnf-α), interleukin-6 (il-6) und interleukin-8 (il-8) sind sehr frühe marker für entzündungsreaktionen. sie sind diagnostisch wertvoll bei frühen verlaufsformen einer sepsis oder eines »systemic inflammatory response syndrome« (sirs) und werden sehr oft auch in der labordiagnostik einer schweren neonatalen infektion angewandt.tnf-α ist der früheste marker eines entzündungsprozesses, wobei eine weitere differenzierung bezüglich der ätiologie nicht möglich ist. es werden gesamt-tnf-α sowie ein freies bioakti- neben der analyse zahlreicher physikalischer und chemischer parameter muss badewasser auch mi-krobiologisch untersucht werden. die anforderungen an rein-und beckenwasser sind in einer norm zur aufbereitung von schwimm-und badebeckenwasser (din 19643-1:2012-11) nach den vorgaben der krinko-empfehlung »anforderungen an die hygiene bei der aufbereitung von medizinprodukten« (2012) muss eine technisch-physikalische validierung erfolgen, die durch den einsatz biologischer indikatoren nach din en iso 17665 ergänzt werden kann. eine mikrobiologische untersuchung wird daher in der regel nur noch bei speziellen fragestellungen durchgeführt.die desinfizierende wirkung einer waschmaschine, mit der krankenhauswäsche aufbereitet wird, sollte mindestens halbjährlich überprüft werden. dabei werden je maschine 5 mit enterococcus faecium kontaminierte wäscheläppchen zur schmutzwäsche gegeben und gewaschen. bewertung/anforderung: bei allen proben muss eine reduktion um mindestens 5 log10-stufen erfolgen.die reinigungs-und desinfektionsleistung von geschirrspülmaschinen sollte mindestens halbjährlich mithilfe von edelstahlplättchen, die mit rinderalbumin, mucin und maisstärke (rams) sowie enterococcus faecium beschichtet sind, überprüft werden.in din 10510 sind für mehrtanktransport-geschirrspülmaschinen zusätzlich abklatschuntersuchungen mithilfe von rodac-platten an mindestens 10 gespülten spülteilen sowie eine wasseranalyse des letzten reinigertanks vor der frischwasserklarspülung nach mindestens 30 min betriebszeit vorgesehen. in der praxis ist die aussagekraft von abklatschuntersuchungen deutlich eingeschränkt. wichtig ist, dass das spülgut optisch sauber ist und die maschine regelmäßig gereinigt und nach herstellerangaben gewartet wird. da das geschirr nach der letzten reinigung mit 80°c heißem wasser gespült wird, ist ein keimnachweis in der letzten reinigerflotte für die praxis ebenfalls wenig relevant.5 keimreduktion des prüfkeims um mindestens 5 log10-stufen 5 abklatschuntersuchungen (rodac):<5 kbe/10 cm 2 5 wasseranalyse: trinkwasserqualität nach trinkwasserverordnungsome ethicists assert that there is a consensus that maximising medical outcomes takes precedence as a principle of resource allocation in emergency triage of absolutely scarce resources. but the nature of the current severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 pandemic and the history of debate about balancing equity and efficiency in resource allocation do not support this assertion. i distinguish a number of concerns with justice and balancing considerations that should play a role in critical care triage policy, focusing on discrimination and on fundamental egalitarian and social justice concerns.some ethicists assert that there is a consensus in favour of maximising medical outcomes in emergency triage of absolutely scarce resources. 1 2 debate turns to the kind or kinds of outcome maximisation that should be adopted, for example, lives or life years, 1 2 and to whether the same principle also licenses resource reallocation. 3 equity considerations may be integrated into triage 1 but only if they do not interfere with the goal of maximising outcomes. i should it be a commonplace? should it apply to our response to critical care triage in the current severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) pandemic?decades ago, we could contrast the ethics of clinical care, with its focus on the good of a patient to whom the physician owes a special duty of care, against emergency triage and public health ethics, with their prioritisation of outcomes. 2 clinical practice is now shaped by considerations of 'good value' care, and the gap between clinical and triage ethics is less categorical. in other allocation processes, we balance maximising medical outcomes with various values. in health technology assessment, some form of values pluralism is reflected in multidimensional decision-making in many jurisdictions. 4 5 in organ allocation, despite the absolute scarcity of a lifesaving resource, need still plays a strong role and i every icu admission involves a judgment of need and a judgment of potential to benefit. even the most extreme outcome maximising triage proposal can be described as a modification of needs-based icu admission, to be applied only where there are too many patients of equal need. my discussion is about triage protocols adopted when existing standards for icu admission and the surge in demand for critical care resources present the healthcare system with a shortage. equity considerations are taken into account. 6 public health ethics, contrary to the claim of white and lo, 2 is informed by values beyond utilitarianism, [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] such as social justice and legitimacy in public policy. the latter is particularly important when we are at odds in our fundamental moral commitments about values like justice and outcome maximisation.triage of critical care resources in the sars-cov-2 pandemic shares some features with emergency triage and other features with resource allocation decisions in routine care. the situation is unprecedented, and we face momentary, absolute resource scarcity. however, the current situation is also going to be a prolonged one. public health has engaged the entire population in an outbreak response that fundamentally alters our day-to-day lives. that broader public health response takes into account values beyond outcome maximisation. a few countries (new zealand, vietnam 12 and some countries of sub-saharan africa 13 ) have maximised lives saved by immediately implementing containment. the goal of most countries has been to keep the outbreak within expanded critical care capacity. many countries are reopening despite ongoing community transmission.furthermore, the pandemic and our public health response expose disadvantaged groups to risks that raise justice concerns. consider two persons. one is a middle-aged person in good health with a life expectancy in their mid-80s, who can work from home with full salary and no threat to housing security. their home is spacious, well ventilated with little pollution, and they enjoy access to green space. they can pay to have necessities delivered. if they must have some contact with the public, they can afford measures to avoid household transmission.the second person is the same age but of lower socioeconomic status and works in precarious employment that cannot be done from home. they have either been designated essential or they cannot leave work because they have no resources to sustain unemployment. their housing is crowded, with poor ventilation and no green space; the pandemic increases their housing insecurity. they cannot afford temporary shelter apart from their family; the whole family faces a substantial risk of household transmission. government financial assistance may provide some relief, but it also saddles them with debt after the pandemic. they rely on public transit to get to and from work and for essential shopping. in many countries, they are disproportionately immigrants or members of racialised minorities and/or immigrant groups. 14 15 they are exposed to a greater risk of contracting covid-19 14 16 for the very reasons that they are at greater risk of chronic health conditions that may original research lower their likelihood of responding favourably to intensive care unit (icu) or organ support in the case of severe in the current pandemic, maximising outcomes in critical care triage may compound the injustices of the social determinants of health and have negative implications for equity of racialised groups. 18 19 concern with these inequities is at least consistent with public health ethics, if not also core to public health ethics. decades of work in resource allocation about balancing equity and efficiency should be brought to bear on critical care resource triage in a pandemic. iithe goal of maximising outcomes in the specific form of maximising lives saved seems highly morally plausible until one considers the unacceptable results of its pursuit at all costs. decades of research into public attitudes and of ethical debate [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] have explored three forms of justice in tension with outcome maximisation.i will label these forms of justice concerns as follows: the egalitarian concern to give everyone a chance, connected to a fundamental sense of human equality, 25 26 the non-discrimination concern to protect those at risk of discrimination and the social justice concern to address unjust health detriments, whether relating to natural (eg, ability or age) or social (eg, socioeconomic status or racialised identity) categories. i will also refer to procedural justice concerns and domain-specific fairness 27 for the distribution of a good. iii surveys of public and professional attitudes in the 1990s suggest that some persons are committed to maximising outcomes and other persons are committed to maximising equality by, for example, granting more livers in organ allocation to those less likely to benefit in order to improve equality of outcomes. this latter commitment is consistent with our approach to disabilities in many realms, and a positive argument for abandoning it in pandemic response, if there is one, must be made. many people can be described as 'balancers' who prefer distributions that give weight to both equity and efficiency. 22-24 28 29 the metaphor of 'balancing' as i use it here captures the idea that we resolve moral dilemmas by developing approaches that take into consideration multiple values: each value retains metaphorical weight, even when it does not dominate. when we cannot do as much good as we should in some dimension, we have responsibilities to limit and mitigate the harm this causes.in balancing conflicting values, risk and uncertainty come into play, specifically epistemic uncertainty, risk of bias and the moral irrelevance of small differences in risk. for example, in ii note that the hospital triage process is not the only prioritysetting question in pandemic response. we raise justice concerns when we prioritise hospital admission (assigning risk to caregivers and families in the community), balance tertiary-care surge-capacity preparation with continuing care sector preparedness and community public health response (testing and tracing for outbreak control), and decide which services are necessary and which characterised as elective can be safely postponed. we also ration personal protective equipment and will likely ration vaccines when they become available but are not yet plentiful. the broader public health response raises substantial justice questions that are beyond the scope of this paper. many of these other prioritisation questions will affect far more people than the subject of this paper. iii the interpretation and specification of each of these forms of justice are controversial, but they are still legitimate concerns in public policy. allocation dilemma research, balancers were willing to sacrifice equal chances for all in order to save a greater number of persons, but only where the difference in probability of benefit was substantial and where epistemic warrant for categorising individuals was good. in the process of balancing competing, important moral claims that could not all be maximised, they wanted decisive rather than marginal considerations to tip the scale.balancing considerations can also reflect an egalitarian concern that persons deserve an equal opportunity or deserve not to have their chance taken away because it is smaller than another's. that is, a balancer might readily agree to prioritise saving the most lives if the choice is between a person who has a 10% chance of survival and a person who has a 90% chance of survival. where the differences are smaller, it is plausible to reason that the differences in survival probability between two persons do not justify a categorical difference in treatment: for example, a person with a 45% and one with a 55% chance of survival both deserve an equal chance at their marginally different possibility of benefiting from access to icu.we may have reasons to be more or less sensitive to the size of difference in probability to benefit as it relates to concerns of discrimination, fundamental human equality or social justice. an epistemic metaconsideration that has long led people to adopt random selection (by lottery iv or by using time as a natural, but imperfect, randomiser in a wait list or first-come, first-served situation) is that it is both difficult and time consuming to categorise persons in fair ways. this is particularly difficult to accomplish under emergency conditions or conditions of competing resource claims. when considerations of procedural justice and the possibility of appeal come into play, the supposed efficiencies of acting to save the greatest number by applying defensible categories in a fair way may be lost.contrary to the argument of emanuel et al, 1 balancing competing values in resolving ethical dilemmas does not render 'illusory' our commitment to values that we compromise. compromise across deeply held, diverse moral values is essential to the legitimacy of pandemic policy.in this approach, medical criteria should be designed solely to maximise outcomes. bias would be detrimental to those subject to triage, and would also interfere with outcome maximisation.insofar as social injustice occurs because of bias and discrimination, non-discrimination also addresses some social justice concerns. however, it does not address all of them: the consistent application of criteria that exclude people with health detriments that are due to the social determinants of health compounds existing health injustices. neither does non-discrimination address the egalitarian or epistemic balancing concern that differences in probabilities must be substantial in order to dissuade us from treating everyone equally or from attending to social justice. these are not reasons to reject unbiased application of medical criteria, of course, but reasons to think that this solution is an incomplete response to concerns of justice.note that some concerns about discrimination are not about irrelevant criteria or inconsistent application of relevant criteria, but about a predetermined idea of persons against whom it is iv broome articulates the classic moral case for random selection, distinct from the argument for its use as a tie breaker in uncertainty. 32 impermissible to discriminate. as johnson points out, 18 no one has proposed prioritising women over men for icu admission, even where there has been evidence that men with covid-19 are less likely to survive. the grounds for this (in balancing considerations or in social justice concerns) must be made transparent and consistent with other groups for whom discrimination is a threat.another disadvantage is that consistent application of outcome-maximising criteria creates a relatively homogenous treatment pool, such that poor prognosis becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. as people with certain conditions are excluded from icu, the opportunity for healthcare providers to refine their management of persons with these conditions is lost, along with the opportunity to improve outcomes.in this section, i review several possible balancing solutions that reflect a willingness to sacrifice outcome maximisation for justice considerations.one way to give weight to social justice considerations is to refuse outcome-maximising criteria that further structural inequalities. that is, outcome-maximising criteria could be adopted only where they are neutral in distribution among categories relevant to justice, such as socioeconomic status, gender and racialised groups. triage protocols based on life expectancy or chronic multimorbidities may fail this test in relation to concerns about health inequities, as would the use of quality-adjusted life years in relation to disabled persons. if no such criteria can be found, then we can move to random allocation by lottery or time.another balancing approach would be to allow outcome maximisation to outweigh social justice considerations and fundamental egalitarian concerns, but only where the distinctions we apply make a substantial difference and the categories are homogeneous enough to warrant discrimination among individuals. note that the differences in odds of surviving critical care between groups are not 9-1. v preliminary uk data on critical care survival suggest differences of 10-14 percentage points between risk categories (including adjacent age categories). 17 a third approach would be to use justice considerations to limit our choice of which outcome-maximising principle or principles to use. some candidates are lives, life years, quality of life and fair innings. adopting several outcome-maximising principles at the same time would further compound health inequities. for example, given a 10-to-30-year difference in life expectancy for persons of different socioeconomic status and different chronic disease patterns, 30 including life years saved or quality-of-life considerations in addition to probability of survival-to-discharge in critical care triage, would doubly advantage persons who already enjoy a considerable health advantage. we should instead choose whichever single outcome-maximising principle is least detrimental to social justice and to egalitarian opportunity. since saving the most v the extensive literature on the imperative to save the greatest number (sgn), following taurek's provocative arguments, 33 focuses on saving 1 versus ≥2 lives, not saving 4 versus 5 lives, and taurek himself argued against sgn on the grounds of partiality, not justice. the deontologist or contractualist who advocates matching procedures for settling these cases might construe all tradeoffs, ultimately, as ≥2/1 cases-the leftover after matching. i think this reveals that the contractualist/deontological matching process is a poor representation of equity concerns.lives limits each person's claim to a maximum of one, it is theoretically more egalitarian than saving the most life years, a principle that allows one person's claim to outweigh another person's by much more.another approach would be to place the most weight on pure egalitarian concerns in order to give everyone the same opportunity to have their existing chance, within a reasonable range of chances. this could be operationalised through randomisation by lottery or time. the same approach could be chosen on the basis of epistemic considerations: in circumstances where judgments of individual probabilities are uncertain, risks of bias are high and/or categorical differences in possibility of benefit are small, it may be preferable to turn to random allocation.social justice considerations should play a role in how we operationalise random allocation. using time to randomise (by wait lists or first-come, first-served) is more publicly acceptable than using a lottery, but it is an imperfect randomiser. vi healthier persons of higher socioeconomic status are likely to be more successful in seeking care and navigating systems than disadvantaged persons, and will have more alternatives for care. it is feasible for healthcare systems and providers to make judgments about, for example, delayed care seeking, the availability of care alternatives, the burden of returning for reassessment or a limited accessibility for follow-up care. such an approach would also tie our response to health inequities closely to dimensions in which healthcare providers and systems can support disadvantaged patients. non-critical care resources can be called on to assist in improving outcome potential, for example, by addressing gaps in postdischarge care or supporting home care to delay or prevent admissions. 19 we should modify how we pursue the goal of saving the greatest number in order to also achieve equitable outcomes a solution that maximises both equity and efficiency without sacrificing either would be ideal. one way to address the limitations in the 'avoid bias and discrimination' approach discussed above has been proposed by schmidt 31 and is permitted by emanuel et al 1 : among those who meet the chosen threshold of likelihood to survive icu and organ support, we could prioritise disadvantaged persons. we would then (in theory) save the same number of lives but save more lives of disadvantaged persons. this would be a form of affirmative action in medical resource allocation. proponents point out that we may be able to save even more lives of the disadvantaged than we would on the balancing solutions canvassed above. however, this proposal faces two normative challenges from quite different perspectives.first, if we take this approach, we will fail to remedy social injustice. if we select healthy disadvantaged persons, ones whose health is not detrimentally affected by the social determinants of health, then we will not interfere with the way that maximising outcomes compounds the health inequities caused by socioeconomic or racialised inequalities. we will save only those disadvantaged persons who have escaped the health effects of their disadvantage. this can be described as awarding resources to those who share a feature that is proxy for health injustice but is not itself health injustice.second, this approach violates competing principles of domain-specific fair distribution. if we take an affirmative action approach, we attract the objection that access to medical care vi thanks to jeff kirby for pressing this question in response to an earlier draft.should be based on medical, not social, criteria. vii we would also face feasibility challenges that support concerns about domainspecific fairness, even if we reject the controversial idea that appropriate allocation principles flow from the nature of what is being allocated. these include the preparation of healthcare providers and healthcare systems to discern the categories of social disadvantage in question. viii data on race and ethnicity but not class are routinely collected in some health systems, such as in the usa, and not in others, such as canada. these data are collected for monitoring health system performance and enabling epidemiological surveillance. they are unlikely to have the accuracy sufficient to inform life and death decisions for individuals. consider the use of postal codes to support judgments of socioeconomic status based on neighbourhood income, which would privilege gentrifiers. if the role of racial, ethnic or socioeconomic markers in affirmative action were known, they would be subject to manipulation. asking healthcare providers to distribute resources based on social inequities may increase rather than mitigate vulnerability to discrimination. expecting people to triage against their own class identities may not be feasible. addressing procedural justice concerns would readily swamp the efficiency gains that the proposal otherwise promises.furthermore, the proposal would achieve its goal only where triage protocols are categorical, such that there is a group above a threshold chance of benefit but still too large for the available resources, and further selection to maximise outcomes is not possible. (if further outcome maximising is possible using a scalar approach, but that has been rejected, then the proposal no longer demonstrates true outcome maximising. 2 ) empirically, this group must contain enough disadvantaged persons such that preferentially selecting these persons will address the fundamental concerns of social justice raised by medical criteria that are designed to maximise outcomes.proponents of affirmative action argue that it could achieve even greater benefits for those worse off than could the balancing solutions i have proposed in the previous section, such that rejecting outcome maximisation and affirmative action would constitute levelling down for the disadvantaged themselves. the argument is that admitting all of the disadvantaged persons who have escaped the health detriments associated with disadvantage could result in admitting more disadvantaged persons than would be admitted under a lottery that includes a broader group of both advantaged and disadvantaged persons who are on average less likely to survive.however, my normative critique of outcome-maximising affirmative action would still apply under this so-called levelling down scenario. on this proposal, we select those who have not experienced the health detriments of the social determinants of health. this achieves, at best, an ambiguous case of levelling up. its application in disability cases, for example, involves playing the interests of the 'healthy disabled' against those whose vii sen characterises this as a 'procedural' objection to achieving health equity by discrimination. 34 i have discussed this as a social justice concern. affirmative action in education can be justified by the argument that students of low socioeconomic status have abilities that are not adequately reflected in prior performance: they will succeed once given the chance. this rationale would not be available in medical affirmative action. a rationale that will stand up in law is necessary for an affirmative action approach. viii compare my proposal above for mitigating social justice concerns with wait lists, where the healthcare system is not asked to make global judgments of relative disadvantage, but to identify and address barriers more proximal to healthcare. disabilities imply greater health detriments or shorter life expectancy. insofar as it does this, it weakens the claim that those with greater health vulnerabilities or shorter life expectancy should see the persons who are preferentially selected as levelling up for a group with which they identify.because only those with fewer health detriments are treated, the problem of the self-fulfilling prophecy still applies. and like the 'avoid bias and discrimination' approach, it does not address the egalitarian sense that differences in probabilities of survival must be substantial to override a fundamental commitment to human equality.in this paper, i have challenged the claim that there is a consensus in a pandemic emergency triage of scarce critical care resources that the value of maximising outcomes should dominate. my argument draws on work in resource allocation and organ allocation, where balancing multiple criteria is common. i focus on concerns of justice, specifically fundamental egalitarian concerns, social justice concerns and non-discrimination concerns. in addition to arguing that maximising outcomes is detrimental to egalitarian and social justice concerns, i have also described balancing considerations that should come into play. in resolving dilemmas, competing values retain their weight even when they do not dominate. they can set standards for evidence and limit the lengths to which we are prepared to go to maximise the value we think is more important. they establish responsibilities to support those of us who are harmed by our failure to live up to values that matter to us, in order to mitigate or compensate for these harms.in addition to these general considerations in favour of balancing justice and outcomes in emergency triage, there are considerations specific to the current sars-cov-2 pandemic that favour triage rules informed by solidarity with those experiencing health detriments arising from social determinants of health and compounded by racialisation. furthermore, it is not clear what in the current pandemic warrants abandoning existing societal commitments to inclusion for disabled persons. this pandemic has required, and will continue to require, an enormously disruptive societal response with substantially inequitable effects. we should broaden our focus beyond which form or forms of maximising outcomes are appropriate in a pandemic response. we need to consider mitigating the health inequities of a global pandemic, in critical care resource allocation and beyond.a number of rna-based vector systems have been used in the construction of hiv-1 and siv vaccines. these include vectors based on negative strand rna viruses [1] [2] [3] , positive strand rna viruses such as sendai virus [4] , coronavirus [5] and lentiviruses [6] , and positive strand rna replicon-based vectors derived from alphaviruses [7] [8] [9] , picornaviruses [10] , and flaviviruses [11] . replicon-based vectors exploit the ability of viral non-structural proteins to amplify greatly (in the cytoplasm of infected/transfected cells) the replicon rna, which encodes both the heterologous protein and the viral non-structural proteins. this results in high-level expression of antigens and provides potent adjuvant activity via double-stranded rna replication intermediates [12] . we have previously described a replicon vector system based on the kunjin virus [12] , a largely non-pathogenic flavivirus found in northern australia [13] . kunjin replicon rna can be packaged into viruslike particles (vlps) using a packaging cell line expressing kunjin structural proteins in trans [14] . the resulting vlp vaccines are capable of inducing potent, long-lived and protective cd8 t cell responses in several murine systems [12, 15] . kunjin replicon vlp vaccines encoding hiv-1 gag have also been shown to induce cd8 t cell immunity comparable to that seen after immunisation with recombinant vaccinia [11] . in contrast to most alphavirus repliconinfected cells, kunjin replicon-infected cells (i) do not show overt cytopathic effects, so both double strand rna-induced "danger signals" and antigen production are maintained for extended periods and (ii) do not produce replication-competent viruses via recombination during vlp manufacture, with recombination in flavivirus systems appearing to be extremely low [12] .the evaluation of siv vaccines in non-human primates has proved to be an invaluable and enduring model system for testing new concepts in hiv vaccine development [16] [17] [18] [19] . most siv and hiv subunit vaccines encode gag, as gag proteins are believed to be an important target of protective cellular immunity [20, 21] . herein we describe the construction and immunogenicity of four siv gag (pol) kunjin replicon vlp vaccines. the first encodes siv gag using the wild-type nucleic acid sequence (wt). the second encodes siv gag using an rna-optimised nucleic acid sequence (dx). hiv and siv gag contain rna inhibitory sequence (ins) elements, which have been shown to act at several levels to inhibit gag expression; primarily via nuclear retention of rna in the absence of the rev protein. rna-optimisation strategies, which remove these ins elements by changing the codon usage, result in significant increases in protein expression from dna-based expression vec-tors [22] , and such rna-optimised siv gag vaccines have been used in a number of monkey trials [23, 24] . inhibition of nuclear export of gag rna by ins sequences is unlikely to be an issue for the exclusively cytoplasmic kunjin replicon rna, however, ins elements have also been reported to reduce rna stability and translation [25, 26] . the third siv gag kunjin replicon vlp vaccine encodes a human codon-optimised siv gag gene (opt). codon optimisation has been used extensively to improve recombinant antigen expression in a number of systems and the process involves altering the codon usage to the one most commonly utilized in a given species [27, 28] . the fourth vaccine encodes wild-type matrix and capsid from gag-linked in-frame to reverse transcriptase from pol (gagpol). this approach has been described previously for hiv gag and removes from the gag gene sequences that encode proteins with potentially immunosuppressive properties, whilst retaining sequences frequently recognised by t cells [29] . although all four vaccines expressed gag protein at comparable levels, they behaved quite differently in terms of immunogenicity, protection and insert stability.the rna-based kunjin replicon vector c20ubhdvrep (sp6kunrep1) [30] was used to construct wt, dx and opt vaccines, and sp6kunrep6 [15] was used to construct the gag-pol vaccine. these two rna-based kunjin replicon vectors are the same, except sp6kunrep6 has two copies of the foot and mouse virus 2a autoprotease, one upstream of mlui (replacing the ubiquitin gene) and another one downstream of the snabi cloning sites [12] . the kunjin siv gag wt construct encodes siv mac239 gag subcloned from p239spsp5 [31] (catalogue #829, nih aids research & reference reagent program, germantown, md, usa) using asci sites. the kunjin siv gag dx construct was generated by subcloning rna-optimised siv mac239 gag dx [23, 24] from pfb-sivgag dx cte neo [32] using asci/snabi sites. kunjin sivgag opt was constructed using asci/snabi sites and p01-426 (catalogue #9422, nih aids research & reference reagent program), which encodes human codon-optimised sivmac239 gag. the kunjin sivmac239 gag-pol vaccine was constructed by separately pcr-amplifying matrix (ma)/nucleocapsid (nc) and reverse transcriptase (rt) genes from p239spsp5 plasmid (nih aids research & reference reagent program) and joining at sacii. the fragment was then cloned into the mlu i and snab i sites of sp6kunrep6 vector. construction of the hiv-1 gag vaccine has been described previously and was expressed from the sp6kunrep1 vector [11] . all gag constructs used in this study-encoded alanine in place of the initial glycine in gag.kunjin replicon rnas were transcribed in vitro using sp6 rna polymerase and electroporated into tetkuncprme bhk packaging cells as described previously [14] . briefly, rna (20-30 g) was electroporated into 3 × 10 6 packaging cells in suspension and the cells were seeded into a 100-mm dish and incubated at 37 • c for 3-5 days and culture fluid collected at days 3-5. the titre of infectious vlps in infectious units (ius) was determined by infection of vero cells with 10-fold serial dilutions of the culture fluid. at 30-40 h post-infection the cells were fixed with methanol/acetone (1:1, v/v) and analysed by immunofluorescence antibody staining using the 4g4 monoclonal anti-ns1 antibody [33, 34] and the 55-2f12 anti-siv gag monoclonal antibody (catalogue # 1610, nih aids research & reference reagent program) and the number of positive cells counted using zeiss axiophot 2 fluorescent microscope (carl zeiss microimaging gmbh, berlin, germany).vero or bhk cells were infected with vlps at moi = 1 or electroporated with 5-10 g of kunjin siv gag rna constructs and cultured for 2 days in a 60-mm dish. the cells were lysed with ripa buffer and cell debris was removed by centrifugation. the protein concentration for each sample was determined using the biorad protein assay (biorad, regents park, nsw, australia). fifteen microgram of total cell protein was separated on a 12.5% gel by sds-page and transferred onto hybond-p membrane (amersham-pharmacia biotech, uk) using the mini trans blot transfer tanks (biorad, regents park, nsw, australia) at 4 • c.the his-tagged recombinant siv mac239 and hiv-1 (clade b sf2/bh10) gag proteins were expressed from the pet28a+ plasmid (merck pty. ltd., vic, australia) under control of t7-promoter in escherichia coli c43(de3) [35] and purified using a ni-agarose column. gag proteins were detected using the 55-2f12 or the ag3. vero cells were transfected with kunjin siv gag vlps at moi = 1 and were cultured for 72 h. total rna was collected using trizol reagent (invitrogen) and superscript iii reverse transcriptase (invitrogen) was used to produce cdna. pcr primers that bind to c20 and e22 of the kunjin replicon vector backbone were then used to amplify fragments from the cdna using dynazyme ext (finnzyme, diagnostics, espoo, finland); forward primer 5 ggctgtcaatatgctaaaacg 3 , reverse primer 5 tctttctctccgtgaacgtgcat 3 .female balb/c (h-2 d ) mice (6-8 weeks) were supplied by the animal resources centre (perth, western australia). mice were vaccinated with the kunjin replicon siv gag vlp vaccines wt, opt, dx, or gag-pol, the kunjin hiv-1 gag vlp vaccine [11] or control vlps diluted in rpmi 1640 and 10 6 iu injected by the intraperitoneal (i.p.) route in a final volume of 200 l.interferon ␥ (ifn␥) elispot assays were conducted using 125 or 123 overlapping 15-mer peptides spanning the entire sivmac239 or hiv-1 subtype b gag protein, respectively (catalogue #6204 and 8117, respectively, nih aids research & reference reagent program). the peptides were divided into six pools and the total final concentration of the peptide mix in each pool was 10 g/ml. for kunjin-specific responses directed to ns3, gyistrvel (h-2k d ) was used (auspep, parkville victoria, australia). ex vivo elispot assays were conducted as described previously [36] except that multiscreen-ip hydrophobic pvdf membrane microtitre plates (millipore australia ltd., north ryde, australia) and 25 iu/ml of il-2 (kindly provided by cetus corp., emeryville, ca, usa) was used.the highest cell concentration was 2.5 × 10 5 cells/well in triplicate, followed by four doubling dilutions. spots were counted using a ks elispot reader (carl zeiss vision gmbh, hallbergmoos, germany). mean background spots from wells without peptide were subtracted from the mean number of spots obtained from wells with peptide.cultured elispot assays were performed using splenocytes cultured in vitro for 6 days in 24 well plates (5 × 10 6 cells/well in 1 ml medium) with a single pool of the entire overlapping gag peptides (10 g/ml of the peptide pool) or gyistrvel (10 g/ml). (culture of splenocytes in the presence of 100 g/ml of the siv peptide pool resulted in excessive responses being detected in naïve mice-data not shown). on day 4 a further 1 ml of medium was added to each well. on day 6 the cells were used in the elispot assay (as described above) starting at 1.25 × 10 5 cells per well followed by four doubling dilutions.groups (n = 3 or 4) were compared (using the total peptide response for each mouse) with the non-parametric median test and the monte carlo significance given (spps for windows, version 15.0, 2007, spss inc., chicago, il, usa).a plasmid encoding an egfp-siv gag dx fusion protein was generated by subcloning human rna-optimised siv gag dx from the plasmid pcmvsivgagdx [24] (provided by dr b. felber) into xhoi/ecori sites of the pegfp c3 plasmid (catalogue #6082-1. bd biosciences, franklin lakes, nj, usa) to generate pegfp sivgagdx. this plasmid was used to transfect the balb/c-derived a20 murine lymphoblastic leukemia cells (atcc, tib-208) using the genejammer transfection reagent (stratagene, la jolla, ca, usa). cells were cultured for 24 h and sorted using moflo high-performance cell sorter (dako, glostrup, denmark) for high egfp expression. the sorted cells were cultured in medium [37] containing g418 (800 g/ml) for 1-2 weeks then sorted again for high egfp expression. this procedure was repeated eight times at which point expression had stabilised with >95% of cells expressing egfp as assessed by facs after a week of culture under g418 selection. expression of egfp-siv gag dx fusion protein was also confirmed by western blot using anti-siv gag (55-2f12) and anti-egfp antibodies (molecular probes, leiden, netherlands). (we were unable to generate a gag-expressing line using j774 macrophage cells).groups of balb/c mice were vaccinated twice separated by 2-3 weeks with 10 6 iu of the four different vlps encoding siv mac239 gag, control vlps, or rpmi 1640 by the i.p. route. approximately 9 months after the last immunisation mice were challenged with the a20-egfp-sivgag cells (2.5 × 10 6 cells/mouse) on the back by the subcutaneous route. hair around the injection site was removed with an electric shaver prior to the challenge to facilitate injection and measurement of tumours. the tumour sizes were measured three times a week and mice were sacrificed when the tumour area reached 100 mm 2 . differences between kaplan-meier survival curves were calculated using the log-rank test (spss for windows).four different kunjin replicon vlp vaccines encoding siv mac239 gag were constructed; sivgag wt (wt), siv gag dx (dx), siv gag opt (opt), and siv gag-pol (gag-pol) (fig. 1) . wt encodes full-length wild-type siv gag, dx and opt encode rna-and codonoptimised versions of the siv gag gene, respectively, and gag-pol encodes wild type matrix and capsid from gag connected in-frame with reverse transcriptase from pol. an hiv-1 gag construct encoding wild-type hiv gag was used as a positive control (see below) and has the same vector backbone as that shown in fig. 1 [11] .in vitro transcribed rna derived from each kunjin replicon dna construct was used to manufacture vlps in packaging cells [14] . each vlp vaccine was used to infect vero cells in vitro and western blotting experiments (using the anti-siv gag 55-2f12 antibody) illustrated that each vaccine expressed a protein of the expected molecular weight (fig. 2a) . similar data was produced when kunjin rna (rather than vlps) was used to transfect bhk cells (fig. 2b) , indicating there was no major differences in expression between monkey and rodent cells. in these experiments no major improvements in protein expression levels were seen for dx or opt vaccines despite rna-and codon optimisation. (no in vitro siv gag particle formation was observed by electron microscopy for these vaccine-data not shown.)when the lysates from siv gag and hiv-1 gag vlp-infected cells were initially compared side by side in western analyses using the ag3.0 antibody, we were surprised to find that the expression of siv gag appeared to be substantially lower (fig. 2c ). it emerged, however, that this antibody recognises the siv mac239 gag protein much less effectively than the hiv-1 gag protein (fig. 2d ). siv gag expression was thus probably not in reality substantially lower than hiv gag expression in these kunjin replicon systems.a more extensive analysis of a panel of antibodies used for detecting siv gag proteins also revealed some hitherto unpublished differences in reactivity with gag proteins from different siv strains using different techniques. we have shown the data in table 1 and have added published information for completeness. this information will hopefully allow others to identify more easily the appropriate antibody for future siv gag studies.to compare the immunogenicity of the kunjin siv gag vaccine constructs, balb/c mice were immunised twice with 10 6 iu of each of the four vlp vaccines. iu represents the titre of vlps expressing gag (see table 2 ), so each mouse received the same number of kunjin vlps encoding gag. two negative control groups were included to account for non-specific responses, one group received no vaccination (control naïve) and the second was vaccinated with vlps not encoding gag (control vlp). immunisations with kunjin vlps encoding hiv-1 gag was also included. ten weeks after the last immunisation splenocytes were assayed by ex vivo and cultured ifn␥ elispot assays using six pools of overlapping peptides spanning the entire siv gag protein or in the case of hiv gag immunised mice, the hiv gag protein. the use of peptide pools covering gag to measure t cell responses in mice has been described previously [38, 39] .ex vivo elispot assays measure immediate effector function and thus tend to measure effector memory t cell activity, whereas cultured elispot assays measure the ability of cells to replicate and form effector cells and thus represents a measure of central memory cell activity [40] [41] [42] . ex vivo elispot assays illustrated that responses induced by the wt vaccine were not significantly higher than the control vlp (p = 0.092) (fig. 3a) . dx induced responses that approached significance over control vlps (p = 0.054), and opt, gag-pol and the hiv gag vaccine induced responses that were significantly higher than the control vlp (p = 0.047, 0.029 and 0.039, respectively) (fig. 3a) . the opt and gag-pol vaccineinduced responses were comparable to those induced by the kunjin hiv-1 gag vlp vaccine tested under the same conditions (fig. 3a) . using the cultured elispot assay, wt and opt failed to produce significant responses over the controls (fig. 3b) . the gag-pol con- struct induced significantly higher responses than wt (p = 0.015), whereas dx (due to the very high mouse to mouse variation in this group, ranging from 2688 to 17,000 spots) did not reach significance over wt using the median test (although it did reach asymptotic significance using the mann-whitney test, p = 0.034). dx and gagpol vaccines also induced responses comparable to those induced by hiv-1 gag vlp vaccination (fig. 3b) . pool 3 dominated the hiv-1 gag responses (fig. 3b ) as this pool contains the immunodominant amqmlketi epitope [11] .spaulding et al. identified a region in dengue virus ns3, which represents a dominant cd8 t cell epitope [43] . we have confirmed that the homologous region ( 299 gyistrvel 207 ) in kunjin virus ns3, which contains a substitution (m to l) in the last amino acid, also represents a dominant cd8 t cell epitope for kunjin replicon vaccines (data not shown). to analyse the levels of anti-vector cd8 t cell responses for the different vaccines shown in fig. 3a and b, elispot assays using the gyistrvel peptide epitope (at 10 g/ml) were undertaken. ex vivo ifn␥ elispot analysis showed that responses ranged from ≈400 to 1000 spots/10 6 splenocytes (fig. 3c) . cultured ifn␥ elispot analysis showed a range of ≈2000-5000 spots/10 6 splenocytes for all the vectors except dx, which gave a large mean response in excess of 40,000 spots/10 6 splenocytes (fig. 3d) . the very large response for dx might be due to the large number of vlps not expressing gag present in the dx preparation (table 2 ). these results illustrate that flavivirus replicon-based vectors, like other vector systems [44, 45] , also induce cd8 t cell responses specific for vector proteins.we and others [46] have noted that flavivirus vlps can lose expression of certain inserted genes. to investigate to what extent the different siv gag vlp vaccines suffered from this problem, vero cells were infected with vlps and dual-labelled with anti-kunjin ns1 and anti-gag antibodies. for wt and gag-pol the majority of vlp-infected cells expressed both ns1 and gag, however, for dx and opt only about 22% and 40% of ns1 positive cells, respectively, also expressed gag (table 2) . for the hiv gag vlps this value was >90% (data not shown). the dx and opt constructs contained rna-and codon-optimised genes, perhaps suggesting that altering the coding sequence somehow reduces the stability of these inserted genes in the kunjin replicon constructs. the in vitro transcribed rna used to transfect the packaging cells did not contain any detectable truncated replicon rna species (fig. 4a ) indicating that these insert deletion events likely occurred during vlp manufacture. gene deletion events from flavivirus vectors have not been extensively studied. to gain some insight into the process, rna from wt and dx vlp-infected cells was analysed by rt-pcr using primers flanking the siv gag gene insert. the full-length gene is visible at ≈2000 bp, with shorter pcr products evident in both wt and dx infected cells. gene deletions in wt and dx appear to be different, with dx showing a major band at ≈180 bp (fig. 4b, lane  3) . a band of the same size was also observed in samples from optinfected cells (data not shown). this ≈180 bp fragment is actually smaller than that obtained from the empty vector (fig. 4b, lane 4) , suggesting that at least one end of the deletion must lie within the ubiquitin cloning site or the fmdv 2a protease region (see fig. 1 ). sequencing of the ≈180 bp fragment from dx illustrated that the deletion occurred 15 nucleotides past the 5 end of the 225 nucleotide ub sequence and 29 nucleotides past the 5 end of the 48 nucleotide fmdv2a sequence (fig. 4b ). there are no obvious homologies between the sequences either side of the insert deletion site that would suggest strand switching or homologous recombination events. each vlp vaccine was titred on vero cells and cultured for 48 h. ifa was then performed using anti-ns1 and anti-siv gag (55-2f12) monoclonal antibodies and the iu titre calculated for each antibody. the ratio of the titres is represented as a percentage (gag titre/ns1 titre × 100).recombinant vaccinia viruses encoding hiv-1 antigens have been used extensively as surrogate viral challenge models in mice to assess protective immune responses induced by different hiv-1 vaccines [11, 47] . we determined whether two recombinant vaccinia viruses, one encoding siv mne gag/pol [48] (kind gift from dr. shiu-lok hu, university of washington, seattle, wa) and the other siv mac251 gag (eva261, centre for aids reagents, national institute for biological standards and controls, uk) could be used in such assays. unfortunately, although they grew well in vitro, both vaccinia viruses replicated very poorly in mice following i.p., intranasal or intravenous inoculations of 10 6 or 10 7 pfu of virus (data not shown), making them unsuitable for such assays. a vaccinia virus encoding hiv-1 gag was run in parallel and replicated efficiently as described previously [11] . a vaccinia encoding sivmac239 gag has been reported to replicate in mice [1] , however, this vaccinia virus has not been made publicly available, and the reason for its better replication in mice is unclear.to develop an alternative challenge assay we generated an a20 lymphoblastic leukemia line stably expressing siv gag dx fused to egfp (a20-egfp-sivgag cells). western blotting illustrated that these cells expressed the gag-egfp fusion protein, which has an expected molecular weight of ≈82 kda (fig. 5a) . these cells were used to challenge animals ≈9 months after vaccination with the different siv vlp vaccines. the opt, gag-pol and dx vaccines all provided significantly better protection than both the controls and the wt vaccine (log-rank tests all p ≤ 0.006) (fig. 5b) . opt vaccination also provided significantly better protection than dx (p = 0.031), with no other comparisons showing significant differences (fig. 5b) . mean tumour growth curves from the same experiment are shown in fig. 5c . the percentage of mice surviving after challenge with a20-egfp-sivgag cells (0, 33, 67 and 100% for wt, dx, gag-pol, and opt, respectively, fig. 5b ) correlated well with the mean ex vivo elispot data shown in fig. 3a (100, 119, 183 and 248 spots/10 6 splenocytes, respectively), r 2 = 0.95. a similar comparison with the cultured elispot data (fig. 3b ) failed to show any correlation, r 2 = 0.04, suggesting that effector memory rather than central memory cell activity had a major role in mediating protection in this model.vaccines against a series of pathogens including hiv/siv are being developed using a number of rna-based viral vector systems. here we describe the behaviour of four different kunjin replicon vlp vaccines encoding siv gag and show that only the gag-pol vaccine (i) induced good levels of both effector memory and central memory t cell responses 10 weeks post-vaccination, comparable to those induced by the previously described hiv-1 gag kunjin replicon vlp vaccine [11] , (ii) showed good levels of protection against challenge with a20 cells expressing siv gag ≈9 months post-vaccination, and (iii) displayed high levels of insert stability. wt and dx vaccines induced poor effector memory responses and provided poor protective activity, and opt and dx showed high levels of insert deletion.the potential for genetic instability for many recombinant viral vectors is well described and a range of largely vector-specific strategies have been adopted to limit the problem [46, [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] . in the kunjin replicon system deletion of inserted genes appears to occur in packaging cells during vlp manufacture. for constructs with low insert stability the proportion of vlps without inserts increases if the time between rna transfection of the packaging line and vlp harvest is extended, and appropriate reductions of this were immunised twice with 10 6 iu of each of the indicated kunjin vlp vaccines. there were two control groups, one received 10 6 iu of a control vlp encoding an irrelevant antigen (control vlp) and the other received no vaccination (control naïve). ten weeks after the second immunisation, the mice were sacrificed and the splenocytes were assayed for gag-specific t cell responses by ex vivo ifn␥ elispot using six pools of overlapping peptides spanning either the siv gag protein for siv gag vaccinated animals, or the hiv-1 gag protein for hiv-1 gag vaccinated animals. error bars illustrate the variation in responses to each pool. (b) measurement of gag-specific responses by cultured ifn␥ elispot assays. the splenocytes from the animals described in (a) were also cultured for 6 days with the pooled siv or hiv gag peptides, prior to the elispot assay. (c) measurement of ns3-specific responses by ex vivo ifn␥ elispot assays. the splenocytes from the animals described in (a) were also used in an ex vivo elispot assays using the ns3 cd8 t cell peptide epitope, gyistrvel. (d) measurement of ns3-specific responses by cultured ifn␥ elispot assays. the splenocytes from the animals described in (a) were cultured for 6 days with gyistrvel peptide prior to an elispot assay using the same peptide. time period can result in vlp preparations with substantially fewer empty vlps (unpublished observation). these observations parallel those obtained for west nile replicons where vlps with insert deletions were also rapidly selected during serial passage of vlps in a packaging cell line [46] . in contrast, we have generated by antibiotic selection several cell lines stably transfected with recombinant kunjin replicon vectors and these could be extensively passaged without loss of reporter gene inserts [12] , suggesting that insert deletion may be rare once a cell is transfected. one might speculate that insert deletion is associated with the cellular stress that leads to the cytopathic effects, which are observed in the packaging cells during vlp manufacture due to the high level of structural protein expression. conceivably, in such stressed cells replicon rna may gain access to the nuclear rna splicing machinery. rna splicing is well known to be influenced by complex rna structure interactions, with distant rna sequences able to regulate splicing events [54] . why dx and opt vaccines would be more susceptible to insert deletion remains unclear, but may be associated with the loss of native rna structures.the dx gene was engineered to allow rev-independent expression from dna-based vector systems [23, 24] , however, this did not provide significant improvements in antigen expression. the negative influence of siv gag ins sequences on rna stability and translation [25, 26] therefore do not appear to be significant in this system. successful expression of wild-type siv gag by other vector systems where mrna is generated in the cytoplasm (e.g. alphavirus replicons and vaccinia) also supports the view that the major influence of ins elements is on rna export [9, 55] . the human codon-optimised kunjin opt construct did not result in significantly higher gag expression in vero (monkey) or bhk (hamster) cells, suggesting that trnas are not particularly limiting in these replicon-based expression systems when tested in vitro.why opt and gag-pol might provide slightly improved effector memory responses and wt and opt induce such poor central memory responses when delivered by kunjin replicon vlps remains unclear, but is likely to be a reflection of multiple factors including the number of empty vlps in the vaccine inocula, the level and length of antigen expression in vivo, and the level of "danger signals" induced by the replicating replicon rna. the better memory responses induced by the gag-pol vaccine may be due to the removal of the potentially immunosuppressive gag-encoded proteins [29] . an alphavirus replicon siv vaccine with these regions deleted also showed improved longevity of t cell responses over full-length gag constructs [8] . the high (albeit variable) central memory responses induced by dx may arise from increased levels of ifn␣/␤ produced [56] as a result of the large number of empty vlps that compromised ≈80% of the vlp inocula for this vaccine preparation ( table 2) .the a20-egfp-siv gag challenge model (fig. 5 ) represents a new model for testing the effectiveness of t cell induction by siv gag vaccines. this model is likely to represent a measure of siv gag-specific cd8 t cell activity as rejection of this tumour has previously been shown to be cd8 t cell dependent [57] . protection from this model also correlated well with the magnitude of ex vivo elispot (effector memory) responses rather than cultured elispot (central memory) responses induced by each of the kunjin siv vaccines. this might be expected since tumours are generally poor at stimulating the differentiation of central memory cells into effectors, so prophylactic protection would rely on effector memory cells [58] . the relative importance of effector memory and/or central memory cells for prophylactic protection against hiv-1/siv has not been extensively studied. some evidence suggests central memory cells are more important than effector memory cells [59] , whereas others have argued that effector activity early in infection (when effector mem- groups of mice (n = 4-6) were immunised twice with the indicated vlp vaccines and were then challenged ≈9 months later with a20-egfp-sivgag cells. animals were euthanased when tumours reached 100 mm 2 . (c) mean growth curves for the tumours from the same experiment. when an animal was euthansed a value of 100 mm 2 was included for that animal in the mean for all subsequent time points. ory t cells would be most active) is important for protection [60] and for slowing progression to aids [61] .in summary we describe here a kunjin replicon siv gag-pol vlp vaccine, which showed high insert stability, good induction of effector and central memory responses, and good protection against a model challenge. other siv gag vaccines failed in one or more of these criteria, illustrating that antigen construction and the insert's nucleotide sequences can have unforeseen consequences for the performance of these rna replicon vectors. through the aids research and reference reagent program, division of aids, niaid, nih: p239spsp5 from dr ronald desrosiers; p01-426 from dr stephen dewhurst; monoclonal antibody to hiv 1 p24 (ag3.0) from dr. jonathan allan; and sivmac p27 monoclonal antibody (55-2f12) from dr. niels pedersen; hiv-1 con b gag peptides-complete set; sivmac 239 gag (15-mer) peptides-complete set; sivmac251 (bk28) pr55 gag.liebe kollegen und kolleginnen, in den hydrogeologischen notizen bieten wir aktuelle und für einen großen leserkreis interessante mitteilungen. damit das auch weiterhin so bleibt, freuen wir uns auch auf ihre beiträge. sie können zu allen rubriken unseres nachrichtenteils beiträge einreichen.damit wir ihre beiträge auch zeitnah drucken können, beachten sie bitte unsere termine zum redaktionsschluss:• heft 3/2020: 26.06.2020 • heft 4/2020: 11.09.2020 • heft 1/2021: 18.12.2020ihre beiträge senden sie bitte an: patricia schüll, e-mail: p.schuell@gmx.de vielen dank für ihre unterstützung!liebe mitglieder der fh-dggv! wenige tage bevor die tagung der fh-dggv in leipzig beginnen sollte, mussten wir die veranstaltung absagen. nachdem die tagungsleitung und der vorstand der fh-dggv anfang märz noch recht optimistisch waren, zwang uns die entwicklung des coronavirus (sars-cov-2) mit steigenden fallzahlen und den gesundheitspolitischen rahmenbedingungen zum handeln. allerdings lagen bereits zu dem zeitpunkt etliche stornierungen durch teilnehmer und referenten vor, denen von seiten ihres arbeitgebers die teilnahme an größeren veranstaltungen untersagt wurde.viele beteiligte, aber insbesondere ruth kaufmann-knoke und andreas musolff haben viel aufwand, mühe, zeit und persönliches engagement in die tagung investiert und ich selbst hoffte bis kurz vor der absage, dass die tagung stattfinden kann. wir haben eine verschiebung diskutiert; allerdings ist aufgrund der langen vorlauf-und vorbereitungszeit für die tagung mit langfristig erforderlichen reservierungen ein termin vor der tagung in 2 jahren in jena nicht rea-listisch. auch die durchführung einer rumpftagung, bei der eine große anzahl an vorträgen, keynotes, exkursionen, fortbildungen etc. entfällt und nicht klar ist, was stattfindet und was nicht, war so unattraktiv, dass wir uns gegen diese option entschieden haben.auch bei einer absage der tagung bleibt ein großer teil der ausgaben bestehen. die vorbereitung der tagung hat inzwischen hohe kosten verursacht, ebenso die anmietung der kongresshalle, der caterer sowie die anmietung von auerbachs keller für das konferenzdinner. diese kosten ohne die gegenfinanzierung durch die kalkulierten 450 teilnehmer übersteigen die finanzielle leistungskraft der fh-dggv.leider ist es auch keineswegs so, dass wir aus unseren finanziellen verpflichtungen ohne weiteres entbunden werden. da die meisten veranstaltungsmöglichkeiten langfristig gebucht werden müssen, gehen auch wir als fh-dggv langfristige verpflichtungen ein. wir versuchen selbstverständlich, mit dem caterer, der kongresshalle, dem auerbachs keller und den anderen dienstleistern eine kulante kostenregelung auszuhandeln. es wird sich zeigen, inwieweit das möglich ist.und obwohl ihnen rechtlich die erstattung der tagungsgebühren bei derabsage der veranstaltung zusteht, haben wir alle teilnehmerinnen und teilnehmer gebeten zu prüfen, ob sie einen teil der tagungsgebühren als spende der fh-dggv zukommen lassen können oder durch den kauf des tagungs unter dieses motto hat die un den diesjährigen weltwassertag gestellt. ein thema, mit dem sich die kommunale wasserwirtschaft in deutschland bereits seit geraumer zeit beschäftigt, wie hans-hermann baas, vizepräsident der allianz der öffentlichen wasserwirtschaft (aöw) erklärt: "wir agieren nachhaltig und ressourcen schonend, sowohl bei der gewinnung als auch der verteilung von wasser. mit den millionenschweren investitionen in die infrastruktur hält die kommunale wasserwirtschaft nicht nur die wasserverluste in den netzen bewusst gering, sie sorgt zudem für die sicherung der trinkwasserversorgung in der stadt und im ländlichen raum, für alle einwohner gleichermaßen. das ist eine beachtliche leistung, wie die letzten heißen sommer gezeigt haben." angesichts des klimawandels fordert aöw-vizepräsident baas ein klares bekenntnis der politik zugunsten der kommunalen wasserversorgung. "die nutzung für mensch und tier muss vorrang genießen -ohne wenn und aber. dieses klare bekenntnis wird nicht zuletzt im wasserdialog der bundesregierung durch andere nutzergruppen immer wieder infrage gestellt. das ist für uns nicht tragbar."in den heißen sommern der beiden letzten jahre hätten die kunden in deutschland kaum einschränkungen der wasserversorgung gespürt. lediglich regional musste an sehr heißen und trockenen phasen das rasensprengen teilweise zeitlich eingeschränkt werden. "das ist der guten leistung der fachkräfte zu verdanken. die kommunalen wasserversorger haben … ihre konzepte entsprechend angepasst. sie haben den klimawandel als herausfordernde aufgabe aktiv angenommen und werden weitere szenarien prüfen", führt baas aus. klar sei für ihn, dass das bewusstsein für die begrenzung der ressource gestärkt werden müsse -und das bei allen nutzergruppen: bei den privathaushalten, bei der industrie und auch bei der landwirtschaft. "wir alle müssen unseren beitrag leisten, noch bewusster mit der kostbaren ressource wasser umzugehen."für baas gehöre dazu auch, dass die politik die nutzungskonkurrenzen um das grundwasser stärker in den blick nehme. nicht nur die men-ge, sondern auch die qualität müsse langfristig gesichert werden. dazu gehöre die minimierung von einträgen ins grundwasser: "da der großteil der wassergewinnung in deutschland aus grundwasser erfolgt, ist die lokale nutzung, gerade auch in zeiten des klimawandels mit dem zunehmenden wasserbedarf in spitzenverbrauchszeiten, von besonderer bedeutung. die lokalen vorkommen müssen nachhaltig in guter qualität erhalten werden. beim nitrat ist der anfang aufgrund des drucks aus brüssel gemacht. hier muss die politik konsequent weitergehen und die rahmenbedingungen schaffen, die den eintrag ins grundwasser weiter deutlich reduzierenund zwar durch die verursacher. hier darf nicht der wasserkunde einseitig belastet werden", so der aöw-vizepräsident.zudem werbe er für flexiblere lösungen für die wasserwirtschaft, um auch die bewirtschaftung in heißen monaten in zeiten des klimawandels leisten zu können. "hier mussten wir erleben, dass die genehmigungen nicht immer die notwendige flexibilität aufweisen, die der klimawandel mit seinen schnellen änderungen, die wir in den hitzemonaten der letzten beiden jahre erlebt haben, uns auferlegt. um die spitzenverbräuche auch weiter verlässlich abzudecken -so es das dargebot erlaubt -, benötigt auch die wasserwirtschaft mehr flexibilität der behörden. auch das fordert der klimawandel ein." mein lieber fh-dgg-präsident, ich muss mich mal wieder bei dir melden, ich mache es auch kurz. mir ist neulich was ganz seltsames passiert, seltsam deshalb, weil ich mich an jedes detail erinnere und normalerweise geht mir das in so einer situation gar nicht so, meistens weiß ich kaum mehr etwas.also, ich schaue aus dem fenster und sehe beim nachbarn (der immer so fröhlich winkt) einen tank-lkw stehen. mit großen, grünen buchstaben steht drauf: h2. der fahrer hatte gerade einen schlauch an einem flansch an der nachbar-hauswand festgemacht. habe ich noch nie gesehen, denke ich, oder mir ist das noch nie aufgefallen, weder der flansch noch der lkw. ich habe dann meine post nachgesehen und einen brief von der landesregierung gefunden, wo man mir mit freundlichen worten die finanzielle beteiligung an der energieerzeugung angeboten hat (staatlich überwacht), zinssatz 4 % pro jahr! keine mindesteinlage, auch als renten-sparplan ab 25 eu pro monat möglich, jederzeit kündbar innerhalb von 4 wochen! wie bitte, denke ich, in zeiten der minus-nullzinspolitik und viren-oder sonstigenpostkrisenbörsencrashzeiten ein tolles angebot! wo ist der haken? dann lese ich, dass es sich um erneuerbare energien handelt (windräder, solar-und biogasanlagen sowie wasserstofferzeugungsanlagen unter beteiligung lokaler firmen und landwirtschaftsbetriebe, garantiert oligarchen-frei). und jede/ r bürgerin kann über die angegebene internetseite in kooperation mit der eigenen hausbank online so eine investition tätigen (man könne sogar einen abgesicherten kredit aufnehmen). für bürgerinnen mit mehr risikobereitschaft wären auch beteiligungen an wind/solar-kraftwerken in griechenland mit 6 % per anno möglich. ich meine, neulich davon gelesen zu haben, dass griechenland neuerdings als "kraftwerk" europas gilt, nachdem sie mit hilfe der eu (so viel weitblick hätte ich der ursel gar nicht zugetraut) und europäischer technologiekonzerne ein paar hundert unbewohnte griechische inseln zu energieproduktionsinseln umfunktioniert hatten. es soll auch die deutsche industrie mit den wasserstofffabriken und dem wasserstofftankerbau ganz gut verdient haben.dieses angebot musste ich erstmal überlegen, natürlich mit einem schluck leitungswasser (0,6 cent der liter in bioqualität). da klingelte es an der tür, der landwirt vom hof vorne an der landstraße, wo ich immer mit dem rad vorbeifahre, zur arbeit, steht da und grinst (ich sehe manchmal seine schweine und kühe auf der weide beim vorbeifahren, und die grinsen genau so!). ob ich vielleicht frische lebensmittel brauche, die ernte ist aufgrund der neuen bio-n-düngemittel-aus-gülle-nitrat-technologie deutlich höher ausgefallen, seine nitrateintragsrate hat er gut an einen anderen landwirt verkauft. auch weil er mit realen bodennitratwerten sein neues gis besser kalibrieren konnte. jo, sag ich. der lkw ist weg, ging schnell, der landwirt geht. ich sehe noch, wie die nachbarin ihr auto mit einem anderen schlauch an einem flansch an der hauswand verkoppelt. da war was, denke ich, die japaner sind wieder mal vorn mit dem autoantrieb, klar, die wollen keine riesenlithiumbergbaulöcher in südamerika. und hat der nachbar nicht neulich was gefaselt, ob ich ihm einen brunnen bohren könnte, er wolle mit dem wasser und mit seiner solaranlage seinen eigenen sprit mit seinem h2-stack herstellen? na, das werden die internationalen ölmultis schon verhindern, sag ich. ich will gerade das bürger-invest-angebot weiter studieren, da klingelt es wieder, ein klingelinferno. ist aber keiner an der tür, ich wache auf. es ist 7.00, ich muss mich in 20 minuten in den stau stellen, sonst komm ich vor 12.00 nicht ins büro.mein consideration of general guidelines and circumstances needing special attention to facilitate the international movement of embryos from laboratory animals and nondomestic species is timely and appropriate. the groundwork for intematidnal efforts began in france when the office of international epixooties (oie; 23), based on extensive embryo-pathogen interaction research (8. 30, 31, 32) , established guidelines to address movement of livestock embryos. the efforts of a group of scientists, many of whom actively serve in the international embryo transfer society (iets) and its import-export committee and subcommittees, were critical to the establishment of and later acceptance internationally by government regulatory officials of standardized embryo washing and pathogen testing procedures (l23.31). these have to be regularly updated based on research and risk assessment information (40).laboratory animals maintained in defined environments require practical but effective guidelines to facilitate controlled embryo movements. fewer papers have been published on laboratory animals than on livestock species, but the data strongly support the effectiveness of embryo transfer for eliminating microbial contamination (4,5, 26, 27) . due to cost constraints and physiological limitations (e.g., embryo availability) of wildlife species, it is improbable that the same degree of scientific investigation will occur before formulating regulatory policies.developing and promoting standardized embryo handling practices for these nontraditional snecies will be discussed and a rationale for establishing effective guidelines, based on the more limited information for nondomestic species, will be or&ined. da6 gathered for domestic species and some wildlife animal movement controls already in place. may support developing guidelines, and thus extensive embryo-pathogen interaction studies may not be necessary to meet regulatory requirements for the international movement of this valuable germ plasm (i.e., embryos).biomedical research demands and the need for embryo cryobanking laboratory animals in the rodentia and lagomorpha orders (e.g., mice, rats, cotton rats, guinea pigs, gerbils, hamsters, rabbits) play a vital role in biomedical research worldwide. at the national institutes of health (nih), many invaluable animal models of disease and normal biological processes are maintained in the animal genetic resource (nihagr) for each of these species. as a stock center for laboratory animals, the nihagr routinely provides breeding nuclei to the biomedical research community and an embryo bank was established as an economical means to indefinitely preserve these rodent and rabbit genotypes. embryo cryopreservation offers benefits for genotype management such as safeguarding against loss from disease, reproductive failure, natural catastrophe or genetic contamination. in the future, the cryobank will help minimize changes due to genetic drift by providing a resource from which defined genotypes can be periodically rederived. this will allow for restandardization of foundation breeding colonies. also, rather than shipping postnatal animals, cryopreserved embryos would offer a simpler, more humane and easier method to transport requested models worldwide. an equally important impact of embryo biotechnologies would be the prevention of vertical transmission of some diseases.the nihagr continuallv receives reouests for laboratorv animal models. last vear more than 2600 animals were shipped, includingmom &an 1500 tolaboratories outside ofnih, of which about 250 were shioued intemationallv. more reauests from laboratories located outside the ne-i could be filled if~~opreserved embryos were available. postnatal animal shipments are halted during the climatic extremes of winter and summer. cryostored embryos, however, could be shipped year round but require that experienced personnel am present to receive and process the embryos. embryo handling skills and training in cryobiology also are needed to ensure embryo survival during warming and transfer.at the nihagr. research models of known genetic oriein and health status exist as closed breeding groups in defined living conditions in a&ordance &h the "guide for the cam and use of laboratorv animals" (25) . assisted reoroductive technoloeies (art) orovide oowerful tools to manage these genetic &&uces at stock centers, such as th~nlhagd,~and to f&l&ate the movement of animal models to other facilities. for example, embryo cryopreservation supports long-term storage and eventual rederivation of particular genotypes, while embryo transfer provides a desirable alternative to hysterectomy to tederive specific pathogen-free (spf) snirnals. as these biotechnologies become incorporated into laboratory animal breeding programs, embryos must be handled aseptically (29) to avoid any contamination or possible disease. transmission by those imported and exported for biomedical research purposes.considerinn the inherent oroblems associated with s~~dd~ie? oosmatal laboratorv animals, and the advanc& in cryobank&g technology, recommendalibns-for handling embryos designated for movement are timelv. guidelines (16) develooed at the nih have been under review bv the iets import/export committee and focus on the need to establish recommendations for au' interested institutions. the proposed guidelines are being considered for inclusion in the future edition of the manual of the international embryo transfer society (31) .shipment of cryopreserved embryos between research institutions, although not yet routine, does occur (20, 36) . this approach is expected to be the preferred method for transporting nihagr models in the future. because the nihagr maintains small foundation colonies, postnatal animals may not be available immediately. banks of cryopreserved embryos will expedite requests, expand distribution and facilitate the international exchange of these valuable animal models by better coordinating animal supply/demand and minimizmg the impact of environmental temperature on shipments.a screen for pathogens (especially zoonotics) is a typical part of routine health surveillance of facility colonies. documenting pathogens is necessary before the shipment of postnatal animals. the health status of donor colonies is also a major concern for embryo shipments. testing for the presence of certain pathogens at each institution would facilitate embryo transportation. suggested agents to be tested for am listed below by species: treuonema, salmoneua a., maenrginosa and coccidia embryo transfer technologies have proven effective in eliminating pathogens from rodent and rabbit embryos. in mice, embryo washing/transfer procedures have been shown to remove cytomegalovirus (22) , mvm (21), ldhv (22) . mhv (4.26) and sendai virus (4,24). also, w p&g~& did not survive during in vitro cultute of mouse embryos (15) . wdulmqdis. kilham's rat virusj sialodacryoadenitis/coronavirus snd reo-3 (27) and pinworms (svohacacla b,, 35) were ehminated via transfer of rat embryos mto spf recipients. bordete& b was eliminated from rabbits following transfer of embryos into &&&-free recipients (33) . no data are available on other species. these technologies can be invaluable when exporting clean embryos from a colony with a compromised health status to an existing, clean colony at the importing institution.colony management systems and health status must be considered before attempting to bank and rederive pathogen-free. embryos. these related factors determine both the complexity of the procedure(s) to derive clean embryos, and the quarantine strategy needed to ensure clean, imported animals without compromising the health status of the existing facility colonies. an outline of colony management systems is included in the guidelines to provide a baseline against which to assess the risk of acquiring (importing) or shipping (exporting) embryos. this characterization of colony environmental conditions is a fundamental nquirement for effective embryo import/export activities worldwide. the proposed guidelines (16) will suggest standardized terms to define colony housing conditions and the extent to which pathogens are present. they will be based on the experiences of the nihagr to-date providing research animal models worldwide.colonies are typically housed under conditions that can be placed into three broad categories: defined flora, conventional and undefined conditions. defined flora typically would be germfree or barrier mom (sterile) facilities and the animals would have a pathogen-free or microbiologically-defined status. barrier colonies may differ from germfree (pathogen-and nonpathogen-free) in that animals might be inoculated with a cocktail of a non-pathogenic microbial flora. embryos collected from defined flora animals would be considered pathogenfree and would reauire the least restrictive conditions to ensum that clean embryos are available. the recommend&ons for handling such embryos reflect those stated in the lets manual for embrvos of domestic species (31), but for embryos in this category the need for washing is mini&.-_the health skus of the donor colony-must be documented in the cryobanking records so the importing institution can determine the quarantine requirements.more restrictive measures am recommended for embryo recovery from conventionally housed (not maintained in sterile conditions) animals. these closed colonies, with a known health status, would probably need to follow the lo-step washing procedure and other protocols outlined in the iets manual. but incornoratine trvnsin treatment onlv if an enveloned virus is known to exist in the colony (30) . q&antine"&&ements would n&d to be strickr than for defined flora embrvos due to the increased risk of contamination. finallv. colonies in undetkd flora conditions would include animals from the wild or with an unknown health status. these would require the most restrictive embryo handling conditions, including health testing the breeder male and the donor females, use of a biological safety hood, testing flush medium for pathogens, lo-step washing possibly with trypsin treatment and quarandne in the importing institution following transfer of embryos.these embryo handling guidelines (16) . together with detailed records represent, at this time, the best approach to minimizing the risk of importing embryos contaminated with unwanted pathogens. these may play a role in supporting the in-house need of some animal facilities, and may in the foreseeable future be a requirement for exchange of animal models between institutions, domestic and international. complying with the guidelines can reduce the risk of acquiring pathogens but further investigation of embryo-pathogen interactions is needed. the skill and knowledge of those collecting and handling embryos is critical to the success of this type of animal model exchange as well. as advances in the technologies occur, the guidelines should be modified to reflect the most current information.the loss of genetic diversity in free-ranging and captive populations has increased the urgency for strategic plans to ensure long term species survival. application of reproductive biotechnologies to wildlife populations may be beneficial for preserving this essential bit-and genetic diversity (28) . the merits and strategies for establishing cryobanks for nondomestic species threatened or endangered by extinction have been detailed previously (37) . germ plasm repositories will 1) interactively support species populations, allowmg for the infusion of genetic diversity; 2) enhance captive breeding efforts and reduce risks of disease transmission by utilizing ai, embryo transfer and ivp; 3) reduce animal numbers needed to ensure high levels of genetic diversity, thus decreasing captive breeding costs and space requirements; 4) transfuse wild germ plasm into captive programs without removing animals from indigenous habitats, thereby providing insurance against epidemics, natural disasters and social/political upheaval; 5) eliminate the risks and costs of animal transport; and 6) provide increased access to rare specimens. transporting healthy live animals can cause undesirable levels of shipmentassociated stress leading to an increased susceptibility to disease or death (11, 19) . in contrast, the cryopreserved embryo suspended in a metabolic resting state is well suited to international movement. following embryo transfer the fetus benefits from peri-and postnatal antibodies from the recipient that offer protection from local diseases (1).the development of strategies for semen and embryo banking as well as a greater understanding of disease transmission in wildlife populations am supported by various international conservation organizations (38, 42) . the spread of disease is of major concern (41) when transporting wildlife, especially when the point of origin harbors pathogens such as rinderpest, foot-and-mouth disease and theileriosis (19) . incidents of disease transmissions by translocated wildlife were recently summarized (19.41) . futthermore, the zoological community identitled high priority diseases at an international conference on implications of infectious disease for captive propagation and reintroduction of threatened species (6). the legal implications of managing captive breeding and reintroduction programs for endangered species also were addressed (7). in attempting to move animals, health and welfare issues as well as controls imposed by the convention on international trade in endangered species must be considered. many potential hazards of moving live animals can be attenuated or eliminated by shipping gametes or embryos. it is generally believed that the potential for disease transmission via embryo transfer is much less than via semen (i.e., ai) or by the actual movement of potentirdly diseased animals (29.30). washing procedures have been shown to remove many pathogens common to domestic and wildlife species from zona-intact livestock embryos. such procedures also may prove effective for wildlife embryos.the field of conservation biology, unlike animal agriculture, lacks the economic incentives to establish guidelines for obtaining and transporting wildlife embryos. however, as interest grows in the use of semi-domestic farmed animals, such as deer and camelids (9, 18) , for agricultural production combined with an increased regard for species preservation, the need for such recommendations is increasing.regulatory officials in the united states department of agriculture (usda) import division currently consider gamete and embryo importations on a case-by-case basis (karis, ners. comm.). the practices defined in the oie animal health code (23) for bovine. ovine/cap&e and swine ova/embryos will apply to all potential shipments of wildliie embryos. strict sanitary procedures and accurate record keeping by a qualified team supervised by an accredited veterinary official are required. categorization of wildlife diseases, unlike those of livestock, has not been attempted due to an absence of basic research but, because of an existing permanent post entry quarantine (ppeq) policy for international live animal shipments such categorizations may not be necessary. a few us zoological larks, selected on a regional basis, havebeen granted ppeq status. before arriving at these zoos, animals are quarantined pre-and post-shipment for disease screening and health status certification. these animals am maintained perman&tly on the ppeq zoo premises but fl generation offspring (26 months old) may be moved after appropriate disease testing. routine preventative clinical and disease screenings are performed on the ppeq animals. quality assurance programs, including record keeping, are implemented by a veterinary medical officer who makes periodic visits to the ppeq facility.the current ppeq program provides a foundation for the international movement of nondomestic animal embryos. this approach was successful in france where early imports of large numbers of bovine embryos under similar quarantine conditions proved effective in preventing disease transmission (34) . embryo and gamete handling procedures and record keeping practices must adhere strictly to the iets manual (31) and must be supervised by an official veterinarian. all nondomestic donor animals must be isolated and appropriate samples (e.g., blood, excrement, tissue and nasal secretions) screened for pathogens at least 30 days before and after gamete/embryo collection. embryos have to be stored in the exporting country's quarantine facility (30-60 days) until approved for export.usda officials are also willing to consider semen importations using the above mentioned precautionary measures. bovine herpesvirus-l (bhvl) might be eliminated from sperm preparations by serial washing (14) . furthermore, some believe that sperm transfected with certain viruses (i.e., bovine viral diarrhea, bvd) produce embryos which degenerate before blastulation (13) , representing an in situ control against transferring contaminated embryos. these studies provide evidence suggesting that semen can be decontaminated. unfortunately, the current united states regulations do not accommodate ivm-ivf derived embryos generated from culled field sources (17) or acquired opportunistically from rare or endangered captive animals that die unexpectedly. regulatory concerns arise from the unknown health status of the donor. and the uossibilitv of intrafollicular transfection (2.3.12). as a result. standardized practices such k those &commended for bovine ivm-ivf embryo production in the oie animal health code (23) are advised when cryobanking these potentially valuable samples, pending future modifications in the regulations.the development of regulatory guidelines to safeguard against disease transmission by livestock embryos resulted from extensive investigations of embryo-pathogen interactions conducted in the late 1970s and 1980s (8, 30, 31, 32) .while similar studies for many nondomestic species are highly unlikely due to limited animal resources and research funds, studies using surplus wildlife eggs and embryos (e.g., spare zonae pellucidae) could provide preliminary data on the effectiveness of embryo washing and on zona adherence of selected nathoeens. for examole. investirrators at anriculture canada are evaluating zona adherence and pathogen transmissibility of ww to ova and embryos in free-ranging deer and elk, and are collaboratine. with usda on similar studies with foot-and-mouth disease (singh, per& comm.).future technological developments may reduce concern about possible transmission of infectious agents with embryos and spermatozoa but, meanwhile, tissue and fluid sampling and storage should become a routine practice of wildlife scientists involved in applying art. in addition to blood sampling of both patents, flushing or follicular fluids and samples from serial washing steps should be stored for subsequent tests for pathogens. for specimens retrieved from culled animal sources, tissue samples should also be preserved and physical examination of the animal performed, as previously summarized for free-ranging wildlife (10) . non-transferable embryos and unfertilized oocytes should be preserved for future tests as well. such projects are both realistic and practical, and most importantly would provide an invaluable source of information. if the approved importation of ivm-ivf derived embryos from wild sources is ever to occur, such associated biological materials must be available.by using the ppeq system it may be possible to conduct in vivo-in vivo studies in the future to definitively document the effectiveness of standardized embryo handling practices. for the present, however, it is essential that scientists and embryo team vetetinarians using art adopt routine practices maximizing data collection, emphasizing aseptic handling procedures and maintainmg detailed records as suggested in the iets manual (29.31) and the oie animal health code (23) .although progress is being made in species conservation biology using art (17, 38, 39) , continuing research in the ama of gamete and embryo cryobiology is essential (28) . concurrently, it is vital that wildlife reproductive physiologists and veterinarians adopt stringent practices to avoid disease transmission via transported materials while adapting guidelines that comply with existing govermnental regulations for domestic species. the internationalthis critical commentary reflects on a rapidly mobilised international podcast project, in which 25 urban scholars 1 from around the world provided audio recordings made about cities in australia, canada, the us, uk, india, iran, germany, singapore and new zealand. the contributions included a mix of personal and academically-grounded readings and personal in-the-moment reflections on how their respective cities were being impacted as a result of the covid-19 pandemic. city road collected and edited the audio files into a structured 30 minute podcast. the project was completed in 12 days and had three key outputs: (i) an edited podcast broadcast on applepodcast and on community radio in australia; (ii) an associated podcast/ radio write up of the project on the city road website; and (iii) a public-facing online media article published by the conversation with the podcast embedded. 1 the podcasting methodology discussed here focuses on two key issues: (i) the planning and production of the podcast; and (ii) the iterative critical reflections on the podcast process and content that underpin this commentary. dallas has used collective biography and digital storytelling methodologies since 2014, and dallas and miles have been thinking through the methodological utility of podcasting since starting city road in 2017 (rogers & herbert 2019) . building on this earlier methodological work, an initial draft of this critical commentary was written by dallas and miles before it was circulated to those who contributed audio recordings to the podcast project, inviting them to make comments or edits on the initial draft which was hosted on googledocs. this enabled an interactive collaboration whereby various colleagues' contributions helped augment, refine and strengthen the overall structure, style and narrative of this commentary.moreover, various comments posed by the podcast contributors became an integral part of this commentary, in that they are included as either direct quotes (cited as per comms below) or as part of the overall narrative within the paper. ultimately, this commentary reflects a multitude of voices -many in tune with one another but also some in tension. this somewhat unorthodox collaborative academic approach to writing is emblematic of the methodological potential of podcasting and reflective of our exploratory foray into listening to and hearing about the unfolding impacts of covid-19 on cities around the world. rather than presenting this co-authored commentary with a single voice, the author quotes bring to light the critical debates that took place and the tensions that exist between the authors, and this is more representative of this final output of this podcast project.podcast is an interview-driven podcast which is also broadcast on the 2ser community radio station in sydney, australia. community broadcasting is australia's largest independent media sector, a key pillar in the australian media landscape, and recognised internationally as one of the most successful examples of grassroots media. six million australians tune in to over 450 not-for-profit, community-owned and operated radio services operating across the country each week. these stations provide programming that caters to the needs of their diverse local communities, and many have strong traditions in social justice broadcasting. city road fits within australia's strong tradition of community radio. the show is produced by dallas, an academic who has been a community radio maker for 5 years, and miles, a walkley award-winning journalist and phd candidate researching podcasting and micro-publics. in addition to a community radio audience, city road's podcast audience largely comprises built environment professionals and urban academics in australia (about 75%) and around the world (about 25%).academic podcasting has become a new means for academics to communicate theory, methods and findings beyond the academic audiences of scholarly conferences, journals and books (llinares et al. 2018) . for paul maginn, the podcast signifies a means of opening up the so-called 'ivory tower' of academia and the paywalled protection of academic knowledge by allowing academics to broadcast directly to wider publics. the release of this project's podcast via the conversation, albeit an academic clearing house, facilitates access to the wider world that paywalled journal articles and prohibitively expensive academic books can never do. academic podcasting, as a form of scholarly output, also speaks to the policy and public 'impact agenda' that confounds contemporary academic research and praxis within academic evaluation systems such as era in australia and ref in the uk. however, the core objective of the city road project was to better understand the experience of city road listeners in their city under covid-19.cities under covid-19 is a global phenomenon. city borders, urban infrastructure and people's homes quickly became the frontline in managing covid-19 around the world (connolly et al. 2020; ren 2020) . the epicentre of the outbreak was wuhan, a megacity of 11 million people located in the middle of china (ren 2020) . wuhan was placed in complete lockdown and other cities around the world soon followed. we know viruses do not respect roadblocks, train cancellations, airport closures or national borders (connolly et al. 2020) , and scientists initially questioned the efficacy of quarantining an entire city by cutting wuhan off from the rest of china and the world (ren 2020) . nonetheless, in social terms, quarantining whole or parts of cities (ren 2020) , and self-isolation and physical-distancing more broadly (ricco 2020) , gained various degrees of popular support in many countries, with varied and uneven impacts on communities within cities. jean luc nancy (2020) argued that the emergent covid-19 city heightened the capacity for solidarity and care during the health crisis, but concerns were also quickly expressed about the virus' impact on the global economy, and the flow-on impacts on local solidarity and care networks (davies 2020) . that hardships and risks in cities under covid-19 were likely to be experienced disproportionally by those in the global north and south (farha 2020) was also highlighted, noting that the global north/south bifurcation can also obfuscate the inequalities that exist within cities.there are rich histories on hygiene, disease, quarantine, social control and the urban environment from various cities around the world (mcneill 1976) . in these narratives about the past there are stories that sound -at least on the surface -eerily like the present (badiou 2020; thomas 2020) . city road wanted to explore contemporary stories about the most recent pandemic through podcast, so dallas and miles asked academic colleagues from all over the world to open up the voice recorder on their phones and record a two-minute report from the field about their city that city road could broadcast on their podcast/radio show. the reports from the field were published under creative commons by the media organisation the conversation, and we refer to excerpts from these public domain sources in source: rogers (2020) . this commentary (you can listen to the reports from the field in full from: https://theco nvers ation.com/what-does-the-coron aviru s-pande mic-sound -like-the-voice s-of-peopl e-strug gling -seclu ding-and-survi ving-aroun d-the-world -13553). many of those who responded to the call to submit reports from the field were struggling to make sense of their experience under covid-19 in their cities. the resulting stories reflected on more-than-human cities, social solidarity, quarantine, social control and the urban environment in cities around the world, but we also discuss the themes of inequality, positionality, privilege and voice below.potentials of academic podcasting -new digital tools are increasing the speeds, formats and breadth of the communication mediums that are available to researchers. this has allowed researchers to collaborate in new ways, and this podcast project pushed at the boundaries of what a research method and research community might be. the sonic geographies literature shows social, cultural and environmental sounds can be captured, shared, and processed by podcast producers in close to real-time (gallagher & prior 2014) . thus, at city road, we were interested in the ways that audio editing might be conceptualised as having analytical qualities that complement the more conventional analysis and textual writing up of research material. a key claim here is that research outputs themselves can be sonic and textual, and that the intersection of sonic and textual outputs can open up different questions and discussions about positionality, power, place and people (gallagher & prior 2014; rogers & herbert 2019) ; themes we collectively explore below.more broadly, this podcast project fits within a genre of digital media/academic projects that aim to use sound (and image) to critically reflect on the nature of power and politics within cities. the cities and memory (2020) project and the anti-eviction mapping project (also see allegra lab 2020) offer different approaches to bringing a geographical sensibility together with sound. the cities and memory project is 'a global, collaborative sound … mapping project [that] covers more than 95 countries … [where] anyone around the world' can send them 'a sound re-cording… tell us a little about how things are wherever you live' (cities & memory 2020) . they place these stories on a gis web-based map and invite others to 'listen to the sounds and read the stories' on the map. similarly, 'the anti-eviction mapping project is a data-visualisation, data analysis, and digital storytelling collective documenting the dispossession and resistance upon gentrifying landscapes [in] san francisco bay area, los angeles, and new york city' (anti-eviction mapping project 2020), who partner with a range of organisations to analyse the audio material they collect and map, such as oral histories (graziani & mary 2020) . in this case the audio editing suite is a key tool in the analytical process. dallas and miles are interested in the idea of audio editing as a form of urban critique at city road too, and so they asked people to send them mobile phone recorded audio clips about their cities.call for audio stories -when dallas and miles were planning their monthly episode of city road in march 2020 they were in the midst of the covid-19 pandemic in sydney. they discussed the role of academic 'experts' in the debate about covid-19 and cities to date, such as academic experts' radio commentary on covid-19, and how academics might separate their expert role from their personal experience of being locked down in their cities and homes. they suspected that this was a question other academics might have been struggling with at the time. city road has always found the work of tanja dreher (2010) to be instructive at moments like these. tanja's work reminds us that sometimes it is more important to listen to the stories of those in our cities than it is to speak at people about their cities. tanja submitted an audio piece to the project in which she talks about the importance of listening at this key moment:listening for solidarity … is not an end in itself, the aim is to listen for calls and cues to action, this might be direct or indirect, also to privilege and amplify the knowledge of those most impacted and most committed to social solidarity, and to keep listening, listening as a continuation, keep listening to better understand how to work for more just futures beyond the contemporary crisis. (tanja dreher, wollongong, australia. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-agloba l-pande mic-1#t=9:20)with this in mind, we asked academics from around the world to send us a report from the field about their city. we wanted to know more about academics' experiences as they confronted the many social, political, economic and material implications of covid-19 in their city (butler 2020) . so we put out the following call on twitter to ask our academic audience if they would work with city road on this project.as can be seen from figure 1 , we did not explicitly ask for academic reports from the field on the topic of covid-19 and cities, but many contributors took covid-19 as the context nonetheless. in fact, city road gave prospective contributors very little instruction at all, choosing instead to allow contributors the freedom to experiment with the broad and purposely vague questions. some participants asked for more clarity about the audio recording process and questions, and city road offered advice on a case-by-case basis. for one contributor, the wording of a follow-up tweet by dallas (figure 2 ) made the opportunity to submit an audio clip: a much less intimidating prospect -as it was immediate, 'quick, dirty and direct', a snapshot of the city … i interpreted it as you seeking (and us easily being able to assert) our expertise about our (everyday) experience of our place -to which we could lay unique claim. (pill; per comms)the different types of audio submissions -a total of 25 academics 1 submitted reports from the field recorded on their phones. city road received well over an hour of audio content and dallas and miles decided to edit the audio material more than they had initially planned. the audio reports from the field also operate as important stand-alone vignettes about cities under covid-19, so city road provided them in full on the city road website. 1 as noted above, city road gave the contributors a lot of freedom when it came to what their audio piece might sound like and a wide range of audio styles were submitted. for example, natalie says, 'you almost discouraged sense-making in your instructions--i'm thinking of how you told me not to 'overthink' it' (osborne; per comms). some had no prior experience of podcasting 'but summoned the courage to "go for it" and to grab the opportunity of 'making sense' of and "reporting" about their city' (alam; per comms). some of the contributions were raw and noisy, others were academic and narrated, and others were free-flowing but analytical. in our discussions about this writing project, carolyn talked about a difference between speaking as a 'civilian' rather than 'academic'; i was just focusing on what i was seeing and not seeing out my window. it mapped well on eugene's framework [which we discuss below], but in that case, i [became], so to speak, a data point being fit into a post-facto theoretical framework. (whitzman; per comms)one of the more, if not the most, academically reflexive contributions to the podcast was submitted by eugene mccann. other contributions ranged from more general free-flowing, off-the-cuff observations to deeply personal reflections, such roger keil's. keil's contribution was recorded on the front step of a friend's house while in lockdown and implicitly encodes his academic work on infectious diseases: i approached it in a naïve way, almost unthinking of the context, the medium, the potential audience. i did it as an individual who stepped outside literally for the first time, in the middle of a two-week period of quarantine, to speak into a phone. despite the fact that i had spent more than 15 years since sars in toronto in 2003 studying infectious diseases in cities, very little in my contribution was premeditated. (keil; per comms)beth watts talked about some of the contributions being 'personal and immediate' (watts; per comms). madeleine pill talked about the contributions operating as metaphorical sonic time capsules:what i find interesting is that it provides a snapshot of a moment in time -and enables you as a researcher to therefore travel back in time to reflect on your feelings and understanding of that time, and how these have subsequently changed. capturing the moment enables you to revisit it as a resource for reflection; it also points to productive possibilities for longitudinal research -of how your own experiences and understanding of these changes. (pill; per comms).listening to others' contributions can also lead to self-reflection, perhaps even anxiety:on listening to the edited version, [i] was struck by the contrast between the 'academic' and 'personal' interpretations of the brief … should i have been 'more academic'? (watts; per comms)we had two deeply moving contributions whereby tooran and deepti talked about the cities and people in the global south they care about from afar; people like kurt and tanja who talked about people outside our academic bubbles, and how this huge pandemic may impact their lives … [and] academics who talked about faraway lands, iran and india, to share the stories of people and places that otherwise would have been missed in this collection. (alizadeh; per comms)in fact, all of the reports from the field blended 'academic' and 'personal' interpretations of cities under covid-19, but these were expressed in different registers of oration:i accepted dallas's invitation not because i had done years of work on infectious disease or because i was a sonic geographer but because i was a captive in isolation in my own hometown, but not at home. speaking into my phone helped me find the ground i needed to stand on the terrain i needed to re-familiarise myself with. (keil; per comms) while everyone approached the report from the field audio recording task in a different way, there was a shared view among those involved in writing this commentary that the podcast project was underwritten by our various positions of privilege and that the structural capacities of these positions enabled us to have our voices heard.maginn, who has written on qualitative methods, posed a pertinent question after having reviewed the first draft of the commentary:is it the case that the podcast -the whole process from commissioning to publication -is in fact a methodological and empirical tool of 21st century academic praxis? (maginn; per comms).dallas and miles were keen to explore the methodological and collaborative possibilities of this potentially new form of academic praxis through the podcast project. as the producers at city road, dallas and miles were pivotal to the practical organisation of the podcast project and the conceptual organisation and presentation of the final podcast product. dallas and miles initially positioned this podcast project as a 'collaboration', but through our discussions via this collective writing project we felt that it was not a 'collaboration' in the traditional sense of the term. beth watts captured this point when she said:a particular kind of collaboration -you guys were the lynchpin, we haven't had any dialogue (as far as i'm aware) between the individual contributors. you have played an important curatorial role -worth recognising the specific kind of collaboration? i think to involve so many people so quickly it had to be like this, and actually at the time, a more onerous collaborative process might have put me off given the other pressures. (watts; per comms) dallas and miles are interested in the sonic geography work of people like gallagher and prior (2014, p. 268) , which shows 'that audio recording produces distinctive forms of data and modes of engaging with spaces, places and environments which can function in different (and complementary) ways to more commonly used media such as written text, numbers and images'. there is an emerging body of scholarship on using radio and podcasting as a research method in media studies (e.g. tomalin & crandall hollick 2002; rayner 2016) , and in dallas and miles' recent work they have argued that podcasting is being used in academia as an 'engaged research methodology, as a research dissemination medium, as a pedagogical teaching tool, or as an assemblage of these' (rogers & herbert 2019, p. 4) .the city road 'brand', as an assemblage of teaching, research and dissemination, is important to how dallas and miles organised and edited the reports from the field into the final podcast product. after dallas heard eugene mccann's report from the field dallas asked miles, who audio edited the podcast, if they should use the four 'dialectical assemblages' outlined by eugene in his piece to organise the rest of the contributions: namely: (i) invisibility and visibility; (ii) privilege and privation; (iii) selfishness and solidarity; and (iv) absence and presence. interestingly, eugene said, 'i was "primed" in what i said in the recording by the teaching i'd been doing', and his four ideas went on to frame the podcast:one of my favourite urban books is marshall berman's dialectical investigation of urbanism, called all that is solid melts into air. a key recurring device in the book is berman's use of the phrase 'and yet' to complicate our understanding of what we think we know about cities. there is never just one thing going on and we shouldn't assume that what we see is all that's going on -there is one thing going on in front of us, 'and yet', there is much more we can't see; and none of it is permanent. i've been thinking about cities as dialectical assemblage this week as vancouver has shut down. (eugene mccann, vancouver, canada. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-agloba l-pande mic-1#t=1:43)the preface to the 1988 penguin edition of berman's (1982, pp. 8-9 ) classic book reads:[o]ne of my book's central themes … [is] the importance of communication and dialogue … in a world where meanings melt into air, [communication and dialogue]… are among the few solid sources of meaning we can count on … we need to make the most of these possibilities; they should shape the way we organise our cities and our lives. berman's (1982) dialectical thinking on cities was characterised by an attention to the complexities, ironies, and potentialities of modernity, broadly defined. he was suspicious of narrow orthodox thinking and lamented what he saw as the loss of nineteenth-century thinkers' willingness to be 'simultaneously enthusiasts and enemies of modern life, wrestling inexhaustibly with its ambiguities and contradictions' and the replacement of that sensibility, in the twentieth century, with a lurch 'far more toward rigid polarities and flat totalisations'. he regretted '[o]pen visions of modern life hav[ing] been supplanted by closed ones, both/and by either/or' (berman 1982, p.24) . his attempt to retrieve the both/and approach leads him to repeatedly use 'and yet' as a rhetorical device to undermine points he has just made and propel his narrative on to as-yetunexplored interpretations. figure 3 provides an illustration of how miles used eugene's four dialectical assemblages, as drawn from berman, as a means of thematically organising the audio edit and the submitted audio material in the podcast. on seeing this visualisation of the audio editing process, eugene reflected:i was also thinking about that screenshot and how it shows that editing sound is a spatial(ised) activity, whereas we maybe tend not to think about audio as spatial. so, does that software's spatialisation of the audio across a grid have an impact on the way storytelling happens? (mccann; per coms)arguably, a geographical sensibility is at work here at a number of levels. first, berman's ideas and theoretical insights were used by eugene to organise the insights in his audio contribution to the project. second, dallas and miles further used eugene's berman-inspired framework to organise the audio editing sessions and the presentation of all the audio contributions. but not everyone was convinced of this:arguably, this is a theoretical sensibility, not necessarily a geographic sensibility. i would argue that you, dallas, sought to find a framework to make sense of what you were hearing from different data points (the fact that they were from different cities mattered less than they were from different genders, ethnicities, and in rare cases such as students or sessionals, economic classes). eugene contributed that framework, just as a great quote from an interviewee sometimes frames an article! (whitzman; per comms) madeleine pill, a city road listener, further complicates the claim this could be solely understood as a geographic, analytical sensibility, suggesting that there were 'branding' issues at play too:perhaps some recognition that you selected the contribution of a senior academic to provide the analytical frame for others' contributions -used in an 'academic' rather than personal way for the structure … did using this frame give you confidence about city road pod's 'brand'?' (pill; per comms)the answer is, 'yes'.finally, the soundscapes of cities often take on a familiar, stereotypical aesthetic. most people, if asked, 'what does a city sound like?', will most likely make reference to the sound of cars, buses, trucks, trams, trains, and people in heavily trafficked and populated areas. these cityscape sounds are representations of what we think cities sound, look and feel like, and city road were interested in probing if cities under covid-19 sounded different. as susan smith (1994) reminds us, soundscapes enable us to foreground the relevance of 'experience and emotion' in place. miles allowed lots of 'space' between the audio excerpts in the final podcast to allow the listener to listen to the soundscapes in each city. we turn to the four key observations in the podcast next.this final section uses the podcast editing framework from eugene's report from the field to present a set of key observations about the podcast project.[i] think a lot about the sound of the city having changed so much, plus (and very much related) the lack of people in our cities. what is a city without traffic and noise and people? a very uncanny, weird, eerie place. it's like a civilisation abandoned -not because the people have been driven out by war, but because they're hiding from harm in their homes. strange, strange, strange. sort of cinematic in its weirdness. (watts, per comms) what was fascinating about some of the reports from the field was that the covid-19 containment measures had altered the soundscape of the city, in some cases quite drastically, as the following comment about an absence of familiar sounds in the city suggests.it emphasises what we have taken for granted in cities, that they are peopled social places … but suddenly, what we find is that the cities that we know are suddenly different … but it is not just a physical emptiness … but listening is important because there are significant structural and political questions at stake here. this reporter from the field is listening to and engaging with the quietness of the city, and this listening reveals an absence of people and other sounds that are otherwise familiar to this city. the audio clip captures this quietness in a way that text cannot (listen via the link above). although as carolyn whitzman noted:to be fair, you asked for a quiet place! certainly it was easier to find that quiet place in the covid city, but … that will only reinforce the anti-density discourse that is emerging out of covid -ignoring overcrowding in homes due to insane rents and focusing on re-establishing the privilege of the quarter acre block'. (whitzman; per comms) it is true there is a politics to the quietness of cities, and that we asked contributors to find a quiet place to record. nonetheless, cameron murray reported from brisbane that his city was quieter:it's rather pleasant with a little more peace and quiet in the middle of the city, but it's noticeable, the change it definitely feels a lot slower, a lot quieter, a lot less hustle and bustle. (cameron murray, brisbane, australia. play audio: https://sound cloud. com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-thecity-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=4:55)the sound of the city we hear throughout the broader podcast is almost defined by an absence of the familiar; and this opens up the possibility for thinking about different futures. the sounds of birds that are present in many of the recordings are not necessarily new to the city. these birds have perhaps always been there. however, the social distancing and lock down measures have changed the urban soundscape in such a way that some reporters from the field could now hear these birds and spoke about hearing them; 'you can hear birds, the noise travels further, because you don't have the hum and hisses of traffic on… the streets. (jason byrne, tasmania, australia. play audio: https:// sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ningto-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=26:05).thus, the familiar anthropocentric sounds of the city, which are produced by the presence of people and their technologies in cities -such as people in cars, buses and trains -are temporarily suspended and replaced by a new more-thanhuman set of urban sounds. these less familiar sounds are revealed through an absence in the soundscape of the city; a sonic window, perhaps, into a different urban future where non-human forms of life can strive in new ways in our cities (houston 2019); 'well, yes', says carolyn (whitzman; per comms), 'coyotes have made it into my downtown-adjacent neighbourhood'. our anthropocentric cities have been designed to allow people to occupy urban space in many forms, from owning private property in the form of housing, to separating children and adults through school and workplaces, to congregating in a shared park at lunchtime, to travelling on public transport to and from work. as covid-19 changed the city socially and structurally it was registered in sound:in [my] soundscape, you can hear me typing, my toddler babbling, my 9 year old practicing the violin, and my neighbour's daughter outside on her deck singing really loudly. i recorded it in a moment of frustration: i was unable to concentrate.' (dombroski, per comm. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/ kelly -dombr oski-sound s-of-the-home-in-agloba l-pandemic) privilege and privation -dreher (2010, p.100) argues that scholars and the wider public need to attend to the politics of 'speaking' and 'listening', because an 'attention to listening shifts the focus and responsibility for change from marginalised voices and on to the conventions, institutions and privileges which shape who and what can be heard'. the transformation of parts of the urban soundscape, from hustling and bustling, to noisy and chaotic, to quiet, subdued and eerie, also represents a displacement or reduction in the sounds of capitalism:the capitalist soundscape is exemplified by, for example, the thousands of people who travel into our cities each day for work, or who interact with one another -socially and professionally -to the beeping of eftpos machines and the ringing of tills as people purchase everything from a coffee to designer clothing. (maginn; per comms) some scholars may see cities under covid-19 as a relegation of neoliberalism. perhaps there will be some kind of structural transformation, but how deep and transformative that will be is an open question. in the short-term:we've seen here pictures of people panic buying toilet paper and other staples in supermarkets, large numbers of people still gathering on beaches and in parks, not to mention incredibly distressing images of thousands of people queued up at [social security] branches trying to access desperately needed income support … we're struggling with the effects on our members with the increased stigmatisation of communities of colour … who are being blamed for the transmission of the virus. (kurt iveson, sydney, australia. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=13:30) kate murray also pointed to a new short-term 'normal' in an increasingly sanitised city: at the top of swanson st trams are pulling in to be met by a team of cleaners with masks and gloves smelling of chemical sprays as they methodically wipe down every surface every door every handle before the tram moves on again with no passengers on board. (kate murray, melbourne, australia. play audio: https://sound cloud. com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-thecity-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=4:04)the retreat or reduction of the sounds of capitalism, however short-lived, amplified the sounds of homelessness, unemployment, inequality, disadvantage, and overcrowding in global north and south cities: the overpopulated slums who unfortunately are going to be the most affected by this virus. there are cases where the poor indian workers in these informal settlements who initially migrated to the city for work are now basically piling back to their villages because of the strict covid-19 measures. (deepti prasad, reporting on india from sydney. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=22:30) just imagine going through the health crisis in iran. you live in a country that the economy is already broken; decade-long economic sanctions have put iran's government in a position that no stimulation package can be offered. (tooran alizadeh, reporting on iran from sydney. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-thecity-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=23:18)the sounds are 'symbolic of social structures that send ripples of anguish and anxiety throughout the city within particular groups; the poor, indigenous peoples, single parents, and especially women, refugees, asylum seekers, sex workers and more' (maginn; per comms). elle davidson, an aboriginal urban planning academic, talked about the effects of covid-19 on her family living in regional australia (play audio: https://sound cloud. com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-cityin-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=14:42). tanja said:we can listen to the most impacted, where the first nations people massively over represented in prisons, or asylum seekers in immigration detention, or people without a home, and also refusing the voices that would claim that quarantine in luxury hotels is just like prison. listening as social solidarity also means listening out, listen out for the structural changes underway. (tanja dreher, wollongong, australia. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=9:15) thus, while this pandemic caused suffering for professionals, including academics, there were also classed, racial, gendered and other dynamics related to who can and cannot, for example, stay at home (valentino-devries et al. 2020) . the urban soundscape, as a fundamental aspect of society, pointed to some of these structural issues:i was … reflecting on my privileged position two storeys above the street … i was contrasting it with folks who are still crowded in shelters, long-term care, etc., whose health and safety is even more acutely compromised in the covid city. (whitzman; per comms)in the podcast, beth said, i also saw four people begging on princes st, i doubt earning very much money from that, at the moment, given the streets are so very empty and there were also either police or community support officers … speaking to some of them, and i wonder if there is a bit more of an assertive response at the moment given concerns about people being out and about. (beth watts, edinburgh, uk. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/ user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-agloba l-pande mic-1#t=20:15) and like all structural conditions, we made this podcast with multiple layers of sound from each city. some of these sounds were brought to the fore while others were pushed to the background, some can be heard by many people, but others can only be heard by those attuned to them; attuned to 'hearing' their structural meanings. these soundscapes are dynamic and temporal, and will vary across time, space and population. eugene put it like this, 'who is heard (literally and figuratively) in this city is classed, racialised, etc.' (mccann per comms), while carolyn said:this [podcast] is great, but again, is it not the sonic space of privilege -those who have the technological education and equipment that allow them to share their stories. does covid-19 not further invisibilise (or, more precisely, make more voiceless) those who are on the street / under the bridges / without a political voice?' (whitzman; per comms) information about covid-19 was highly mediated and people were heavily reliant on the media for information about the pandemic. people could not understand the pandemic through their own individual, direct sensory experience alone. thus, it was a strange juxtaposition that voice was further removed from some marginalised people during the pandemic at the very moment they became more physically visible and exposed in cities.selfishness and solidarity-selfishness and solidarity can be seen in the contrast between people hoarding toilet paper, in buying it up in large amounts and stores for example, versus the various acts of mutual aid. (eugene mccann, vancouver, canada. play audio: https://sound cloud. com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-thecity-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=12:50)during covid-19, many people were unable to move through or gather in cities in the ways they had in the past, and they were now gathering in different sonic domains in new ways, such as though digital audio and video platforms, such as zoom, and using their voices and embodied sonic capacities to occupy the city in new ways. around the world -perhaps more often in middle class neighbourhoods (valentino-devries et al. 2020) -people opened their windows or sat on their balconies to make noise or to create music to acknowledge the essential health workers who were on the frontlines of the health crisis.normal forms of communication or collective action are protests, 'sit ins', gatherings of various kinds. what's unique about sound is it can bring us together across space; it's our weapon against social distancing.' (watts, per comms) we hear this in the podcast too; the lincoln cathedral:has been lit up with a blue light in the evening … meant to coincide with the nationwide movement to clap for the national health service workers who have been on the frontline of the coronavirus pandemic at eight pm and this was described as a very visual way to show them the city's thanks for the sacrifices they're making and saving lives during this crisis. (creighton connolly, lincoln, uk. play audio:https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-agloba l-pande mic-1#t=11:25) when research and other urban scholarship is represented in journals through text alone, this form of scholarship 'does not account for the body, or the sounds of the body' (harter 2019, p. 126) . harter (2019, p. 126) argues, '[p] odcasting stretches the tendencies and capacities of academics toward multi-sensorial forms of inquiry' and this allows the sounds of the body to be more fully incorporated into the research process and outputs. harter (2019, p. 127) further argues that more conventional research outputs are often 'limited in their ability to register the visceral experience of suffering and resilience'. harter is referring to the participants of research in this quote, but we suggest it might equally apply to those involved in this podcast project and we encourage you to listen to the audio links provided herein. there were lots of references to the visceral experience of being in the city under covid-19 in the reports from the field, including this comment by kate murray: i can hear birds, prominently, usually the birds in this neighbourhood are drowned out by the footsteps and bicycle bells and cars, trucks, motorcycles, construction sites. but today it's like the shutting down of all this industry and business, the hustle and bustle is all swept away and it's revealed underlying layers of sound that we had forgotten in the city. (kate murray, melbourne, australia. play audio: https:// sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47liste ning-to-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=5:33) you can hear people sharing positive messages across urban space in several reports from the field, and there was a strong sense in which the academics were talking to each other in their reports too:keep listening to better understand how to work for more just futures beyond the contemporary crisis. (tanja dreher, wollongong, australia. play audio: https:// sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47liste ning-to-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=12:12)another post-podcast reflection captured the sense of positivity and solidarity too:if this lockdown continues for a few more days we, pedestrians, joggers, cyclists could perhaps reclaim our suburban streets from automobiles; many small selfless acts of care are already emerging around us either through crowdfunding on facebook or students volunteering for delivery services to the doors of the old and frail. i sense that the covid city is filled with care-full possibilities. (alam; per comms)absence and presence -the immediacy and intimacy created through the collaborative podcast project, as people shared their experiences of their city under covid-19, as viewed from their verandah/porch, garden, second floor apartment, bike ride or car journey, seemed to bridge the tyranny of physical distance. this underscored the importance of podcasting as a process rather than a final product (harter 2019) :but listening to the podcast did remind me of the pleasures as well as the scary aspects of silence. i think beth's comments remind me that we need to pay heed to the absences and silences. we didn't really listen to what people who aren't us had to say. we didn't listen to the places where front-line workers were trying to carry out business as usual in dangerous conditions (taxis or supermarkets). we need to reflect on our geographic and class privilege in being able to reflect on altered soundscapes. (whitzman; per comms)over the course of the 30 minute podcast city road used sound in an effort to paint a somewhat textured soundscape for the listener to illustrate the changes taking place in cities around the world. in developing and broadcasting this soundscape city road sought to offer an alternative take on cities under covid-19, such that it would provoke people's sonic and visual imaginations. the empty and eerie sounds of cities that were, at this moment in time, often absent of people and technology revealed just how seriously everyone was taking the invisible threat of this virus:the church bells down the street have taken on a new meaning, a kind of an eerie presence in a soundscape that has fundamentally changed'. (matt novacevski, melbourne, australia. play audio: https:// sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47liste ning-to-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=28:41)the city under covid-19 had its own urban soundscape that was directly linked to the global circulation of covid-19 and any sound that managed to cut through was a reminder of the danger:the threat of the presence of the virus in the air between and around us emphasises the invisible circulations that flow through our biophysical existence. we are more aware of the invisible. (eugene mccann, vancouver, canada. play audio: https:// sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47liste ning-to-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=24:45)there was also an attentiveness to each other:there's not very many of us out here in the streets but those of us who are we are so attentive to one another … if someone sees me coming they give me a wide, wide berth, they'll take an extra step in order to maintain as much distance as they can … every movement that i make has an opposite, has a reciprocal movement in someone else, we are paying so much attention to each other while also being very far apart. (natalie osborne, brisbane, australia. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=17:00)and there was an attentiveness to non-human others, and a listening out to the morethan-human city, that we noted above:i'm not sure if you can hear it but there is a red kite whistling … this time of the year always brings new life and a lot of joy to people, as the grass starts to grow, and the trees grow leaves again, and the bees are out finding new hives and the birds are busily singing. it's eerily quiet … it doesn't really feel like a pandemic. (em dale, oxford, uk. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/ user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-agloba l-pande mic-1#t=6:09) and finally, for some, there was a sense of lockdown déjà vu:i think because christchurch has gone through this before with the earthquakes in 2010 and 2011, with a day-long lockdown with the terrorist attack last year, we know what we're doing. people here know that you just have to hunker down … and we're just going to wait it out.' (kelly dombroski, christchurch, new zealand. play audio: https://sound cloud.com/user-28378 9701/47-liste ning-to-the-city-in-a-globa l-pande mic-1#t=27:56)this critical commentary, and the rapidly mobilised international podcast project that it reflects upon involved 25 academics from around the world. city road asked academic colleagues to open up the voice recorder on their phones to create a report from the field about their experience in their city under covid-19. the podcasting methodology presented here covers the curated production of the podcast and critical reflection on the podcast process through collaborative writing. therefore, this commentary was a key part of this broader methodological endeavour. the methodology may seem unorthodox to some, but it represents a development of existing qualitative methodologies (e.g. digital storytelling, collective writing and collaborative biography) rather than a break from them.put simply, the podcast represents more than just an audio output. as an exploratory, curated academic project the podcast, along with academic podcasting in general, extends the methodological tools available to researchers to collect and analyse oral/ aural data alongside text. it enhances the methodological tools available to us to understand cities within and beyond the context of a global pandemic. a key lesson from this project is that some of the most insightful reflections about podcasting and cities under covid-19 were produced through the collaborative writing process rather than through the production of the podcast. this might not surprise qualitative researchers because the production of the podcast was highly curated by dallas and miles and they made all the editing decisions in the audio editing suite. by comparison, the writing of this commentary was described by some of those involved as being more collaborative, analytical and revealing.therefore, each step in the methodology revealed different types of insights. in the tightly controlled production of the podcast stage of the project -as with much qualitative research -the sampling strategy underpinning podcast production was purposive. that is, the primary aim was to elicit the experiences of a particular group or community, and in this case city road targeted urban studies scholars. again, as with qualitative research in general, the podcast does not lay claim to generalisability. rather, it provided explorative and situational insights at a specific moment in time from each contributor. it was fortuitousness for city road that eugene mccann framed his contribution with four dialectical assemblages, inspired by berman, but it was ultimately dallas and miles, rather than the broader collective represented in the podcast, that used this conceptual framework to illuminate and bring into sharper focus the different concerns and questions raised by the various contributors.the discussions about the podcast project that form the substance of this collaborative writing piece were much more revealing than the podcast production process. these discussions quickly turned to positionality, privilege, power, people, place and voice. although the contributors to the podcast were broadly diverse in terms of gender, age, academic position and geographical location, with contributors from nine countries across the global north and south, the views and experiences reflected in the podcast were largely, although not exclusively, coming from various positions of privilege. while every participant was affected personally and professionally by the covid-19 pandemic, and these stories are important, there were big silences too. various minority groups' voices and experiences were absent from the podcast; the sacked service-sector workers sleeping rough on the streets of london or rohingya refugees in a bangladesh camp. we only hear a glimpse of these types of stories in the podcast, when we hear about informal settlements in india, or the effects of covid-19 in iran, or the plight of aboriginal families in regional australia.who and what was, and was not, heard thus became central questions in our post-podcast discussions. so much of what we learnt about covid-19 in cities was mediated by news, current affairs, and social media (and by policies and laws). the financial and other logics underwriting these media routinely privilege powerful voices and institutions, as marginalised voices struggle to be heard. it was hard to hear the full force of the virus' social, political, economic impacts of covid-19 in cities. as a digital methodology, then, the question of who gets to speak through podcasting and who is listening deserves more attention.future research could target the tension we have noted here in this emerging digital methodology; that is, the power and privilege that is afforded to academics to speak and the silences in our debates about cities. indeed, this type of critical reflexivity opens up a longer process of engaging with urban soundscapes along political, social, economic and other lines, and beyond the moments of recording and listening. being critically reflexive requires slowing down to listen and observe, to ponder and reflect, and to integrate and synthesise. it might also require us to put the microphone down. as a digital qualitative methodology, podcast production with accompanying critical reflection opens up a space for wider critical discussion and researcher reflection once a podcast is released into the world.insgesamt werden staaten bemüht sein, eine allzu große abhängigkeit von lieferungen aus dem ausland zu verringern, gerade in kritischen bereichen wie medizinprodukte, medikamente und ähnlichem. die welt nach der ersten echten pandemie seit 100 jahren wird fast sicher in vielerlei hinsicht eine andere sein, als zuvor. ob eine bessere oder eine schlechtere hängt von allen beteiligten ab. die informationstechnologie kann einen wichtigen beitrag dazu leisten, dass der erste fall eintritt.ich wünsche allen lesern, auch im namen des hauptherausgebers thomas ludwig, dass sie die aktuellen herausforderungen erfolgreich meistern.herzliche grüße peter pagelchange was necessary. while the change process was complex and not without storming and controversy, the model was adapted to the unique culture of the institution and its commitment to be the best of the best.our small consulting team, cornish & associates stepped care solutions ltd., has worked with over 100 colleges and universities across north america who have expressed interest in sc2.0. recently, provincial and territorial governments in canada have contracted with us to introduce the model more broadly through the country's publicly funded healthcare system. a core feature of sc2.0 is its flexibility and adaptability. some have remarked that it is more of a recovery care design process than a treatment model. it is certainly not a manualized program. in keeping with the principles of distributed co-design, it looks different in every location. the case study presented below describes co-design stories across all six stages of the implementation cycle. these have been drawn from experiences on our own campus and work we have done with a variety of institutions in both canada and the united states. many details have been changed to preserve anonymity.one of the first institutions we worked with is well known for its highly competitive admission standards and has solid reputation globally. over the years this university had invested more in mental health than comparable institutions but the concerns about access had been raised by students. was there duplication, were there inefficiencies, could we do better? a senior administrator asked me to serve on an external administrative review panel. we visited the campus and met with a variety of stakeholders internal and external to the department. we discovered about midway through the first day of consultations that representation from one key department responsible for addressing a large proportion of mental health programming was missing. we were surprised initially and then discovered that relationships between three student wellness service departments were strained. with a little initial resistance, we managed to arrange meetings with all parties.at the end of the first day, during a break, i described our stepped care model to my fellow administrative review panellists. they were intrigued expressing interest in learning more. i said, maybe we could meet after our consultations are finished and i could share with both of you a presentation i delivered elsewhere. we asked one of the senior members of the department under review if we could get access to a room where i would have av technology to present on my new model. of course, the answer was yes. but, curious, this administrator asked if others would be welcome. we discussed privately as a panel and agreed to open it up to others. four representatives of two of the three wellness departments attended. it was hard to read the interest of participants. the atmosphere in the room was somewhat guarded. within a month our report was delivered. among the recommendations, we suggested some steps be taken to improve collaboration among the units.i thought that was the end of my work with the university. however, about 1 year later, i was invited to present on the stepped care model to all clinical and administrative staff in the three wellness departments. i worked in advance with leaders of two wellness departments (the only two who were intrigued), to plan the agenda. the leadership teams of the two departments sat at the same table as me near the front of the room. i thought this was a good sign; the leaders were in this together. collaboration was happening. there was both excitement and apprehension throughout the day of the workshop. many were intrigued, however, a handful of very vocal critics held sway. these clinicians, some from each department were sceptical. their questions at times bordered on hostility. it was, it turned out, the beginning of a period of significant storming.some of the clinicians filed grievances with their union. others consulted with their professional organizations. sc2.0 was considered a potential threat to their professional autonomy, ethical practices and even their livelihoods. the model was perceived as prescriptive -mandating low-intensity, low-quality programming, some of which they feared would be facilitated by other professions, paraprofessionals or peer supporters.i soon discovered that all was not well between two of the three leadership teams. one leader expressed serious concerns about sc2.0 and dropped out of the consultation process with us. another leader, while not hostile to the sc2.0 model, did not see it as relevant at the time. her department was not slated for amalgamation like the other two. the third leader continued to work with us, convinced that stepped care held promise. despite the internal conflict, the university administration decided to go ahead with adapting the model. they invited me to visit again, this time to work with a smaller design team. the group on this team were enthusiastic and committed. this group knew why they were working on transformation and were wowed by sc2.0. however, one of the two departments had completely disengaged. the why did not seem clear to them. as such, collaboration between the units deteriorated. the one department that decided to go it alone received some institutional support. lower intensity programs were launched including e-mental health tools and a rapid access system. the departmental leadership seemed pleased and i was too, but the transformation process was on shaky ground.our sc2.0 consulting team offered to help resolve some of the conflict between leaders of the two separate units that were to be merged at a future date. the unit that was more engaged with us was comprised of counsellors, psychologists and social workers. they identified as non-medical. the disengaged unit was more medically oriented; the mental health counsellors worked alongside health clinic staff, including physicians, psychiatrists, nurses and nurse practitioners. i was surprised initially that the medically oriented unit was not as interested in the model. stepped care was initially developed for medical settings to improve coordination and transfer of care between primary care physicians and psychiatrists. but the drive for change had historically come from primary care practitioners who were frustrated with challenges accessing psychiatric care or consultation for their patients. at this university, psychiatrists were the majority among the staff of physicians, nurses, and nurse practitioners. the unit was led by a psychiatrist. all the staff psychiatrists worked fee-for-service which was covered by students' insurance. it was a private practice model of care. they did not receive benefits from the university and their allegiance was to their patients rather than the institution.first, we met with the leaders separately to gauge their interest in mediation. they agreed only if the sessions would be structured according to an agenda developed in advance with their input. over the course of 5 months, we met four times via web conference with the two leaders. an agenda was developed collaboratively prior to the first meeting and notes were "flip-charted" using the screen share feature. we carried forward the same agenda across all meetings, adjusting as we went along. common goals were identified which include developing recommendations for:(a) the relationship between the two leaders. while the relationship between the two leaders had been strained, we got a sense that they liked each other. they recognized how their different styles were complementary. one was thoughtful and cautious, whereas the other was passionate and eager to act. early on we also named 'the elephant in the room"-one of them might be vulnerable. was one of their positions at risk with restructuring? we agreed after some discussion that it would be useful to explore the kinds of roles they envisioned with restructuring. it turned out that the administration was not in a rush to complete restructuring. instead, they were interested in what both leaders would recommend following campus-wide consultations that had begun prior to our first contact with them. the university had a reputation for consulting widely and repeatedly on many issues. the focus of the consultation was vague. it was intended to gather all and any input on mental health experiences and ideas. after 5 months of consultation, and support from our team, the two leaders completed their report. it recommended a flatter organizational structure with a variety of adjacent lead roles. to facilitate development of the new care model (yet to be designed), the following lead roles were adopted: healthy campus lead, primary care lead, mental health lead, collaborative lead and stepped care lead. the report also recommended that the merger would ensure that all staff would be funded by a blend of insurance and operating revenue and that all would be eligible for benefits. the new money and matching central funds would allow for this.in hindsight we had attempted to move too quickly to solutions. we had only gotten to the first step in the distributive design cycle-working at the inner circle with leaders. while we had made strides with the internal leadership team, we had underestimated conflict among staff. we thought we had solved some problems to their satisfaction. low-intensity programming, including e-mental health tools, was helping to curb student demand already. aligning revenue streams would bring clinical staff on board. and flatter leadership roles would ensure meaningful roles or existing leaders following restructuring. but the buy-in was not there. the two leaders had heard a number of complaints, but collectively we assumed we already had answers: low-intensity programming and stepped care. yes, consultation had happened. broad input had been obtained. but not true co-design. while all stakeholders agreed that demand for care had been exceeding supply, there was no shared perspective on why this was the case. disregarding sinek's appeal to always with "why" (sinek, 2009) , we had moved directly to "what". and we were nowhere near a well thought out implementation method (how). a public relations crisis made the false start obvious. although never proven, rumours circulated that some disaffected staff had warned the student union that the stepped care program was a threat to good service. in an effort to save money and decrease wait times, service quality would be compromised. some clinical staff left the university. they were uncomfortable with the prospect of altering their practices in alignment with the model that was already being adopted. highly critical articles were published in the student newspaper.the university communications team became involved. senior administration officials had no desire to reverse the course on stepped care-after all, early indications were (contrary to the press reports) that it was working. secondly, funders were very interested in the model. however, with input from the public relations office, a decision was made to rebrand the change. instead of stepped care, the new approach was labelled "cooperative care". this was a brilliant move because not only would there be a commitment to stepped care principles, but in addition, the issue that had derailed implementation (internal and inter-department conflict) could be addressed with a focus on relationship-building. the crisis became an opportunity to implement a formal process of working through storming at two levels: level 1 among clinicians and leadership and level 2 with persons with lived experience (students and the student union leadership).after the dust settled, it became clear through deliberate engagement with clinicians, student union representatives, as well peer helpers what the problem areas were. the "why change" became more obvious. students found the current organization of programming confusing. why were there two departments offering similar services? which one do i go to? why do i have to wait so long when we have more funding and more staff than many other colleges and universities? do we really have quality programming? can't we do better? by pausing implementation and asking stakeholders whether and/or why anything (whether it be programming, clinical roles or leadership structures) should change, motivation to participate in the design process increased. when the clinicians learned that changes would address inequities in funding between the two units, preserve their professional principles and values through horizontally organized process leadership roles, and that the decisions on how and what to implement would involve them directly, buyin further increased. likewise, when the students learned that access to care would be streamlined and the new model would only add programming, not remove anything they valued, they were on board. finally, both groups were reassured that future steps would include consideration of a wide range of possible solutions and that they would be involved in the process. they were invited to search for and create innovations that addressed the issues of importance to them. the fact that staff and students were supported to engage in blue-sky thinking to address their own needs, indicated a shift from why to wow. we had completed stage 2, identifying why change and inspiring some wow among the leadership team, clinical staff and the students (persons with lived experience).we could have stopped at stage 2. the core stakeholders were engaged. why do we need to keep moving outward? the university leaders had researched innovations, contracted with us as thought leaders for innovative practice. students and clinicians were part of the co-design process. should this not be enough? a wide range of expertise and experience had been tapped. but as gino cautions, accumulated expertise and experience can be restrictive. in her npr interview, she referred to a study she conducted on cardiac surgeons who had been notified by the food and drug administration that a routine technique was no longer considered safe. the results indicated that the more experience a surgeon had, the less likely they were to change their practices in response to the fda warning (gino, 2018) . the clinicians, managers and students at the university we had worked with thus far had considerable experience. as a result of this experience we wondered if they might be too deep in the forest to recognize out-of-the-box ideas. compared to outsiders, would their collective years of experience with established practices make them less receptive to novel, experimental ideas? outsider perspectives, according to gino, are crucial for innovation.following the two suicides at memorial university (chap. 3), it was conversations with residence leaders, not counsellors, managers or students attending counselling, that led us to recalibrate what needed to be changed. before these conversations, the suicide prevention strategy had created an atmosphere of high tension and fear. the risk paradigm had not been challenged. we had not even recognized its presence. the protesting residence leaders alerted me to its presence. and the conversations that followed inspired a vision of a more engaging, vibrant residence community that could be cultivated in the very space occupied by postvention puppies. the idea of bringing fun and games back to that multipurpose room was a wow moment. the residence leaders who helped us to see where we were going wrong with the risk paradigm would not have been invited at a stage 2 level had the distributive design cycle method been in place at memorial university. but they might be considered for participation as external stakeholders at stage 3.at memorial university, group counselling programming had been poorly attended for years. the student peer network at memorial could not attract interest in their activities. they had helped to market the groups with us, but with no success. the experts and students with the most experience were stumped. given the increasing demand and the full waiting rooms, why was there no uptake? we had no answers. but when a new director of the botanical gardens approached me expressing interest in mental health, we discovered an alternative. he had a background working in psychiatric hospitals as a horticultural therapist. he wondered if there might be opportunities for collaborating with the counselling centre. he came to a staff meeting and presented on his work. one of our counsellors had expertise in mindfulness. the concept of green mindfulness was hatched at this meeting. together they launched a 90-min weekly walk-in event in a high traffic area of campus. it quickly became known as a place to get a new houseplant. when students wandered in they were invited by students from the peer network to take a cutting and plant it mindfully in a small pot. they were encouraged to feel the texture of soil, its temperature. they could take a mint leaf and absorb the aroma of fresh mint tea. an average of 100 students attended each week. it took an outsider, the director of the botanical gardens, to solve the problem of failed group work and the lack of uptake from peer mentors. before his appearance, we kept offering the same kind of groups somehow continuing to think people might start coming. the peer mentors, determined to build a successful peer counselling program, continued to host dropin hours for 2 years despite few takers. none of us considered that we should stop doing this or try something different.while undoubtedly success stories (bringing fun back to residence and green mindfulness), the prompt for change was random and could easily have been missed. what would have happened if the resident assistant, the director of the botanical gardens and all kinds of other outsiders had been deliberately invited to answer the question "why change?" maybe innovation would have happened more smoothly and rapidly.returning to our mid-sized public university, what might the broader community think about change? would extending the "why change your practices" question be of interest to academic advisors, to the fitness centre, to the student residences, to faculty partners? and then what about the city beyond the campus? are there no other influential organizations asking questions about change? could we engage in a broader conversation about change in policies with potential external partners? who else wants change? are others being inspired by new ideas? can we share our "wow" blue sky ideas?not surprisingly, conflict also emerged when we got to stage 3-external stakeholders. campus staff and faculty invited to participate in the discussion were divided. some said the problem was that the clinicians were not seeing students fast enough and did not have time to consult with them when they called. others simply wanted the clinicians to take the mental health problems off their hands; they did not want to learn more about how to support students because that was not part of their job. it appeared that at least one common problem among all stakeholders (clinicians, managers, students, staff and faculty) was the sense of being overloaded with no room to do anything new or more. what were their needs? all stakeholders needed something to make their experiences easier, more manageable and more comfortable. how could wow be facilitated for external partners? we already learned that moving too quickly to how or what will fall flat. resolving tensions cannot happen without some consensus on the question "why change".some tensions were traced to conflicting opinions about what constitutes best practices in mental health care. about a year after implementing cooperative care, the manager of counselling services received a complaint from a student union board member. the board member said that students were complaining about the new model. the manager called the board member to suggest they host a joint meeting with all who might have concerns. several board members attended along with a representative from a student society group focused on mental health awareness programming. the student society representative complained about the quality of care they received at the counselling centre. "what did they say about the quality? did they have negative experiences?" asked the counselling manager. "no", replied the student, "but they both see dr. x at the health clinic operated by the faculty of medicine, and he said to them that they should be getting weekly cbt treatment, with hour-long sessions for up to three months. that is best practice and their symptoms warrant this". the manager thought for a few moments and then said, "sometimes care providers on our own teams disagree about what constitutes quality care. if you are interested, i can show you part of a presentation i give frequently which shows how we are both right. cbt is evidence-based but so is our model. would you like to see what i have been presenting to my colleagues at conferences about our cooperative care model?" the students agreed. they asked pointed questions and seemed to leave the meeting both satisfied and intrigued. the counselling servicer manager made a note to set up a meeting with the chair of family medicine.as external consultations at stage 3 continued, it turned out there were several philanthropic organizations interested in participating. when they joined, we learned of their concerns about current practices, and more importantly, how eager they were to fund change. for years, these organizations had been funding regional and national projects gathering data in support of innovation. they hinted that some of their funders were now ready to donate large sums of money to support change. their raison d'etre was to fund broad systemic innovations aimed at serving all stakeholders.they were committed to well thought out strategies based on implementation science. a one-day forum was hosted by one of the philanthropic groups with a focus on implementation science. an expert facilitated the workshop. participants learned about the drivers of successful design and implementation. they were introduced to tools that would help focus the work at stages 4, 5 and 6 of the multisectoral design cycle. they agreed to engage the implementation science expert again at later stages to support their work.prior to the engaging stakeholders on the why and wow process at stages 2 and 3, consultations had been reactive and unfocused. previously, when students or other campus stakeholders complained, or worse, published scathing reports in social media or the campus newspaper, administrators and public relations staff were only able to work on putting out the fires. by the end of stage 3, however, all parties (the sc2.0 leads, clinicians, managers, persons with lived experience, and external stakeholders) agreed on the why of change and were more inspired (wowed) by what could be.with agreement that change was needed and shared understanding of issues to be addressed, all stakeholders were ready to begin identifying solutions. they had been inspired enough by opportunities but there was no agreed upon process for building solutions or a clear sense of what those solutions might look like. it was time for an environmental scan. field trips were organized. representatives of the mental health strategy committee arranged visits to three campus that were a little further along in their transformation process. in their visits they asked about their process, the changes, what did and did not work and why. following the visits, a workshop was held to debrief. stakeholders at all levels were asked to think about how to move forward. one of the lessons learned by an institution they had visited was to resist the allure of the "shiny object". the manager of counselling at one campus they had visited admitted to having a reputation for saying yes to every new and exciting e-mental health program that promised to solve the challenge of increased service demands. while programs were evidence-based or evidence-informed, little attention had been paid to implementation strategy. the utilization rates had been low. the committee agreed that they did not want to fall into the shiny object trap. one of the members had recently attended a conference where a psychiatrist, now a canadian senator, warned that "the bloom will eventually fade and fall off the rose" of e-mental health. while this committee member was not so pessimistic, she was wary of the promise of technology. the hype can be overblown.the committee struggled with a common implementation tension. one side cried for bold action now, "mental health reform here is long overdue: we've been working on this forever! one more study will sit on the shelf gathering dust and nothing will change!" while perhaps less passionate, but equally pointed, another committee member countered "shiny-object syndrome will lead us down blind alleys, we should proceed carefully and cautiously". in the end, they agreed that balance was needed. there might be some things that can be actioned immediately-initiatives that have already been researched and subjected to broad consultation.politicians, for better or worse, are masters at balancing quick wins with carefully planned, drawn-out strategies requiring exhaustive consultation. a few carefully selected immediate actions can satisfy pent up demand and inspire others to commit to change. was there anything in line with their cooperative care model that could be implemented without further delay? what needed more careful consideration? a representative from the university's marketing and communications department spoke up, "i think what we need is a good communications strategy so that we can leverage anticipation the way apple does, but of course within an academic values frame". a counsellor on the committee added that managing expectations is very important in mental health treatment; expectations are key to positive outcomes. but she admitted that this was not part of her skillset, and cautioned that, "our licensing board actually prohibits any type of promotion of psychological services". due to the potential for manipulating vulnerable persons, advertising is considered unethical.another counsellor countered this caution, "we are masters of persuasion. our practices sell hope. some psychotherapy schools are explicit in this respect". ericksonian hypnotherapy, for example, has influenced many contemporary methods, including solution-focused, narrative, and positive psychology approaches. has the ethical code proscription on promotion been interpreted too broadly? other committee members were intrigued. "this could work on so many levels", one said. "the transparency about our process is in keeping with recovery principles. and a more proactive approach could stimulate feelings of anticipation and hope". perhaps promotion aimed at the principles underlying the system of care would be considered outside the scope of the profession, especially, if it is guided by external partners and administrators and not the practitioners alone. a ripple of excitement spread through the room. the first clear action-step (an example of what) was emerging-communications. the committee would work out a full implementation strategy with input from the communications experts sitting on the panel. a communication strategy would roll in tandem with implementation steps.the committee prepared a report with recommendations organized along six guiding principles: (1) access to care needed to be streamlined-there should be a clear point of entry; (2) options for care need to be expanded since one size does not fit all; (3) the care system needs to be nimble and informed by continuous co-design by all stakeholders; (4) the care system needs to be accountable with its mission to improve outcomes; (5) implementation should follow best practices informed by implementation science; (6) a communications strategy is needed to stimulate hopeful help-seeking.at stage 5, the work was transferred back to internal stakeholders-clinic managers, clinical staff, representatives from student affairs and students with lived experience. one of the first tasks was to re-engage with the implementation science consultant. this was deemed essential to ensure the "what" would not get ahead of the "how". implementation science has been defined as "the scientific study of methods to promote the systematic uptake of research findings and other evidencebased practices into routine practice, and, hence, to improve the quality and effectiveness of health services" (eccles & mittman, 2006) . the practice has evolved to address what is referred to as "the implementation gap" that exists between research and practice. while evidence may exist to support care practices, the practices are often not adopted. if they are adopted, they may not be used with fidelity to the intervention originally tested. and even if they are used with fidelity to the originally tested intervention, the practices may not be sustained. and if they are sustained in one setting, they may not be scaled up or replicated in other settings. multiple gaps may interfere with impactful knowledge mobilization. our six-stage sc2.0 distributive design cycle is an example of an "active implementation framework" (metz & bartley, 2012) . in addition to organizing the process through phases that extend across 2-4 years, an active implementation framework specifies useable interventions, drivers for successful implementation, processes for improvement and composition of teams.an initial step in developing an implementation framework is to articulate a clear description of the program. second, the essential and gold standard features of a program or model are identified. third, core interventions are clearly operationalized in line with underlying principles. finally, practice guidelines and standards are developed to allow for performance and fidelity assessment. typically, few programs are implemented with attention to all these features of implementation science. while most programs are clearly described, few identify the core or essential components and most fail to operationalize or test for fidelity in practice settings. our team recently compiled standards for stepped care 2.0 in collaboration with the mental health commission of canada (mhcc, in press). the standards are currently being applied through the implementation of a digital platform that extends sc2.0 to all canadians as part of the government of canada's covid-19 mental health response (wellness together canada, 2020). the platform provides the technological infrastructure for not only tracking and enhancing outcomes, but also treatment fidelity to the new sc2.0 standards.as indicated in fig. 7 .1, meaningful outcomes for any new program depend on the efficacy of the intervention, how it is implemented and the context in which implementation occurs. in our six-stage implementation model, enabling contexts are nurtured first by asking why change is needed and by inspiring blue-sky wow thinking. this nurturing happens long before effective interventions are selected (the what) and before application of implementation science (the how).the implementation science consultant met several times with the team. the goal was to develop "useable cooperative" interventions. the university wanted a clear description of what cooperative care really is. but first the team worked through another full-day workshop aimed at developing cooperative care practice profiles. practice profiles were developed using a toolkit designed to operationalize care principles. the toolkit ensured that treatment protocols were based on research and information about best practices. it also ensured that competencies aligned with innovations, and that the innovations would be phased in gradually. it was important that the incremental process of adoption met the expectations of all stakeholders. the facilitator began the day by asking, "what are the critical, non-negotiable components of your cooperative care model? to know if a component is critical, ask yourself, if it were to be missing, would you no longer be able to think of it as cooperative care". the team defined cooperative care and came up with five critical components (see table 7 .1).then, for each of the five components, workshop participants operationalized, in turn, what ideal implementation, acceptable variations and unacceptable variations might look like. beside each, they also specified what outcomes could be expected if acceptable variations were applied with fidelity. for example, the first component (flexible approaches) was operationalized first by deciding the number of step categories and then populating them with existing programs. the team decided on a 10-step model ranging from prevention at the lower end to psychiatric consultation at the higher end. but because of the sensitivity to hierarchy, and the long-standing discomfort with the word "stepped care", the category list on their graphic was unnumbered. in the prevention category, four programs were specified: orientation events, outreach/distress activities, training for professors and other campus staff, and departmental talks for the various faculties. the second component (treatment that gives students choices) was operationalized in several ways. one stemmed from a mock webpage storyboard created by participants to map out the envisioned help-seeker experience. they drafted a counselling services webpage with the title: "what kind of support are you looking for?" four top-level options were drafted (1) mental health support; (2) support for a physical health condition; (3) academic support; (4) i want to learn more about mental health and self-care. if the student were to click on the first option (mental health support), three options would appear: (a) i need to speak with someone right now; (b) it's not a crisis but i still need to talk; (c) i am not in immediate distress or i am open to online resources. then if the student were to choose option 2 (it's not a crisis but i still need to talk), they would see four options: speaking to a professional right now, speaking to a professional in person, speak to a peer, or speak to an academic advisor.by the end of the day, practice profiles were completed for all five components of the cooperative care model. participants were cautioned that none of these operationalized care components would succeed without careful attention to enabling factors. what needed to be in place to support implementation? what were the implementation drivers for their campus? these were identified at the next meeting. as indicated in fig. 7 .2, several drivers were specified on organizational, leadership and competency dimensions. on the organizational level, support was needed to adapt policy, fund new initiatives, support the implementation process, and develop technological infrastructure. managers had to develop new procedures for operations, and strategies for anticipating and mitigating team dysfunction that might arise through the transformation process. clinical and organizational training was needed to adapt practices and develop new competencies. a system of coaching or mentoring was needed to support ongoing adjustments to care. cooperative care means that our healthcare professionals work with students and explore various services to find the best kind of care for their needs. this means using one or multiple treatment options, both traditional and holistic. our staff collaborates with campus colleagues, other care providers, peers and community services to support students and meet their individual needs. cooperative care includes: 1. flexible approaches that match students with the right resource at the right time to help students feel better-fast. 2. treatment that gives students choices, building on their existing strengths and autonomy. 3. community-based care that pulls together resources on-campus, off-campus and online, depending on what best fits students' needs. 4. a holistic wellness approach that targets all of the factors that contribute to overall student wellness. 5. goal-oriented care that builds resiliency and focuses on what makes them well rather than only discussing what makes them unwell.at stage 6, the co-design process was complete. the implementation team was in full operation, useable interventions had been defined and enabling structures were in place. funding from donors had been received and matched by the university. architects and contractors were hired to redesign and renovate the space to facilitate smooth, integrated, cooperative care. technological infrastructure for self-checkins, shared record-keeping, therapeutic monitoring and web-page improvements was developed. policies and procedures were adapted or created anew. new staff with experience in walk-in, single-session counselling, and e-mental health care were recruited and hired. none of these new staff were hired within the existing counsellor collective bargaining unit. this decision was made in collaboration with the union representing counsellors. vacancies within the bargaining unit would continue to be filled for the next 3 years and hiring outside of the bargaining unit could only be made with new funds. this agreement helped resolve some of the anxiety expressed by existing staff about the future of their roles. on the other hand, it meant that some of the existing staff no longer felt obligated to adjust their practices in line with the new cooperative care model, since this new way of practicing was only required by the new hires outside of the bargaining unit. we reminded the managers of the units to use the same approach to change management as counsellors use with their clients in the context sc2.0. rather than urging staff to become more ready for change, the job of managers was to connect with staff where they were already.this pivot to where people are ready did not mean that any staff would be isolated from the new model. training was provided to all staff on recovery principles, stepped care decision-making, collaborative care, walk-in care interviewing at the time of writing, stage 6 implementation had just begun. the renovations were complete, and a more centralized, collaborative care hub was in operation. a flatter organizational structure was in place with six leads reporting to a new assistant dean of campus wellness. the two mental health managers, as well as the manager of primary care services, had received promotions to campus lead roles. there was still a lot of work to do before the new wellness hub would be truly integrated. the physicians were still operating in isolation and there was no unified health record. a new cycle of design would be needed to move to fully collaborative care.there are infinite ways to develop stepped care. some of the earliest adopters of sc2.0 organize their programming in a non-hierarchical pattern. the university of british columbia was one of the first canadian institutions to adapt the model from our campus. as indicated in fig. 7 .3, programming is still arranged in linear fashion but there is no implied hierarchy. arranged horizontally, there is no suggestion that one program is better than the other. in consultations following introduction to sc2.0, some stakeholders expressed discomfort with the values associated with the three dimensions (i.e. on the x, y, and z axes). one worry was that help-seekers might feel cheated with lower intensity programs or with programs requiring less investment. the arrangement along the continuums might reinforce the prevailing assumption that psychiatric care or face-to-face intensive psychotherapy is more valuable or more effective. if this were the case, help-seekers might be less inclined to consider low-intensity program offerings.other non-linear versions of sc2.0 are more explicit. instead of arranging steps perpendicularly along the x or y axes, interventions are positioned around a circle. the province of newfoundland and labrador now organizes publicly funded mental healthcare for adults into seven categories which are arranged in a circle around the help-seeker. this emphasizes their commitment to client-centric care, in which the help-seeker preferences are accommodated as much as possible. following consultation with us, the george washington university in washington dc and algonquin college in ottawa have also developed circular versions of sc2.0. the newfoundland and labrador version is still under development. the two other circular versions are illustrated in fig. 7 .4.the importance of client-centricity cannot be overstated. helen (a pseudonym), is a local hero in my mind. she is the the ceo of newfoundland and labrador's only province-wide peer network (channal), literally lives recovery principles. helen is a person with lived experience who continues to struggle from time to time, but somehow manages to break new ground on multiple fronts. amber's story in chap. 4 is a testament to helen's impact. helen coined one of my favourite recovery phrases: "atp, ask the person first!" she exclaims with the broadest of smiles. this refrain is a constant reminder to all of us working on mental health reform. before making any prescriptions based expert opinion why not simply "ask the person" first? helen says this with such good humour, and so often, that the acronym, atp is now common parlance in the province's mental health sector.circles are ancient features of healing practices. sacred circles have a long tradition throughout the world. when people gather in a circle, they are practicing connection, equality, sustainability and unity. if there is power expressed, it is not a power-over anyone or anything. instead it is power-with. the medicine wheel, a term coined by people of european descent, is a common structure for organizing knowledge in north american indigenous populations. the earth's resources and habitats, if preserved in their natural state, have healing power. the resource configuration across the four quadrants (north, east, south and west) of the wheel represents the natural order of our planet, mother earth (fig. 7.5) . order is not forced. it is what was there to begin with. wellness and harmony are achieved by aligning with the balancing forces of nature, the elements, the four directions and the cycle of life. while sacred circles bear some resemblance to our sc2.0 circular stepped care models, we are careful to avoid cultural appropriation. we aspire to anti-oppressive and anti-colonial values and avoid making firm assumptions of relevance to indigenous peoples and their communities. if invited, however, we would welcome opportunities for co-design. we need bold thinking. we need humility. we need risk-takers. we need caretakers. the fable of the fox and the cat (aesop, 1893 ) is a variation on the fox/hedgehog dichotomy. the fox and the cat discuss their varied talents, namely their tricks and dodges in the face of danger. the fox has many, whereas the cat admits to just one plan. when hunters arrive, the cat immediately flees to the safety of high tree branches. the fox can't decide, thinks of many options, and tries a few but none with commitment. the fox is caught by the hounds. in this perilous context, the fox fails and pays with its life. mass media reports warn that we are in the midst of a mental health crisis. risk managers, in efforts to maintain reputations of insurers, insist on a cat-like, focused and rigid protocol. professional associations for the most part follow suit. does the cat plan save lives? while the cat survives, we can't all hide in trees. a risk averse approach to mental healthcare protects providers more than those they serve. help seekers are frustrated by this overly cautious approach. do they want only foxes? probably not. isiah berlin wouldn't either. why not dispel with dichotomies. we need cats, hedgehogs, and foxes. cats climb up to watch out for danger. hedgehogs focus on details. foxes run around practicing sly deviance and disruption. let's make room for all three.. numbers of mice per group displaying clinical signs at 0.5, 4, 24, and 48 hours post prime and boost injections. *one mouse from this group was found dead 8 days after primary vaccination for unrelated reasons and was excluded from further analysis. histopathological lung lesion scores (a) and bacterial loads (b) recovered from vaccinated then challenged animals. (c) representative lung histopathology image from an mpla+dlamps vaccinated, mp challenged mouse receiving a lesion score of 1.5 (median score of the group). arrows indicate perivascular and peribronchiolar infiltrates. photo taken at 100x magnification on a digital evos xl microscope (life technologies). white bar = 400µm. error bars indicate median and interquartile ranges (iqr) (* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001, **** p<0.0001).mycoplasma pneumoniae lamps were extracted utilizing tx-114 partitioning using a slightly modified protocol from the one established by bordier (1981) . m. pneumoniae pi1428 cells were cultured in t-175 cell culture flasks at 37ºc in complete fc medium until mid-log phase as determined by acidmediated shift of phenol red dye from red to orange. adherent bacterial cells were scraped onto the medium then pelleted by centrifugation. the pellet was washed with pbs then solubilized in 5ml of ts-edta buffer (20mm tris, 150mm nacl, 5mm edta ph 7.6) containing 1mm pmsf (protease inhibitor) and 2% (v/v) tx-114. the solution was rocked for 2 hours at 4ºc, followed by centrifugation at 10,000xg at 4ºc for 10 minutes to pellet the insoluble phase. the soluble phase was transferred to a new tube and incubated at 37ºc for until solution became cloudy (indicating condensation of detergent micelles), then centrifuged for 15 minutes at room temperature to separate the detergent and aqueous phases which were then aliquoted into new tubes. appropriate amounts of ts-edta buffer and tx-114 detergent were added to the tubes containing the insoluble, aqueous and detergent fractions to reach a 2% tx-114 solution, and the phase partitioning was repeated twice to clean the fractions.purified lamps were prepared using a slightly modified filter-aided sample preparation (fasp) method in a microcon ym-10 10 kd molecular weight cutoff (mwco) filter (thermo fisher scientific) (29). briefly, samples were suspended in ua buffer and reduced for 1.5 hr at 37°c using 25 mm dithiothreitol in ua buffer. samples were spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min, washed with 200 µl ua buffer and spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. samples were alkylated using 50 mm iodoacetamide in ua buffer for 15 min in the dark at 37°c. after a 14,000 x g for 30 min spin, the samples were washed twice with 100 µl ub buffer with identical centrifugation cycles, the mwco filters were washed with 50 µl ub buffer and protein was placed in a clean 1.5 ml eppendorf tube. the filter was washed twice more with 50 µl aliquots of 0.1 m ammonium bicarbonate and pooled. endoproteinase lysc (pierce) was added at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio and left to digest at 37°c for 16 hr. samples were diluted to <1 m urea with 0.1m ammonium bicarbonate, sequencing grade modified trypsin (promega) was added at a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio and left to digest for an additional 8 hr at 37°c. proteolysis was quenched using formic acid and the resulting peptides were desalted using c18 peptide desalting spin columns (pierce) per manufacturer's instructions. mycoplasma pneumoniae strain pi1428 was utilized for all aspects of this study. for infection studies, frozen 50µl aliquots of low passage (p12-p13) m. pneumoniae pi1428 were thawed and resuspended in in 10ml of complete fortified commercial (fc) medium (20% heat inactivated horse serum, 5% yeast extract). cultures were incubated at 37ºc with orbital shaking at 120 rpm. after 5 hours, optical density at 620 nm (od620) was used to estimate colony forming units (cfu) counts per ml of culture. furthermore, color changing unit (ccu) measurements were conducted using 10-fold serial dilutions to validate spectrophotometric estimations. samples were then centrifuged at 2000xg for 10 min at 4ºc, the supernatant decanted, and the pellet suspended to the desired concentration in fresh complete fc medium.all animal experiments were conducted in accordance with our approved institutional animal care and use committee protocol (a17-034). male and female specific pathogen free (spf) balb/c mice (8 weeks old) were purchased from jackson laboratories (bar harbor, me) and allowed to acclimate for 1 week prior to use. for vaccination, mice were anesthetized using vaporized isoflurane and intraperitoneally injected with 250µl of sterile physiological saline (0.9%) for sham vaccination, or 250µl containing 50µg of protein from the appropriate fraction. for mice receiving adjuvanted mpla-sm + dlamps treatement, mice were injected with 250µl of sterile physiological saline containing 20µg mpla-sm + 50 µg of dlamps. mice were boosted similarly 21 days after the primary injection.mice showing clinical signs after injections were closely observed for 48 hours and clinical signs such as piloerection, hunching, nose bulge, orbital tightening, and lethargy were recorded by counting the number of animals per group displaying said clinical signs. group clinical scores were derived by adding +1 per sign displayed, per animal. max clinical score per group can be calculated by (n*5) where n is the number of animals per group and 5 is the number of categories of clinical signs recorded. twenty-one days after the boost dosage, mice were anesthetized using vaporized isoflurane and intranasally inoculated with 50µl of fc medium containing 1x10 8 cfu m. pneumoniae pi1428. four days post-infection, mice were humanely sacrificed via cervical dislocation and lungs were immediately harvested for histopathology and mycoplasma recovery.for mycoplasma recovery, the lower right lobe of the lung was removed and placed into 3ml of fc medium, vortexed, and incubated for 3 hours at 37ºc. the remaining lung tissue was inflated with 10% neutral buffered formalin and allowed to fix for histopathologic evaluation. after 3 hours of incubation, mycoplasma recovery samples were passed through a 0.45µm filter and transferred to new sterile tubes containing fc medium. quantification of recovery cultures was performed by assessing color changing units (ccus) in 10-fold serial dilutions performed on 96 well tissue culture plates. samples were incubated for 28 days, and color change was observed and recorded daily.after fixation for 48 hours in 10% neutral buffered formalin, tissues were routinely processed and stained. perivascular and peribronchiolar leukocytic infiltrates were graded in increasing severity with scores 0 (no visible lesions), 1 (mild lesions), 2 (moderate lesions), 3 (marked lesions), and 4 (severe lesions), with half-step intervals (i.e. +0.5) indicating lesions that fall between two categories. lesion score evaluations were performed in a blinded fashion by an experienced individual trained in the evaluation of these specific pathologic lesions by a board-certified pathologist. scores were assigned based on the density of the perivascular and peribronchiolar infiltrates and the following objective criteria:lesion score 0: no visible peribronchiolar and perivascular leukocytic infiltrates observed. representative histological image of an h&e stained murine lung cross-section with a lesion score of 0. photo taken at 200x magnification on a digital evos xl microscope (life technologies). white bar = 200µm.mycoplasma pneumoniae (mp) is a highly contagious and widespread human respiratory pathogen causing over 2 million cases of community-acquired pneumonia (cap) and~100,000 adult hospitalizations annually in the united states 1 . additionally, innate resistance to commonly used β-lactam antibiotics, increasing resistance to macrolide antibiotics, and mortality in certain demographic groups establish mp as a high-risk pathogen capable of causing acutely severe disease [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . critically, no vaccine against mp is available, as experimental vaccine-enhanced disease (ved) after infection has stymied further development.m. pneumoniae ved was first reported in human volunteers in the 1960s. in these studies, prisoners and military recruits were vaccinated with formalin-inactivated or a serially passaged liveattenuated strain of mp, then subsequently challenged with a virulent strain of the bacterium. while some protection was observed, many vaccinated individuals in both studies exhibited more severe clinical symptoms than those receiving a placebo control 8, 9 . recent studies by our group (and others) have since recapitulated ved in an animal model by utilizing live-attenuated or crude extract mp vaccine candidates, respectively [10] [11] [12] [13] . in these murine models, ved is characterized by more severe histopathology post-challenge, when compared to sham vaccinated, mp challenged mice. ved has also been observed in vaccine candidates against other mycoplasma species, making the identification of the causative factors a crucially important task for vaccine development against these atypical pathogens.lipoproteins are the most abundant components of the lipidassociated membrane protein (lamp) fraction to identify the specific causative factor(s) for mp ved, we utilized tx-114 phase partitioning to fractionate mp proteins into three fractions: a lamp hydrophobic detergent phase, an aqueous phase (aq) harboring mostly hydrophilic cytosolic proteins, and an insoluble phase (ins) containing the insoluble triton shell and a spontaneously forming, phospholipid-rich precipitate 14 . an initial pilot study indicated that vaccination of balb/c mice with lamps resulted in ved after challenge with virulent mp. we performed proteomic analysis to reveal lipoproteins, elongation factors, chaperones and chaperonins, and cytadherence proteins (previously found to induce strong antibody responses [15] [16] [17] ) as the most abundant immunogenic and antigenic components of the lamp fraction ( fig. 1a-f ). of these, lipoproteins are the most abundant (31.79%) (fig. 1a) and include twenty-two lipoproteins representing all six mp lipoprotein families (fig. 1b, c) . family 2 lipoproteins, paralogs of the immunodominant mycoplasma gallisepticum nucleotide-binding virulence factor msla 18, 19 , were the most abundant lamp lipoproteins, making up 43.22% of the lipoprotein fraction (fig. 1c) . lipoproteins not belonging to a multigene family were the second most abundant lipoproteins in the lipoprotein fraction (32.83%), followed by family 4 lipoproteins (11.73%), family 3 lipoproteins (5.53%) then family 6 lipoproteins (4.36%) (fig. 1c) . members of family 5 lipoproteins (which are specific to mp) were also identified in the fraction, albeit at minute relative quantities (0.67%) (fig. 1c) . mycoplasma lipoprotein lipid moieties are known to be potent immunostimulators, inducing expression of inflammatory cytokines such as tnf-α, il-6, and il-1β following the recognition of their lipid moieties by toll-like receptor complexes 20 . given that these cytokines are frequently associated with immunopathology, we hypothesized that sensitization by mp lipoprotein lipid moieties during vaccination induces ved upon challenge with virulent mp.lipoprotein lipid moieties are responsible for ved to test our hypothesis, tx-114-derived mp fractions were treated with exogenous lipoprotein lipase to generate delipidated fractions (dlamps, daq, and dins), which could be tested for immuno-stimulation in vitro and as vaccine candidates in vivo. successful delipidation was assessed via a tlr2 bioassay. in murine macrophages, lamps stimulated higher levels of tnf-α than aq and ins fractions. delipidation significantly reduced lampstimulated tnf-α production, notably to levels lower than those stimulated by aq or ins fractions (fig. 2b) . surprisingly, delipidation also reduced aq fraction-stimulated tnf-α production, suggesting that some lipoproteins may have sequestered to the aq phase during tx-114 phase partitioning. delipidation did not affect the ability of the ins fraction to stimulate tnf-α production in vitro (fig. 2b) .to test the effect of lipoprotein delipidation on ved, native and delipidated mp fractions (lamps, dlamps, aq, daq, ins, and dins) were used to intraperitoneally vaccinate mice according to the schedule illustrated in fig. 2a with 50 μg of protein from each fraction per dose. shortly after vaccination, mice receiving nonlipase-treated fractions began to display clinical signs consistent with mild septic shock (supplementary table 1 , supplementary  fig. 1 ), which we quantified as a group clinical score (fig. 2c ). while these clinical signs abated by 48-h post-vaccination, they point to potential immediate safety concerns for vaccine candidates containing intact lipoproteins. notably, early clinical signs were absent in mice vaccinated with delipidated fractions. given that in vivo data mirrored those obtained in vitro (fig. 2b) , early clinical signs may have resulted from the over-stimulation of peritoneal immune cells by the lipid moieties of native mp lipoproteins.in terms of ved, only mice vaccinated with lamps (containing native lipoproteins) exhibited histopathological lung lesions that were more severe than sham-vaccinated/challenged animals, consistent with lamp-mediated ved (fig. 2d, f) . furthermore, vaccination with lamps did not reduce bacterial loads, suggesting that the induced inflammation is solely pathologic and consistent with ved (fig. 2e) . importantly, vaccination with delipidated lamps (dlamps) did not exacerbate lung pathology (fig. 2d, f) , demonstrating that the factors responsible for ved are the lipid moieties of mp lipoproteins. compared to controls, dlampvaccinated mice also had significantly lower bacterial loads (fig. 2e) . these data suggest that the dlamp vaccine preparation includes protective antigens that improve bacterial clearance and can reduce mp-induced lung disease when freed of the ved effects associated with mp lipoprotein lipid moieties.mice vaccinated with mpla-sm adjuvanted dlamps and challenged had significantly reduced lung lesion scores when compared to sham vaccinated, mp challenged mice (supplementary fig. 2a, c) , but did not differ in bacterial loads recovered ( supplementary fig. 2b ). this was unsurprising as lesion scores did not always correlate with bacterial loads. these data further indicate that the choice of adjuvant will be critical in developing a vaccine that reduces bacterial loads while also protecting the host from unnecessary pulmonary inflammation.the identification of mp lipoprotein lipid moieties as the cause of mp ved is a breakthrough for the field, overcoming a major roadblock for mp vaccine development. the findings presented here may be broadly applicable to other mycoplasma species for which vaccine induced disease exacerbation has been reported. vaccination of calves with inactivated whole cell vaccines and partially purified membrane proteins of mycoplasma bovis resulted in increased pulmonary pathology upon virulent challenge 21, 22 . additionally, vaccination of cattle with inactivated whole cell mycoplasma mycoides subsp. mycoides sc and a subunit lipoprotein q (lppq) vaccine also were reported to exacerbate the effects of contagious bovine pleuropneumonia (cbpp) in challenged animals 23 . these studies did not identify the lipid moieties of lipoproteins or any other factors as the causative factors of ved in these cases. given the parallels of these studies with our data, however, it is attractive to speculate that the lipid moieties of the lipoproteins included in these vaccine candidates may have been the maladaptive factors responsible for disease exacerbation. indeed, vaccination of cattle with the n terminus of lppq (which 5) . arrows point to perivascular and peribronchiolar leukocytic infiltrates. error bars indicate mean and standard error of the mean (sem) for parametric data (b) and median and interquartile ranges (iqr) for non-parametric data (d, e) (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001).includes the region where the lipid moieties attach) failed to be protective and was also associated with adverse events 24 . it is important, however, to note that more studies need to be conducted to demonstrate the maladaptive effect of lipoproteins in ruminant mycoplasmosis vaccines.in terms of m. pneumoniae, our data indicate that caution should be used when considering the inclusion of native mycoplasma lipoproteins in future vaccine formulations against this significant human pathogen. furthermore, the findings here may be broadly applicable to other bacterial pathogens for which ved is observed, and suggest that the potential role of lipoproteins in this phenomenon should not be easily dismissed. purified lamps were prepared using a slightly modified filter-aided sample preparation (fasp) method 26 described in the supplementary methods (see extended methods). purified peptides were injected onto a pepmap rslc c18 column (thermo scientific) and separated using reversed phase gradient on a dionex ultimate 3000 rslc uplc instrument (thermo scientific) coupled directly to a q exactive hf mass spectrometer (thermo scientific) via electrospray ionization. maxquant (v1.6.1.0) was used to search raw files against a custom mp proteome database (cp010538_faa) using the andromeda search engine 27 and for peptide and protein quantification using the lfq algorithm. scaffold v4.9 (proteome software, inc.) was used for visualization and analysis, and gene designations were identified through comparison to the mycoplasma pneumoniae (t00006) kegg genome database with 95-100% sequence identity and lowest evalue used as cut-offs. multigene mp lipoproteins were categorized into the 6 numerically named families based on previously established criteria 28 . lipoproteins not belonging to a multigene family were categorized as "no defined family". mycoplasma pneumoniae strain pi1428 was utilized for all aspects of this study. all animal experiments were conducted in accordance with approved institutional animal care and use committee protocol (a17-034) as described in the supplementary methods (see extended methods).results were analyzed via a non-parametric one-way anova on ranks (kruskal-wallis) with a dunn's post hoc test or a parametric ordinary oneway anova with a tukey's post hoc test for multiple pairwise comparisons between groups. analysis of data with only two groups was conducted utilizing a one tailed mann-whitney u test for nonparametric data (α = 0.05). all data were analyzed using the graphpad prism software, version 8.02 (graphpad software, la jolla, california, usa).further information on experimental design is available in the nature research reporting summary linked to this article.the mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the proteomexchange consortium via the pride 30 partner repository with the dataset identifier pxd016814. all other data are included in this manuscript and supplementary file.received: 14 january 2020; accepted: 17 march 2020;the novel coronavirus (covid-19) has created a deadly worldwide pandemic that is now sweeping across the united states. many individuals and professionals have been forced to work from home, accelerating a trend that has already been increasing in society. healthcare professionals have been severely impacted; there have been concerns about the availability and quality of personal protective equipment (ppe) including appropriate masks, eye protection, and gowns. deficiencies in these supplies have led directly to infection and even death, impacting not just "vulnerable" populations but the young and "healthy," including those who work in healthcare.physicians of various specialties have been demonstrated to have unique risk factors for contracting covid-19. otolaryngologists can be considered high risk when it comes to certain aspects of this epidemic. there has been controversy and significant concern regarding endoscopic evaluation of patients in the office, especially nasal endoscopy and flexible laryngoscopy, since performing these procedures puts one in direct contact with the virus as it resides primarily in nose and nasopharynx. these issues have been detailed by other groups, and our objective is to examine clinical topics relevant to rhinologists which warrant consideration and have not been discussed in detail elsewhere. we appreciate the valuable work that has already been publicized, and we will discuss other topics that we feel will also become increasingly important in today's healthcare environment, as they have the potential to minimize the otolaryngologist's role in spreading infection [1] .numerous groups have taken the lead discussing rhinology-specific concerns related to covid-19 and have identified items of special importance. for example, the stanford rhinology division, the british rhinologic society, and the american academy of otolaryngology -head and neck surgery have emphasized issues relating to the recognition of anosmia as a symptom that cannot be ignored. we are approaching these issues from a different perspective, both with regards to the acute phase of the pandemic as well as being prepared for upcoming "waves" that may happen over the coming months and the future of rhinology.this is an important topic for which to develop guidelines: not just for the immediate portion of the pandemic, but with an eye to the future in case there are subsequent "waves" as expected. an established consensus backed by an organization would be helpful for this specific purpose. some cases are clearly elective, while others are obviously urgent. there are, however, some cases in a grey zone that are not as obvious.prior to establishing a guideline-backed consensus for which surgeries are not elective, safety considerations must be addressed for sinonasal surgeries, including exactly which personal protective equipment (ppe) is required in the or. rhinologists from the stanford university group have performed a valuable service by publicizing their communications with colleagues abroad and their experiences with covid-19. there have been reports that during a transsphenoidal resection performed in china, all 14 individuals in the operating room, ranging from the surgeons to ancillary staff, contracted covid-19 despite some of them using n95 masks and other ppe. they have posited this may be due to viral particles becoming aerosolized during epithelial disruption, and that these viral particles may stay in the surrounding air for 3 hours or longer. similarly, covid-19 cases were contracted following other endoscopic endonasal cases. surgeon and staff covid-19 infections anecdotally appear to be eliminated with the use of powered air purifying respirators (paprs). in addition to these communications, the stanford group suggests covid-19 testing for all surgical patients, if possible two tests due to the prospects of a false negative especially in those groups that had previously tested positive.in practice, a significant number of rhinologists perform in-office procedures. consequently, guidance is needed on many of the same safety measures as for or cases. similar to the or, the chief concerns are whether the otolaryngologist and assisting staff need n95 or full papr masks and what type of gowning and other ppe are required; these should be considered in light of the fact that many of these procedures are more "minor" than the ones performed in the or, and whether that makes a difference.recommendations for office visits are necessary both during the crisis and thereafter. the same questions remain and guidelines would be helpful. importantly, if no procedures are performed, knowledge about which type of mask is sufficient is important, as well as whether gowning and eye protection are needed.the transition from or-based cases to in-office procedures has been increasing tremendously [2, 3] . common procedures include debridement, cryotherapy (e.g. clarifix), balloon sinus dilation, eustachian tube dilation, limited ess with or without a micro debrider, turbinate reduction (various methods), and external nasal implants (e.g. latera®). most important of all is when and how to perform nasal endoscopy.the diverse array of sinonasal procedures above may represent completely different risk profiles. covid-19 patients harbor the virus in the nasopharynx; as a result, the stanford rhinology division has recommended avoiding aerosolized sprays and instead using pledgets to mitigate this risk in the outpatient setting. this also presents the question of whether all patients or just high-risk patients undergoing these procedures in the office obtain covid-19 testing. furthermore, do different procedures harbor different risks to the otolaryngologist and staff? our hope is that a reliable and rapid test is widely available by the time of this commentary's publication, but that may not be the case.there have been numerous studies demonstrating that otolaryngology is amenable to telemedicine consultation. gilani et al. performed telemedicine consultation on patients with ear-related complaints and found that more than 80% did not even require inperson followups [4] . another analysis noted patients with ear problems were also most appropriate for telemedicine [5] . although these are relatively recent studies, we would argue that in our current circumstances, rhinologic patients are amenable to consultation on a remote basis as well. additionally, there are already available telemedicine platforms used in otolaryngology that demonstrate its potential benefits in evaluating patients in remote and underserved areas [6] , such as quintree (quintree medical llc, detroit, michigan, usa).the easiest concern to address is that history taking is obviously accommodating to telemedicine. providers can take this opportunity to triage who needs nasal endoscopy, but this requires guidelines to be developed on this for the future. in our practices, we feel that this involves several categories of patients. patients with unilateral sinonasal symptoms warrant a repeat in-person visit after telemedicine for nasal endoscopy, as well as patients with imaging demonstrating unilateral disease. high-risk patients such as immunocompromised patients present a quandary, particularly during these covid-19 times. these are the individuals who you would want to stay home, and that would certainly be appropriate during the initial telemedicine visit. nonetheless, there should be a low threshold for considering nasal endoscopy on them if they are having troublesome new onset symptoms such as severe pain, fevers, and other systemic symptoms. patients with a known tumor history need appropriate surveillance and are not amenable to simply a telemedicine visit without nasal endoscopy, however depending on the severity of the previous lesion, perhaps some of these routine surveillance visits can be performed remotely with imaging replacing endoscopy for surveillance. finally, while many epistaxis patients can be seen remotely and instructed on conservative measures for minimizing epistaxis, this is not always possible, particularly in this day and age characterized by an expanding repertoire of blood-thinning medications.the department of health and human services (dhhs) has relaxed guidelines on using certain platforms for telemedicine during the covid-19 pandemic. hippa violations are relaxed as long as the visit is in "good faith" when telehealth is used for any treatment or diagnostic purpose [7] . in addition, software supporting video platforms including skype, zoom, google hangouts and apple facetime are allowed for use, but those with social media capabilities (facebook live, twitch) are still not allowed to be used.several changes have been implemented by cms for medicare patients that make it easier to perform telehealth visits in otolaryngology. importantly, retroactive to march 1, 2020, telehealth visits are "considered the same as in-person visits and are paid at the same rate as regular, in-person visits" [8] . this removes the prior stipulation that the patient had to be in an approved originating site. dhhs will not perform audits examining for a pre-existing patient-physician relationship, for codes that are considered "established patient only" while the covid-19 public health emergency continues. in addition, patients can be seen and billed via telemedicine across state lines assuming your state medical board approves.there are several documentation requirements that are important to include for telehealth visits, similar to requirements for a regular visit. statements or variations on them as appropriate are helpful to include and optimize appropriate reimbursement. the statements that we are suggesting to meet documentation requirements are detailed in table 1 . additionally, physicians should be familiar with the difference between telehealth visits, "virtual check-ins," and "e-visits." prior to the public health emergency, virtual check-ins and e-visits were for established patients not seen within the previous 7 days and did not lead to an inperson visit within 24 hours [8] . however, cms now allows virtual check-ins and e-visits to be performed on new or established patients [9] . patients need to provide verbal consent to qualify for these visits.a medicare telehealth visit for an outpatient service is reported using cpt codes 99201-99215. as noted previously, a "virtual checkon" may now be provided to new and established patients and are reported to medicare with hcpcs code g2012. this 5-10 minute service may be performed via telephone, text or patient portal and is used to determine whether an office visit or procedure is required. the last type of visit recognized by medicare is an e-visit, which involves communication with a patient through an online patient portal; the cpt codes used for e-visits, which also may now be used for new and established patients, are 99421, 99422, and 99423 [9] . additional hcps/cpt codes used for ed or inpatient visits can be used for telehealth but are less applicable to rhinology during the covid-19 epidemic; more information can be found on the cms website.depending on practice setting, many patients are supported by commercial payers rather than medicare/medicaid. most commercial payers are supporting these telemedicine guidelines, however this is anecdotal; patients and providers should check with individual insurances for individual insurance guidelines.in an attempt to facilitate telehealth consultation and maximize its usefulness, thought needs to be given to the role of ct as a substitute for nasal endoscopy in the positive patient the hazards of nasal endoscopy to both the otolaryngologist and the staff with whom they work have been suggested to be considerable in light of the covid-19 epidemic. particularly with the possibility of future waves of this virus impacting our healthcare delivery system, planning in advance for how to deal with patients now and in the future should be kept in mind. aside from obvious indications for nasal endoscopy, including unilateral symptoms, immunocompromised patients, and patients in whom malignancy is suspected, failed appropriate medical treatment and complications of rhinosinusitis, telehealth offers an excellent opportunity to gather an appropriate history supporting the need for imaging as an alternative to nasal endoscopy be it in the office or radiology suite. to decrease nasal endoscopy procedures and minimize risk, organizations such as the american rhinologic society (ars) should consider guidelines examining when it is appropriate to go straight to ct in select cases of possible covid-19 now and in the future.for a patient who is being seen in person in an office with ct capability, it may make sense under appropriate circumstances to utilize this instead of nasal endoscopy. to our knowledge, there has not been a direct comparison of in-office ct versus nasal endoscopy as diagnostic modalities. nonetheless, in these times this is another issue that may need to be addressed by any guidelines coming out.in the current litigious environment that characterizes the practice of medicine, the medicolegal risks of not performing nasal endoscopy need to be further determined. malpractice litigation has had an impact on the practice of all aspects of otolaryngology, including sinonasal disease and endoscopic skull base surgery [10] [11] [12] [13] . as the pandemic continues and as there are risks for subsequent "waves" this fall and winter, guidelines for when imaging can be considered in lieu of nasal endoscopy can be a helpful resource on which to fall back. in addition to surgical misadventure, missed diagnoses have been demonstrated to play a role in pursuing litigation. therefore, in patients in whom we decide to perform imaging for the purposes of facilitating telehealth visits and follow ups, we need to still maintain a low threshold for inperson consultation when there are findings in imaging warranting follow-up. communication with patients is key in this regard, as perceived inadequacies in informed consent play a large role in medicolegal litigation. we need to be clear that in these cases, ct imaging is a valuable tool that we are using as an alternative to nasal endoscopy to minimize in-person visits and risk.in-office ct sinus will continue to play an important role as a point of service procedure in lieu of nasal endoscopy in patients with covid-19 or suspected thereof.the covid-19 pandemic has tremendously impacted our entire society, including healthcare providers. those serving on the front lines, including those working in hospital settings, the emergency department, and critical care units, are at greatest risk. otolaryngologists harbor unique risks due to the viral particles residing in the nasopharynx and nose. this makes nasal endoscopy and other in-office rhinologic procedures a concern for the otolaryngologist with increased risk for infection. rhinologists need to develop standardized guidelines with an eye to both the present and the future due to the troubling potential for additional "waves" of the pandemic, and what the rhinologist needs to do as they get back to work both in the office and the or. these include protocols pertinent to safety, the substitution of imaging for endoscopy when appropriate, and importantly, understanding the role of telemedicine. additionally, it is important for rhinologists to be prepared with practical information about the differences between various types of telemedicine and how to bill appropriately.none.kp is an employee of karenzupko & associates, inc. (1) the service was provided with telemedicine using [state platform used such asapple facetime] (2) all persons (and their role) participating in the encounter (3) geographic location of patient and provider (state) and place of service for patient (e.g., home) and provider (e.g., office, home) (4) patient was informed they have the right to go to another provider, but by doing so there could be a delay in care as well as the need for an in-person visit. (5) patient was made aware they have the right to trained and available personnel while receiving the telemedicine service should there be emergencies or other needs (6) patient was told they can refuse telemedicine and should be informed of risks and alternatives of telemedicine vs. an in person visit (7) all questions regarding equipment and technology were addressed a these are documentation tips that can be modified or paraphrased.die erfolgreiche therapie von infektionskrankheiten setzt in vielen fällen eine sachgerecht durchgeführte mikrobiologische diagnostik voraus. dabei werden die diagnostischen möglichkeiten im klinisch-mikrobiologischen labor entscheidend von der präanalytik beeinflusst. sie wird ergänzt durch die bestimmung klinisch-chemischer parameter, die häufig erst den anlass für eine entsprechende weitere diagnostik geben. im rahmen der infektionsprävention und zur dokumentation einer einwandfreien medizinprodukteaufbereitung werden untersuchungen von unbelebten materialien wie wasser, luft, oberflächen oder kontaminierten prüfkörpern durchgeführt.in allen fällen sollte auf eine standardisierte probenentnahme geachtet werden. dies beginnt mit der auswahl geeigneter abstrichtupfer und transportgefäße, setzt sich fort in der korrekten entnahme und -falls notwendig -lagerung des materials und endet mit dem möglichst raschen transport in das labor.die gewinnung mikrobiologischer proben ist ein wichtiger schritt in der diagnostik und therapie von infektionskrankheiten. fehler, die bei der probengewinnung gemacht werden, kann auch das beste labor nicht ausgleichen. nicht selten werden im klinischen alltag proben eingeschickt, die keinen diagnostischen wert haben, z. b. oberflächliche abstriche von chronischen wunden. grundsätzlich sollten die angaben des labors, in das die proben versandt werden, beachtet werden. dieses sollte detaillierte angaben zu probengewinnung, -lagerung und -transport in einem kompendium zur präanalytik zur verfügung stellen. in zweifelsfällen sollte, insbesondere bei schwer zu gewinnenden proben, bereits vor entnahme kontakt mit dem labor aufgenommen werden. beachtet werden sollten insbesondere hinweise zu folgenden punkten (schoerner et al. 2009 ): 4 wann sollen die proben entnommen werden? (z. b. bei antibiotikaspiegelbestimmung) 4 welche probenmenge ist notwendig? 161 8.1 · probengewinnung und -behandlung von untersuchungsergebnissen durch das absterben besonders empfindlicher keime und durch änderungen der quantitativen zusammensetzung der vorgefundenen keime. daraus können sowohl falsch-negative als auch falsch-positive befunde entstehen. zur richtigen lagerung der proben gibt es nur wenige wissenschaftliche untersuchungen, weshalb dem schnellen transport ins labor unbedingt vorrang einzuräumen ist. generell können die in . tab. 8.1 aufgeführten lagerungsbedingungen empfohlen werden. primär sterile materialien, die auch anspruchsvolle und empfindliche keime enthalten können, sollten bei raumtemperatur aufbewahrt werden. materialien, bei denen mit einer überwucherung durch flora zu rechnen ist oder bei denen eine verfälschung bei der quantitativen analyse möglich ist, z. b. bei urinen, sollten dagegen gekühlt gelagert werden.bei klinischer symptomatik (pollakisurie, dysurie, flankenschmerzen, fieber) mit verdacht auf harnwegsinfekt. zusätzlich bei rezidivierenden und nosokomialen harnwegsinfektionen, bei ausbleibender klinischer besserung unter antibiotikatherapie sowie bei fieber und sepsis unklarer genese, insbesondere bei kindern unter zwei jahren.mikrobiologische proben sollten vor beginn einer antibiotischen therapie entnommen werden. hierdurch darf es jedoch nicht zur verzögerung des therapiebeginns bei kritisch kranken kommen, wie z. b. bei schwerer sepsis und septischem schock.proben sollten stets so schnell wie möglich ins labor transportiert werden, idealerweise innerhalb von 2 h. der transport erfolgt grundsätzlich bei raumtemperatur. es werden immer kürzere turn-around-zeiten durch den einsatz moderner diagnostischer verfahren gefordert, die oft hohe kosten verursachen. die transportdauer von mikrobiologischen proben, die erheblich zur gesamtdauer der diagnostik beiträgt, sollte jedoch ebenfalls immer wieder kritisch beurteilt werden.proben sollten an zentralen orten, z. b. am pflegestützpunkt, gesammelt werden. für den transport sind die proben so zu verpacken, dass eine kontamination der umgebung oder eine gefährdung des transportpersonals ausgeschlossen werden kann. erforderlich sind neben einem stabilen, auslaufsicheren probengefäß (primärverpackung) ein schutzgefäß (sekundärverpackung) sowie eine außenverpackung, davon muss eine ebenfalls auslaufsicher und mit einer saugfähigen einlage ausgestattet sein.für den postversand von klinischen proben zur mikrobiologischen diagnostik ist gemäß der verpackungsanweisung p650 für den transport diagnostischer proben nach un-nr. 3373 neben dem probengefäß und dem schutzgefäß mit saugfähiger einlage ein transportkarton mit entsprechender kennzeichnung erforderlich: "biologischer stoff, kategorie b" oder "biological substance, category b" und die bezeichnung "un 3373" in einer raute (europäisches übereinkommen über die internationale beförderung gefährlicher güter auf der straße, adr 2015).eine längere lagerung der probe sollte nur dann stattfinden, wenn ein rascher transport nicht möglich ist. die lagerung führt zur verfälschung anzunehmen. treten sie jedoch als weit überwiegender keim auf und scheiden andere ursachen aus, sollten sie als erreger in betracht gezogen werden. clostridium difficile-erkrankungen werden über den toxinnachweis im stuhl diagnostiziert. dieser ist als pcr oder antigen-elisa direkt aus dem stuhl oder über eine kultur möglich. der toxinnachweis aus dem stuhl ist sehr spezifisch, der antigen-elisa weist jedoch einige schwächen bei der sensitivität auf. daher sollte als suchtest im antigen-elisa der glutamatdehydrogenase-(gdh-)nachweis erfolgen, der eine hohe sensitivität aufweist. ist dieser test positiv, muss jedoch ein toxin a/b-elisa oder eine entsprechende pcr angeschlossen werden, da die gdh als gemeinsames antigen auch bei nicht toxinproduzierenden c. difficile und anderen clostridien nachweisbar ist.aus der mitteilung, dass eine blutkultur positiv geworden ist, und dem ergebnis der untersuchung des gram-präparats lassen sich häufig bereits erste schlüsse auf die ätiologie der erkrankung des patienten ziehen. zudem kann eine anpassung der antibiotikatherapie vorgenommen werden, insbesondere bei befunden, die in der empirischen therapie nicht unbedingt berücksichtigt werden (z. b. grampositive stäbchen bei listerieninfektion). die mikroskopischen befunde werden durch zusätzliche untersuchungsergebnisse, die direkt aus der bewachsenen blutkultur gewonnen wurden, untermauert (z. b. hinweis für mrsa oder n. meningitidis aus einer pcr-untersuchung oder einem antigentest). der gleichzeitige nachweis desselben erregers in einer blutkultur und an der katheterspitze gilt als hinweis auf das vorliegen einer katheterassoziierten blutstrominfektion. eine sachgerechte entnahme und hautdesinfektion vorausgesetzt, sind erregernachweise aus primär sterilen kompartimenten in der regel ätiologisch bedeutsam. viele dieser erkrankungen werden durch eine bakterienart verursacht. sie betreffen in der regel definierte hautschichten. tiefe infektionen sind nicht selten durch aerob-anaerobe mischinfektionen bedingt, die durch den relativen sauerstoffmangel ermöglicht werden. eine übersicht zeigt . tab. 8.4.toxische reaktionen der haut können durch bakterielle toxine bedingt sein. eine übersicht zeigt . tab. 8.5.hauterkrankungen durch viren treten entweder als lokalisierte infektionen oder als symptome systemischer viruserkrankungen in erscheinung. eine übersicht findet sich in . tab. 8.6.operationswunden werden im rahmen des eingriffs bzw. kurz danach mit bakterien besiedelt. einfache postoperative wundinfektionen verzögern in der regel die wundheilung und zeigen die typischen klinischen symptome einer lokal begrenzten entzündung.bei der bewertung mikrobiologischer befunde muss neben der klinischen symptomatik der entnahmeort berücksichtigt werden. koagulasenegative staphylokokken aus einer sternotomiewunde bzw. nach implantation einer hüfttotalendoprothese sind als potenzielle krankheitserreger zu betrachten, wohingegen sie bei gemeinsamem nachweis mit enterobakterien und/oder enterokokken in darmresektionswunden vernachlässigt werden können.typische erreger postoperativer wundinfektionen sind staphylococcus aureus, streptococcus andere erreger wie pneumocystis jirovecii werden mittels pcr ebenfalls sehr zuverlässig detektiert. hierbei stellt sich jedoch oft die frage nach der relevanz der befunde. bei hiv-patienten lassen sich p. jirovecii aufgrund der hohen erregerzahlen meist problemlos im mikroskopischen präparat nachweisen. bei allen anderen patienten ist der mikroskopische nachweis häufig nicht zielführend, da deutlich weniger erreger vorhanden sind, sodass sich mikroskopisch falsch-negative befunde ergeben. ist die pcr positiv, muss anhand klinischer, laborchemischer und radiologischer parameter zwischen erkrankung und kolonisation unterschieden werden.in jüngster zeit wurden quantitative real-time-pcr-verfahren entwickelt. sie helfen, eine differenzierung zwischen infektion und kolonisation vorzunehmen.die identifizierung mikrobiologischer isolate erfolgt klassischerweise anhand makroskopischer und mikroskopischer morphologischer kriterien sowie mit tests, die gattungsspezifische biochemische stoffwechseleigenschaften der erreger überprüfen. dies kann durch einzelreaktionen in reagenzgläsern, durch die analyse mehrerer parameter im mikroformat in einer "bunten reihe" oder automatisiert in analysegeräten erfolgen. je geringer die stoffwechselaktivität, desto schwieriger ist die differenzierung. als alternative bieten sich neuere verfahren an, die nukleinsäuren mit molekulargenetischen methoden oder proteine massenspektrometrisch analysieren und eine differenzierung der erreger auch bei geringer stoffwechselleistung ermöglichen. serologische verfahren beruhen auf dem nachweis von spezifischen antikörpern oder erregerantigenen.antikörper werden bei kontakt mit entsprechenden antigenen mit einigen tagen bis wochen verzögerung gebildet, sodass sie in vielen fällen für die akute diagnostik nicht geeignet sind. aufgrund der einfachen materialgewinnung werden antikörperuntersuchungen jedoch häufig durchgeführt und sind für die beantwortung spezifischer fragestellungen auch sehr hilfreich. grundsätzlich kann beim nachweis einmalig erhöhter titer oder eines mindestens vierfachen titeranstiegs von einem ersten oder erneuten kontakt mit den erregern ausgegangen werden. auch die antikörperklassen sind, abhängig von der jeweiligen erkrankung, für die differenzialdiagnostik von großer bedeutung. in der regel werden bei akuten infektionen iga oder igm gebildet. indikationen für antikörperuntersuchungen sind: 4 ätiologische klärung von infektionen, insbesondere auch nach abklingen der entsprechenden klinischen symptome 4 nachweis bzw. ausschluss von folgeerkrankungen nach bakteriellen oder viralen infektionen, z. b. bei reaktiver arthritis, einige mikrobielle antigene werden über den urin ausgeschieden, sodass sie dort nachgewiesen werden können. am häufigsten werden tests zum nachweis von legionella-und pneumokokken-antigenen angewandt. der test ist als zusätzliches, schnelles diagnostisches verfahren bei der diagnose der ambulant erworbenen pneumonie von erwachsenen sinnvoll, wird jedoch in den s3-leitlinien zur ambulant erworbenen pneumonie (cap) und zur nosokomialen pneumonie nicht als routinediagnostik empfohlen, da pneumokokken im spektrum der antibiotischen therapie enthalten sind (höffken et al. 2009; dalhoff et al. 2012) . kinder und kleinkinder sind in bis zu 20 % pneumokokkenträger, daher sind urinantigentests bei ihnen häufig falsch-positiv.die sensitivität beträgt 50-80 %, die spezifität liegt bei über 90 %. der test ist damit als alleiniges verfahren ungeeignet und sollte durch kulturelle untersuchungen von respiratorischen materialien und blutkulturen ergänzt werden. dies ist auch sinnvoll, um eine resistenztestung durchführen zu können, da die verbreitung penicillin-resistenter stämme zunimmt.ein positiver befund kann zur fokussierung der antibiotischen therapie beitragen, wobei die möglichkeit falsch-positiver befunde und polymikrobieller infektionen zu bedenken sind. auf der anderen seite schließt ein negativer test eine pneumokokkenpneumonie nicht aus und sollte daher bei weiter bestehendem klinischen verdacht ggf. wiederholt bzw. durch weitere untersuchungen ergänzt werden.die diagnostik entzündlicher prozesse umfasst die analyse der leukozytenzahl und des differenzialblutbilds, der blutkörpersenkungsgeschwindigkeit und bei vorliegen septischer erkrankungen die analyse von parametern der gerinnungsaktivierung das c-reaktive protein (crp) ist ein akute-phase-protein, dessen plasmakonzentrationen bei systemischen entzündungsreaktionen durch proinflammatorische zytokine wie interleukin-6 (il-6) stimuliert wird. es wird in der leber synthetisiert und gelangt über das plasma zum ort der entzündung. dort nimmt es als teil des angeborenen immunsystems an der immunabwehr teil. es kann potenziell toxisches material aus gewebeschädigungen oder strukturen von mikroorganismen binden. anschließend wird deren abräumung veranlasst.die crp-konzentrationen steigen im rahmen von infektiösen prozessen, aber auch bei gewebeschädigungen wie z. b. operativen eingriffen, bei malignen tumoren oder malignen systemerkrankungen sowie bei einigen autoimmunerkrankungen an.der referenzwert des crp liegt bei <5 mg/l und steigt innerhalb von 6 h nach beginn der infektion an. der maximalwert ist nach operativen eingriffen meist nach 48 h erreicht und fällt dann mit einer halbwertszeit von 24-48 h wieder ab. bei infektionskrankheiten können die werte ohne adäquate therapie für tage bis wochen erhöht sein. je nach infektionserreger bzw. krankheitsverlauf werden unterschiedliche typische crp-anstiege beobachtet (. tab. 8.9).das crp eignet sich auch zur beurteilung der effektivität einer antiinfektiven therapie. unter einer adäquaten therapie fallen die werte innerhalb von 3 tagen wieder ab. grundsätzlich können die in . tab. 8.10 dargestellten muster unterschieden.procalcitonin (pct) wird als vorstufe des calcitonins in allen körpergeweben, vor allem jedoch in der leber produziert. es ist unter physiologischen bedingungen nur in geringen konzentrationen im serum nachweisbar (0,005-0,05 µg/l). als referenzbereich werden werte <0,5 µg/l angegeben. bei mikrobiellen infektionen erfolgt eine verstärkte freisetzung das lipopolysaccharid-bindende protein (lbp) bindet den lipid-a-anteil des lipopolysaccharids gramnegativer bakterien. erhöhte werte finden sich bei bakterieller sepsis und pilzsepsis, aber auch bei schweren traumata, nicht jedoch bei viralen infektionen. die kinetik entspricht der des crp.die proinflammatorischen zytokine tumornekrosefaktor-α (tnf-α), interleukin-6 (il-6) und interleukin-8 (il-8) sind sehr frühe marker für entzündungsreaktionen. sie sind diagnostisch wertvoll bei frühen verlaufsformen einer sepsis oder eines "systemic inflammatory response syndrome" (sirs) und werden sehr oft auch in der labordiagnostik einer schweren neonatalen infektion angewandt.tnf-α ist der früheste marker eines entzündungsprozesses, wobei eine weitere differenzierung bezüglich der ätiologie nicht möglich ist. es werden gesamt-tnf-α sowie ein freies bioaktives tnfα-trimer nachgewiesen. letzteres ist nur 4-6 h nach produktion nachweisbar. die monomere und spaltprodukte lassen sich hingegen für 24 h und länger nachweisen, sodass eine beurteilung des zeitlichen verlaufs möglich ist.il-6 und il-8 werden innerhalb von 6 h nach tnf-α-stimulation bzw. kontakt mit bakterien oder bakterientoxinen von monozyten/makrophagen sezerniert. nach 24-48 h nimmt die sekretion bis unter die nachweisgrenze ab. neben der analyse zahlreicher physikalischer und chemischer parameter muss badewasser auch mikrobiologisch untersucht werden. die anforderungen an rein-und beckenwasser sind in einer norm zur aufbereitung von schwimm-und badebeckenwasser (din 19643-1:2012-11) pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (pcp) is seen in people with a defect in cell-med iated immunity. today the most common cause for this is the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids). there have been some remarkable advances recently in the development of new drug regimens to combat th is oth erwise fatal infection. although cotrimoxazole (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) is still the drug of first choice it cannot be tolerated by a significant proportion of pat ients , and therapies such as pentamidine (pentamidi ne-isethionate) [intravenous or nebulised], dapsone-trimethoprim, eflornithine (dfmo; difluorometh ylornithine), trimetrexate, and clindamycin-primaqu ine are finding therapeutic niches. the major advantage in these oth er agents is not improved efficacy but different toxicity profiles, enabling therapy to be mos t appropriately tailored to indi vidu al patients ' conditions. although the majo rity of patients should now surv ive an attack of pcp, relapses will occur if prophylaxis is not used. there is also the capacity to predict accurately which pat ients are at risk for this pneumonia and prevent it th rough the use of chemoprophylaxis. these ad van ces in the treatment and prevention of pcp, together with anti-retroviral therap y, mean tha t th is is an area of aids management tha t has resulted in impro ved long term sur vival.pneumocystis carinii is a low grade pathogen that causes an insidious pneumonitis in people with immune defects -especially those with defects in cell-mediated immunity, e.g. malnourished infants, organ transplant recipients and patients on immunosuppressive chemotherapy.since the commencement of the aids pandemic (masur et al. 1981) there has been an exponential increase in the incidence of pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (pcp) in the western world.currently pcp accounts for 60% of initial aids diagnosis and approximately 85% of aids patients will develop this form of pneumonia during the course of their illness (kovacs & masur 1989) .pcp is suspected on the basis of the clinical symptoms of cough, night sweats and increasing dyspnoea, with chest x-ray changes of diffuse interstitial shadowing, and low arterial oxygen pressure (pa02) in a person in a high risk group. the diagnosis can only be confirmed by the microscopic detection of typical pneumocysts in alveolar tissue or bronchial secretions.since the emergence of aids there have been considerable changes in the treatment of pcp. in the 1950s pentamidine administered intramuscularly was the treatment of choice. however, the high incidence of sterile abscess formation at the site of injection and the finding that hypotension and cardiac arrhythmias are not encountered more often with intravenous administration led to a preference for slow intravenous infusions (mallory et al. in the 1960s the development of cotrimoxazole (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) changed treatment strategies. it appeared to be as effective as pentamidine but was associated with a much lower incidence of adverse drug reactions. cotrimoxazole therefore replaced pentamidine as the treatment of choice (hughes et al. 1978) .with the rapid increase in the number of cases of pcp related to aids in the early 19808 it became apparent that there is a higher incidence of adverse drug reactions with cotrimoxazole in these patients than in the non-aids groups (approaching 100% in some studies) [jaffe et al. 1983 ]. most investigators now feel that cotrimoxazole has no advantage over pentamidine as a first-line treatment for pcp in aids patients . recently a number of other regimens have been advocated by various centres as efficacious against p. carinii (table   i; figs 1 and 2) . these include pentamidine (pentamidine isethionate) administered as an aerosol, oral dapsone-trimethoprim, eflornithine (dfmo ; difluoromethylornithine), trimetrexate and calcium folinate (folinic add), and clindamycin plus primaquine. although all regimens show reasonable effectiveness, a range of toxicities is often encountered. the major features of each regimen are discussed briefly below. treatment of pcp, and is commonly used as firstline therapy either intravenousl y or orally. the duration of treatment is 14 to 21 days, depending on the severit y of the episod e. adverse reactions are common with cotrimoxazole, necessitating drug withdrawal in up to 50% of patients (wharton et al. 1986 ). the major adverse effects include nausea and vomiti ng, rash , fever, bon e marrow suppression (in 20 to 50% of pat ients ), stevens-johnson syndrome (rare) and hepatotoxicity. some centres prefer intravenous administration rather than oral in the belief that there may be less nausea. it is becoming quit e clear that a number of the toxiciti es associated with cotrimoxazole, such as nausea or haematological toxicity, are dose related and that mon itoring drug drugs 42 (4) 1991 concentrations and dose reductions may redu ce toxicity ). for man y centres, however, monitoring drug levels is not possible and as newer regimens appear to be as effective many physicians readily change to alternative therapy. besides changing drugs, man y physicians are trying to decrease cotrimoxazole toxicity by either starting treatment with lower doses (960 rug/day trimethop rim, 4800 rug/day sulfame tho xazole) or decreasing treatment courses from 2 1 to 14 days. some centres are able to maintain certain patients on cotrimoxazole throughout a full treatment course by 'treating through' any hypersensitivity reactions that occur or by desensitising the patient to the drug (finegold 1986 pentamidine at a dosage of 4 mg/kg (approximat ely 300mg), adm inistered as a slow intra venous infusion, is an effective treatm ent for pcp. response rates are approximately80%, depend ing on the severity of the episode. unfortunately, the effectiveness of pentamidine is limited by a high incidence of adverse reactions , up to 50% of patients in some studies (wharton et al. 1986 ).the most common drug reactions include renal dysfunction, hypotension and dysglycaemia (goa & campol i-richards 1987) . renal impairment appears to be a dose-related effect and is more likely to occur if patients have been treated with pentamidine in the past, have pre-existing renal impa irment or are given a prolonged course of treatment. 631 hypotens ion often occurs as the drug is being infused and can usually be countered by slowing the infusion rate (mallory et al. 1987) . dysglycaemias occur as a result of direct toxicity to the fj islet cells of the pancreas and may result in long term diabetes (waskin et al. 1988) . although these toxicities are potentiall y life-threatening, close monitoring of blood pressure and serum biochemistry can detect abnormalities early, usually before the patient becomes symptomatic.. the high incidence of toxicity associated with parenteral pentamidine has led to modification of the standard regimen (4 rug/kg/day intravenously for 21 days) in an attempt to diminish these adverse effects. one such modification .has been to administer the drug as an aerosol directly to the lungs (monk & benfield 1990) . although initial pilot studies using this regimen showed promising results (montgomery et al. 1987) , later comparative studies of intravenous versus nebulised pentamidine showed an unacceptably high failure rate (conte et al. 1990; soo hoo et al. 1990 ). the disadvantage with using nebulised pentamidine for treatment is that even the most efficient delivery system can only carry aerosolised drug to those parts of the lung with adequate ventilation. if patients are having difficulty in getting enough oxygen into their alveolar spaces then it is highly unlikely that they will be able to get adequate amounts of drug to the alveoli as well. we therefore would not use this method in patients who are hypoxic or whose chest x-rays show any marked degree of interstitial shadowing. one disadvantage with the nebulised route is that patients are more intolerant to the presence of high concentrations of pentamidine every day when they are acutely unwell (personal observations). unlike prophylactic therapy, where wide margins of error can be tolerated (in terms of amount of drug deposited in the alveoli), with treatment courses the unknown variables of drug concentration, droplet size, flow rates and nebuliser types become more important. despite these disadvantages nebulised pentamidine may be suitable for the treatment of patients with mild pneumonia (normal resting arterial blood gases, minimal changes on x-ray), intolerance to sulfa-based drugs or those keen to be treated as outpatients.one modified regimen that has been tried consists of concurrent intravenous and nebulised pentamidine for the first 3 days of treatment followed by alternate-day intravenous administration until the course is complete. the rationale behind such an approach is that it takes 3 to 5 days of intravenous therapy before adequate lung tissue concentrations are achieved (donnelly et al. 1988 ), due to the strong protein binding properties of pentamidine; therefore, the use of aerosol delivery should rapidly elevate lung concentrations into the therapeutic range . once initial pulmonary loading has been achieved, alternate-day intravenous administration should prevent accumulation of pentamidine (conte et al. 1990 ), and drugs 42 (4) 1991 hence result in less toxicity. we have found that since the introduction of this new regimen there has been a significant reduction in pentamidinerelated reactions with no loss of efficacy.eflornithine is a decarboxylase enzyme inhibitor which interferes with polyamine synthesis (important for cell growth) [sjoerdsma & schechter 1984] . we have shown this drug to be an effective salvage treatment in patients who faii to respond to conventional therapy (smith et al. 1990a ). it is administered as a continuous intravenous infusion at a dose of 400 mg/kg for 14 days. an oral formulation is available but it is not well absorbed and causes diarrhoea. response rates are approximately 60% when used as salvage therapy.the major toxicity with eflornithine is related to bone marrow suppression (occurring in up to 40% of patients). other adverse reactions are phlebitis at the injection site and alopecia. although an effective second-line agent in patients with a poor prognosis, studies nearing completion in our unit comparing eflornithine with cotrimoxazole as a first-line agent have not shown cornparable efficacy (smith et al. i990b ). there are 3 possible explanations for eflornithine being less effective when used as primary therapy rather than salvage therapy. firstly, eflornithine has no activity against possible secondary bacterial chest infections, which may play a more important role in unresponsive pcp than initially thought. when patients are switched to eflornithine because of apparent failure of primary therapy they are usually also treated with antibacterial and antituberculosis agents. secondly, the polyamine inhibition of eflornithine in tissue cultures can be bypassed by the addition of exogenous polyamines (cushion et al. 1985) . it is possible that in very ill patients in an increased catabolic state, who have exhausted polyamine supplies, the effects of eflornithine are enhanced. finally, in animal models of trypanosomiasis there is pronounced synergism between eflornithine and other anti-protozoal agents (bac-chi & mccann 1987) ; such may also be true for human pcp.trimetrexate is a potent folic acid antagonist which is taken up by both mammalian and pneumocystis cells. it produces a fatal blockage of folic acid metabolism (allegra et al. 1987a ). calcium folinate is administered concurrently to 'rescue' mammalian cells from this blockage, as only mammalian cells possess the mechanism to actively transport calcium folinate into the cell. the net result is the selective destruction of pneumocystis cells while leaving the host cells relatively undamaged. this therapy is being investigated as both first-line and salvage treatment.results to date are encouraging, with response rates of 66 to 88%, although reports of early relapses (allegra et al 1987b) and the practical difficulties in administration (the drug must be given by medical staff on a strict 6-hour regimen) will probably mean that this regimen never gains widespread acceptance. as with eflornithine, bone marrow toxicity is the biggest drawback although this usually responds to an increased dose of calcium folinate. elevation of liver enzymes has also been reported.trimetrexate is administered intravenously at a dose of 45 mg/m 2/day in 50ml 5% dextrose in water for 21 days and the calcium folinate 20 mg/m 2 every 6 hours for 24 days, although the 2 agents cannot be infused concurrently in the same intravenous line as precipitation will occur. currently this regimen is used only as salvage therapy by a few centres .the combination of dapsone (100 mg/day) and trimethoprim (20 rug/kg/day) has been shown to be of some benefit in the treatment of pcp, with 100%survival reported in one small study (leoung et al. 1986 ). however, the incidence of adverse drug reactions was also high, at 95% of patients treated. in another comparative study dapsone-trimetho-633 prim was shown to be equal in efficacy to cotrimoxazole but with less toxicity (medina et al. 1990 ). the majority of drug reactions were minor (rash, nausea, neutropenia and asymptomatic methaemoglobinaemia). this combination therefore seems an attractive alternative to pentamidine or cotrimoxazole in the treatment of mild to moderate episodes of pcp. it is only available as an oral preparation.an unusual drug reaction that has been noted with the combination of dapsone-trimethoprim is haemolytic anaemia, especially in patients with glucose-6-dehydrogenase enzyme deficiency (rashbridge & scott 1973) . this regimen is now commonly used in ambulatory or outpatient treatment of pcp.clindamycin and primaquine have only recently been used in patients after studies in the rat model of pcp showed this combination to be effective. initial pilot studies in patients gave response rates of 92 to 100% (ruf & pohle 1989; toma et al. 1989) . although rashes, diarrhoea, nausea and mild methaemoglobinaemia were seen, the regimen was generally well tolerated.this combination is attractive in that many of the sulfa-based hypersensitivity reactions seen w ith other regimens do not occur, and the bacterial secondary infections which commonly accompany pcp are treated as well. it is expected that this regimen will gain widespread acceptance as more experience accumulates. pseudomembranous colitis secondary to clostridium difficile toxin has not been a major problem.corticosteroids have been advocated as being of benefit in the prevention of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards)-type deterioration and a number of stud ies have shown improvement in oxygenation and resolution of clinical features (bozzette 1990; gagnon et al. 1990 ). steroids certainly have a dramatic effect in some hypoxic patients, with rapid improvements in paoz, clearance of infiltrates on chest x-rays and a resolution of fever. their ultimate place in the management of pcp, however, is the subject of debate (kovacs & masur 1990) .the difficulty in deciding where to use steroids comes from the observations that maximum effectiveness is achieved if steroids are given before profound pulmonary inflammation occurs. it is well recognised that deterioration in lung function occurs in the first 3 days after the initiation of treatment. this is probably due to cytokine stimulation in response to the release of antigenic protein from disrupted p. cariniicells. steroids have proven effectiveness at preventing these effects when initiated concurrently with antipneumocystis therapy.the role of late or rescue corticosteroid use remains unclear. in clinical practice corticosteroids would be given to those patients with poor prognostic markers on admission to hospital , i.e. paoz of < 8.0 kpa, severe interstitial infiltrates on chestx-ray and elevated lactic dehydrogenase (ldh) levels (> 700 u/l) . there is still debate as to the optimum dosing regimen but current recommendations suggest prednisolone 40mg 2 to 4 times a day for 5 days, followed by 40mg daily for 5 days, then 20 rug/day until the end of treatment masur et al. 1990) . worries have been expressed that too long a course could result in further immunosuppression or that other concurrent infections such as herpes, tuberculosis or candidial infections may be more severe and difficult to treat (sattler 1991) . certainly , refractory oral and oesophageal candidosis is a problem during corticosteroid therapy.although pcp can be treated with a reasonable degree of success, the underlying immune dysfunction that allowed the pneumonia to develop rema ins. this means that reinfection or relapse is likely..patients appear to be most at risk for pcp relapses 6 to 9 month after an initial attack (golden et al. 1989 ). since subsequent episodes carry a drugs 42 (4) 1991 higher mortality than the first attack, prevention of relapses should .result in better long term survival in some patients (rainer et al. 1987) .the choice of agents suitable for pcp prophylaxis includes cotrimoxazole , dapsone , pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine, pentamidine, and clindamycin + primaquine.cotrimoxazole given daily or 3 times a week has been shown to be effective in preventing pcp in patients without aids (hughes et al. 1987 ) and more recently in aids patients as well (raviglione et al. 1990; ruskin & la riviere 1991) . the recommended dose is 5 mg/kg trimethoprim and 25 mg/kg sulfamethoxazole in 2 divided doses as tablets. although probably the most effective form of prophylaxis, its use is somewhat limited in a number of patients with aids due to adverse reactions. the most common is skin rash; nausea is another compla int that patients often find intolerable in a medication that they will need to be on for the rest of their life.dapsone has been shown to be effective in the prevention of pcp at a dose of 50 to 100 rug/day (kemper et al. 1990 ). with long term follow-up under 5% of patients had a relapse. again, adverse reactions are common, the most worrying being haemolytic anaemia and methaemoglobinaemia. some investigators have suggested that lower doses (50 to 100 rug/week) may give adequate protection (ogata-arakaki et al. 1990 ) but this has not been our experience. when dapsone is given with pyrimethamine it may also protect against cerebral toxoplasmosis (clolet et al. 1991 ). myelosuppression in patients concurrently on zidovudine (azidoth ymidine) therapy has been seen in some patients , particularl y if combined therapy has been given for more than a year.the combination of pyrimethamine and sulfadoxine has been reported to have some benefit in preventing pcp despite its lack of success in treat-ment. it does not appear to be as effective as cotrimoxazole, with a relapse rate following first-episode pcp ofabout 23% over 6 months (fischl & dickinson 1986) . it is usually given as i or 2 tablets/week and it is likely that its poor efficacy is related to inadequate drug concentrations. rash and nausea are common side effects. the stevens-johnson syndrome, which may occur in up to 4% of patients, is a severe limitation to its use.pentamidine has recently received considerable attention as a potentially beneficial drug for pcp prophylaxis (corkery et al. 1988; monk & benfield 1990; thomas et al. 1990 ). nebulised pentamidine has been used with success by a large number of centres dealing with aids patients. the rationale for its use as an aerosol is to deliver the drug specifically to the site of infection and avoid toxicity to other organs. it is theoretically possible to do this with pentamidine for a number of reasons: firstly, it is possible to aerosolise the drug to form droplets that can reach the alveolar spaces; secondly, it adheres strongly to alveolar macrophages and so does .not enter the systemic circulation in significant amounts; and, finally, the long half-life of the drug, together with its concentration in the lung, means that long dosing intervals of between 2 and 4 weeks are possible (conte & golden 1988; hirschel et al. 1991; kronawitter et al. 1991) .adverse reactions seen with this form of administration include unpleasant taste (approximately 100%), cough (30%), bronchoconstriction (dosedependent and reversible with a bronchodilator) [smith et al. 1988 ], nausea (5%) and increased saliva production (30%). there have been very few reports of systemic toxicity (leen & mandai 1988) and on the whole this method of prophylaxis appears well tolerated .as with the use of nebulised pentamidine for the treatment of pcp, prophylactic regimens have been developed ad hoc by each major centre seeing aids patients so that nebuliser equipment, dosage and dosing intervals have varied widely, making direct comparisons difficult. doses have ranged 635 from 60 to 600mg of pentamidine, dosing intervals from weekly to monthly administration. there is also wide variation in the types of nebulisers used to deliver the drug..as most commercially available nebulisers were designed for the administration of bronchodilators and thus target the large airways, these have had to have been modified, redesigned (simonds et al. 1989) or new models developed to give a nebuliser that produces large quantities of aerosol capable of alveolar deposition. unfortunately, some of the nebulisers in current use do not achieve these criteria, and result in inadequte lung protection and dissatisfaction with this form of therapy.although there is considerable debate about which nebuliser to choose (o'doherty et al. 1988; smalldone et al. 1988) , it is unlikely that one particular brand is clinically significantly better than any other. both jet and ultrasonic nebulisers, throwaway or reusable, are currently being advocated as the most efficient; however, any nebuliser is appropriate as long as it can consistently deliver enough droplets of adequate size to coat all the alveolar spaces. in practice this means that the majority of droplets should be less than 5jlm in size, preferably 2 to 3jlm (newman 1985; stahlhofen et al. 1980) . droplets smaller than this may not settle in the lungs but be exhaled; larger droplets will impact in the oropharynx and large airways, increasing adverse effects such as cough and bronchoconstriction and decreasing efficacy.the efficacy of nebulised pentamidine has been established in several large scale controlled studies, among them one placebo-controlled study from canada (montaner et al. 1991) , one from france comparing nebulised pentamidine and zidovudine with zidovudine alone (girard et al. 1989) , and one dose-ranging study comparing a large dose of pentamidine (300mg monthly) with a much smaller dose (30mg fortnightly) ]. however, doubts about its widespread applicability remain.it is not known whether long term use of nebulised pentamidine will result in interstitial lung damage. a study of 173 patients on long term prophylaxis at our centre showed that there is no de-terioration in peak expiratory flow rates over time (smith et al. 1991) ; however, more extensive studies on lung function are needed. worries have also been expressed about the failure of this form of prophylaxis to protect against the possibility of disseminated p. carinii and about an increasing incidence of pneumothoraces in aids patients. although a number of case reports of disseminated p. carinii infection have been published (northfelt 1989) , no comparative studies have been reported against other forms of prophylaxis. less than 60 cases have been reported in the world literature, most associated with concurrent severe pulmonary infection or in patients with a past history ofpcp.it is likely, therefore , that disseminated p. carinii infection is very rare .similarly, the increase in cases of pneumothoraces (martinez et al. 1988 ) seems to be more related to the number of episodes of pcp a patient has had rather than what form of prophylaxis he or she is on. pneumothoraces are probably caused by the rupture of thin-walled pneumocoeles which appear during recovery from pcp. as patients live longer following their pcp (harris 1990) it is likely that more of these events will be seen.another major problem with this form of prophylaxis is the considerable expense of the drug, the equipment required for nebulisation and of trained personnel. however, despite these concerns about long term adverse effects and the considerable cost of this form of prophylaxis, it will always be widely used as a considerable number of patients will not be able to tolerate the adverse effects of the other currently available systemic forms of pcp prophylaxis, especially as they all contain a sulfa moiety to which many hiv-positive patients are intolerant.clindarnycin/primaquine has only been used as a prophylactic regimen in a very small number of patients who have responded to this combination as treatment of their pcp (kay & dubois 1990) .although data are sparse it appears to be well tolerated and probably effective. a dosing schedule drugs 42 (4) 1991 of clindamycin 150mg 4 times daily and primaquine 26.3 mg/day has been proposed (kay & dubois 1990) . further experience in larger numbers of patients is needed before this combination can be widely promoted.with the necessity for prevention of relapses of pcp acknowledged by most doctors, many investigators also feel that it is equally important to prevent first attacks -with primary prophylaxis -as opposed to prevention of subsequent episodessecondary prophylaxis. primary prophylaxis has been used in patients with kaposi's sarcoma, where it was found that preventing pcp resulted in improved survival (fischl et al. 1988 ). as it is possible to predict which patients with hiv disease are at high risk for the development of pcp (phair et al. 1990 ) these patients should be offered prophylaxis (centres for disease control 1989). this would include patients with kaposi's sarcoma, other non-pcp opportunistic infections, adults with cd4 counts below 200/mm 3 and children with a cd4 of less than 20% (centres for disease control 1991). it would be unnecessary to use prophylaxis in hiv-positive patients with normal or near-normal immune status .as pcp accounts for 60% of aids diagnoses and 85% of aids patients will develop it during the course of their disease, the elimination of this infection (whether initial or recurrent) with prophylaxis is now starting to affect morbidity and mortality figures. survival figures for patients with pcp have improved considerably compared to patients with other opportunistic infections over the past few years (harris 1990; lemp et al. 1990 ). this improvement is undoubtedly due to the effects of both antiretroviral treatment with zidovudine plus the reduction in mortality from pcp with the widespread use of pcp prophylaxis.considerable advances have been made over the past decade in the treatment of pcp, with a resultant reduct ion in mortality to below 10%today. an increasing number of agents are available but all are plagued with major toxicities. cotrimoxazole, the standard, remains the drug of first choice and is still an effective therapy if patients can tolerate it. perhaps the most significant advance in this area has been the realisation that survival is improved most not by different treatment regimens, but by early diagnosis and initiation of therapy, with outpatient treatment becoming more common. side effects are seen with all regimens but are predictable and should never be a cause of major morbidity. modifications of dosing regimens to prevent drug accumulation will reduce most of these side effects.as with treatment regimens, there are also an increasing number of prophylactic regimens available to the clinician. hlv-infected patients should be commenced on chemoprophylaxis when there is evidence of marked immunodeficiency (cd4 count < 200/mm 3 , oral candidiasis or opportunistic infections and tumours). cotrimoxazole is the most effective agent but is not tolerated long term by up to 50% of patients. dapsone and nebulised pentamidine are also effective but the optimum dose and dosing frequency remain in doubt. patients are still prone to other opportunistic infections as their survival is extended, and agents in the future with dual or triple activity against pneumocystis, toxoplasmosis and/or cryptosporidiasis are desired. dapsone-pyrarnethamine and the naphthoquinone 566c80 are already showing early promising results in pneumocystis and toxoplasmosis prophylaxis.background severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has caused considerable disruption across the world, resulting in more than 235,000 deaths since december 2019. sars-cov-2 has a wide tropism and detection of the virus has been described in multiple specimen types, including various respiratory secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, and stool. objective to evaluate the accuracy and sensitivity of a laboratory modified cdcbased sars-cov-2 n1 and n2 assay across a range of sample types. study design we compared the matrix effect on the analytical sensitivity of sars-cov-2 detection by qrt-pcr in nasal swabs collected in viral transport medium (vtm), bronchoalveolar lavage (bal), sputum, plasma, cerebral spinal fluid (csf), stool, vtm, phosphate buffered saline (pbs), and hanks' balanced salt solution (hbss). initial limits of detection (lod) were subsequently narrowed to confirm an lod for each specimen type and target gene. results lods were established using a modified cdc-based laboratory developed test and ranged from a mean ct cut-off of 33.8-35.7 (10-20 copies/reaction) for the n1 gene target, and 34.0-36.2 (1-10 copies/reaction) for n2. alternatives to vtm such as pbs and hbss had comparable lods. the n2 gene target was found to be most sensitive in csf. conclusion a modified cdc-based laboratory developed test is able to detect sarscov- 2 accurately with similar sensitivity across all sample types tested.validation of sars-cov-2 detection across multiple specimen types.background severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has caused considerable disruption across the world, resulting in more than 235,000 deaths since december 2019. sars-cov-2 has a wide tropism and detection of the virus has been described in multiple specimen types, including various respiratory secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, and stool. objective to evaluate the accuracy and sensitivity of a laboratory modified cdcbased sars-cov-2 n1 and n2 assay across a range of sample types. study design we compared the matrix effect on the analytical sensitivity of sars-cov-2 detection by qrt-pcr in nasal swabs collected in viral transport medium (vtm), bronchoalveolar lavage (bal), sputum, plasma, cerebral spinal fluid (csf), stool, vtm, phosphate buffered saline (pbs), and hanks' balanced salt solution (hbss). initial limits of detection (lod) were subsequently narrowed to confirm an lod for each specimen type and target gene. results lods were established using a modified cdc-based laboratory developed test and ranged from a mean ct cut-off of 33.8-35.7 (10-20 copies/reaction) for the n1 gene target, and 34.0-36.2 (1-10 copies/reaction) for n2. alternatives to vtm such as pbs and hbss had comparable lods. the n2 gene target was found to be most sensitive in csf. conclusion a modified cdc-based laboratory developed test is able to detect sarscov- 2 accurately with similar sensitivity across all sample types tested.validation of sars-cov-2 detection across multiple specimen types.background severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has caused considerable disruption across the world, resulting in more than 235,000 deaths since december 2019. sars-cov-2 has a wide tropism and detection of the virus has been described in multiple specimen types, including various respiratory secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, and stool. objective to evaluate the accuracy and sensitivity of a laboratory modified cdcbased sars-cov-2 n1 and n2 assay across a range of sample types. study design we compared the matrix effect on the analytical sensitivity of sars-cov-2 detection by qrt-pcr in nasal swabs collected in viral transport medium (vtm), bronchoalveolar lavage (bal), sputum, plasma, cerebral spinal fluid (csf), stool, vtm, phosphate buffered saline (pbs), and hanks' balanced salt solution (hbss). initial limits of detection (lod) were subsequently narrowed to confirm an lod for each specimen type and target gene. results lods were established using a modified cdc-based laboratory developed test and ranged from a mean ct cut-off of 33.8-35.7 (10-20 copies/reaction) for the n1 gene target, and 34.0-36.2 (1-10 copies/reaction) for n2. alternatives to vtm such as pbs and hbss had comparable lods. the n2 gene target was found to be most sensitive in csf. conclusion a modified cdc-based laboratory developed test is able to detect sarscov- 2 accurately with similar sensitivity across all sample types tested.validation of sars-cov-2 detection across multiple specimen types.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the virus causing coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , has infected over three million people in 187 countries as of writing [1] . the ongoing pandemic has been exacerbated by lack of adequate testing across the globe [2] . early detection of sars-cov-2 can identify patients who are more likely to experience significant disease. the virus's wide tropism is reflected by the presence of its rna across a wide array of sample types.sars-like coronavirus rna has been detected in a range of specimens such as nasopharyngeal (np) aspirates, throat swabs, plasma, rectal swabs, stool, urine, kidney and lung tissues [3, 4, 5, 6, 7] . quantitative detection can be used to diagnose, inform modes of transmission, and monitor progress of antiviral therapy [8] [9] . accounts of meningitis associated with covid-19 have demonstrated a need to detect sars-cov-2 in cerebral spinal fluid (csf) [10] .although np swabs are commonly submitted for covid-19 testing, sensitivity for qrt-pcr can vary by virus and sample type [11] . for instance, bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) is an invasive procedure gathering fluid from individuals with lower respiratory tract infections (lrtis), and can oftentimes be more sensitive than nasal swabs [12] . similar issues with urti versus lrti detection have been seen for other respiratory viruses [13, 14] . here, we establish and validate limits of detection (lods) across specimen types using a sars-cov-2 molecular detection qrt-pcr assay for n1 and n2 gene targets from cdc distributed primer/probe sets.for lod determination, we used our original sars-cov-2 positive np swab specimen from late february 2020. sars-cov-2 negative np swabs, bal, sputum, plasma, csf, stool, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f viral transport media (vtm), phosphate buffered saline (pbs), and hanks' balanced salt solution (hbss) were spiked with sars-cov-2, extracted, amplified, and analyzed for sensitivity. hela cells were included in every run as a negative extraction control and dh2o as a negative template. negative sputum samples were pooled together for initial lod determination.for other sample types, individual unique patient negatives were used for lod determination.stool samples used for validation were previously diluted at a 1:10 ratio with stool transport and recovery (star) buffer before extraction [15] .the preliminary lod of each specimen type was established by quadruplicate serial tenfold dilutions where positivity was defined as 100% detection. confirmatory lods used 20 samples of the same specimen type on each side of the cutoff dilution series. if positivity was <95%, further two-fold and five-fold dilutions were assayed with 20 more samples for each series until >95% of samples were detected for confirmatory lods. for specificity, clinical samples were collected from before december 2019 and tested for viral pathogens by a multiplex respiratory panel [16, 17, 18] .nucleic acid (na) extraction was performed on a roche magna pure 96 (mp96) using the pathogen universal kit [19] . we used a modified cdc protocol targeting the n1 and n2 gene along with an internal extraction control (exo, a 130-base jellyfish rna transcript) [20, 21] .200µl of sample was extracted and eluted into 50µl elution buffer, of which 5µl was used as template in a 25µl reaction using the agpath-id one-step rt-pcr kit. each 25µl qrt-pcr reaction mix consisted of 4.09µl h20, 12.5µl of 2x reaction mix, 1.5µl of cdc n1/n2 primer/probe mix, 0.75µl of exo primer mix, 0.16µl exo probe, 1µl 25x enzyme and 5µl of extracted rna template. final primer concentrations were 400nmol/l for n1 and n2, 100nmol/l for exo forward, and 200nmol/l for exo reverse, while fam probes had a final concentration j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f of 100nmol/l each and exo vic probe was 62.5 nmol/l. probes, primer sequence, and complete assay parameters are described in the cdc sars-cov-2 protocol [22] .thermocycling conditions were 48°c (10min), 95°c (10min), followed by 40 cycles of 95°c (15s) and 60°c (45s). viral amplification was performed on an abi 7500 real-time pcr system with analysis on 7500 2.3 software using a baseline from 6-15 and threshold of 0.1.droplet digital (dd) pcr was performed on bio-rad's qx200 droplet digital pcr system with samples in duplicate to quantify copies/reaction. each 25µl ddpcr reaction used 5µl of extracted rna and was analyzed on quantasoft analysis pro (1.0.596). ten-fold dilutions from 100,000 copies/reaction to 1 copy/reaction were used to establish a standard curve.we first determined the absolute number of copies present in our sars-cov-2 positive specimen using ddpcr. based on ten-fold dilutions of the material and the linear range of ddpcr between 500-2000 copies, we determined a 1:1000 dilution of our specimen contained 1,000 copies/reaction of virus (fig. 1) . we then determined the lod of our qrt-pcr assay in vtm from np swabs. the initial lod for both n1 and n2 primers in np swabs was 10 copies/reaction corresponding to 500 copies/ml vtm. n1 was confirmed at 10 copies/reaction while n2 confirmed at 5 copies/reaction. specificity testing using 20 respiratory virus positive specimens yielded no cross-reactivity.we next examined the lod in bal. spike-ins of sars-cov-2 material in bal yielded a similar lod of 10 copies/reaction for n1 and 5 copies/reaction for n2. specificity testing using 25 respiratory virus positive specimens again yielded no cross-reactivity. the confirmed lod in j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f sputum for n1 was also 10 copies/reaction but increased for n2 to 10 copies/reaction. no cross-reactivity was observed in 16 respiratory virus positive sputum samples. examination of spike-ins into different specimen transport medias including pbs, vtm/utm, and hbss gave the same lod as sputum of n1 at 10 copies/reaction and n2 at 10 copies/reaction. studies in plasma yielded a higher lod than respiratory secretions, with 20 copies/reaction for n1 and 10 copies/reaction for n2. studies in csf gave the most sensitive lod of 10 copies/reaction for n1 and 1 copy/reaction for n2. no respiratory virus positive csf specimens were available for specificity testing. star-protected stool gave a similar lod as respiratory secretions with n1 at 10 copies/reaction and n2 at 10 copies/reaction.np swabs are the most common sample type submitted for respiratory panels and are minimally invasive, cost effective, and widely available for testing. however, the wide tropism of sars-cov-2 means that multiple specimen types may be used to detect the virus in patients.here, we found that a modified cdc ldt performed equally well in different sample matrices on an analytical basis. our results also confirm prior work on the high analytical sensitivity of the n2 primer set [23] . notably, the n2 target appeared to be most sensitive in sars-cov-2 detection in csf with an lod of 1 copy/reaction.we also established analytical lods for pbs and hbss as they can be alternative transport matrices to vtm/utm given current supply chain concerns [24] . pbs and hbss had equivalent lods to vtm at 10 copies/reaction for both n1 and n2 targets. the high lod of plasma compared to other sample types could be due to pcr inhibitors present in blood and plasma that directly affect rna [25] . contemporaneous work has similarly established no difference in analytical sensitivity between np swabs and bal, with an lod at 6 copies/reaction using the cdc assay [26] .stool specimens were already preserved 1:10 in star buffer, which likely accounted for no loss in analytical sensitivity in this difficult matrix. a further limitation is the lack of stability testing, which may account for the similar lod determined across the different matrices tested.we have analytically validated our qrt-pcr laboratory developed sars-cov-2 test on different specimen types and established respective lods. validation of a wide range of sample mediums for pcr assays has the potential to significantly increase molecular diagnostic testing capacity to detect sars-cov-2.this work was supported by the department of laboratory medicine at the university of washington medical centerthe authors declare no conflict of interest.a) digital droplet pcr quantifying n1 serial dilutions with a threshold set at an amplitude of 2,600. sample 1) 1:100,000, 2) 1:100,000, 3) 1:1,000, 4) 1:1,000, 5) 1:10,000, 6) 1:10,000, 7) extracted pbs, 8) water. b) standard curve to establish genomic copies/reaction with a threshold set at an amplitude of 2,600. sample 1) 1:10, 2) 1:100, 3) 1:100, 4) 1:1,000, 5) 1:1,000, 6) 1:10,000, 7) 1:10,000, 8) 1:100,000, 9) 1:100,000, 10) 1:1,000,000, 11) 1:1,000,000, [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] water.in the middle of march 2003, an attending staff physician informed me that the weekly grand rounds topic would be sars. ''will be. . . sorry?'' when he repeated the word, i realized he was referring to severe acute respiratory syndrome, the new pneumonia in asia. i teased him for using the acronym, shortening the name to sound both hip and common.seven days later, i was hiking around the hospital grounds, searching for an entrance untouched by yellow police tape. inside the empty building, i walked through silent halls wearing a mask over my primary means of communication, the smell of the material to become both familiar and redolent.with the return of influenza season, the re-implementation of isolation procedures has induced a posttraumatic stress disorder-like response amongst those who endured the 2003 sars epidemic. much has been written regarding the impact of sars on public health, health care delivery, and occupational safety. [1] [2] [3] [4] however, very little has been written on the impact of sars on the educational environment of teaching hospitals. on the basis of our experiences as residents at the university of toronto during the sars epidemic, this article will highlight several areas of residency training that were affected by this disease, as well as articulate the atmosphere it created. our intent is to prompt further discussion regarding the effect of future infectious epidemics on medical education.in the emergency department (ed), febrile patients were placed in the back rooms, which were under negative pressure, except for the day when a fellow resident noticed that the paper he tucked under the door whooshed back out at us. i wished the glass was not embedded with wire, decreasing one of the only views i had of my patient. after 10 minutes of tedious dressing procedures, i entered the room looking, sounding, and feeling like an astronaut. i could not see the young man before me-the hood had fogged up. i extended my neck as far as i could to gain visual access to the lower left corner of the plastic window, and i saw by his skin that he was african american. yet no matter how i turned, i could not see his eyes. ''have you noticed. . . any yellowing of the whites of your eyes lately?'' his voice sounded strong, so i wrote nad on his chart.residents provide the bulk of direct patient contact within teaching hospitals. thus, they are a population inherently at risk of exposure to communicable disease. this is not a novel issue, because emergency medicine residents are exposed to the potential transmission of tuberculosis, hepatitis, and other infectious diseases. [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] however, there is security in the established means of preventing transmission of these diseases. during the sars epidemic, especially in the early stages, there was little confirmed information regarding optimal personal protective equipment. thus, 108 (43%) of 251 cases of probable sars in canada were health care workers, 10 which included residents. as physicians contracted sars and became ill, the role of patient contact for practitionersin-training was called into question. medical students were removed from clinical placements, as were nursing and other student health care providers. 11 emergency medicine and other residents continued working.when allison was admitted to the sars ward, we were shocked. we shouldn't have been. as a fourth-year resident in the emergency medicine program, she was specializing in critical care, so naturally she would have supervised the infamous icu intubation of a sars patient ( physician). she was quarantined on the sars ward, taking her own temperature and communicating her physical examination findings by means of a bedside phone to the nurse who guarded her door. she was not intubated, and the in-laws she visited days before becoming symptomatic were not infected.emergency medicine is a discipline that lends itself best to one-on-one clinical teaching. as eds were quarantined and other hospitals became overwhelmed with the influx of redirected patients, the time for faculty to teach around a case was severely restricted. as week dragged into week, the garb of goggles, gowns, gloves, caps, booties, and the hated n-95 masks progressively drained faculty and senior residents of the energy required to engage medical students and residents. as friends became sick and physicians found themselves quarantined from families, morale plummeted, stripping enthusiasm for clinical responsibilities, including bedside teaching. all of these factors contributed to a morale in which the teaching environment was suboptimal. given the circumstances, it is difficult to imagine how anyone could maintain a productive teaching environment during a sustained epidemic of more than 4 months.on the first day of my anesthesia rotation, the anesthetist sent the patient back out of the operating room to get his temperature checked; it had been done, the nurse assured us, but not written in the chart. nerves were frayed, and the anesthetist next door said, ''it's from the high ambient co 2 -put the co 2 detector in your mask, and you'll see.'' on the fifth day, another anesthetist insisted on absolute sars precautions, despite the elective nature of the case. once i passed the tube through the white target, i attached the tubing and put down the laryngoscope-only to be upbraided by a voice from over my shoulder. ''you just contaminated the ventilator, and the tape too!'' i looked down at the ring of salmon pink cupped in my tainted hand, impressed that this step had become instinctive already. i changed my gloves, as instructed, and with his eyes on my own, the anesthetist leaned over the lax head of the patient to turn on the ventilator. i hadn't perceived the alarm, having been disrupted from the tenuous sequence of my new induction skills. later, i found a former priest-turnedanesthetist who had worked for many years in africa; his view of life afforded him peace of mind in these times, and me the ability to learn airway management.the question is often posed as to how the system continued, when it was overwhelmed to begin with, because ed crowding was already a daily reality. [12] [13] [14] [15] some experts suspect that the cancellation of elective cases and a decline in walk-ins led to an overall decrease in the number of patients seen in toronto eds during the sars epidemic. 16 if this was the case, it would offset some of the crowding precipitated by the closure of other eds in the city. however, this was likely site-dependent, because we suspect that hospitals closer to those with ed closures bore the brunt of redirected patients, whereas more distant centers experienced less impact. subsequently, medical students and residents at the former sites enjoyed less teaching time than those at the latter hospitals.we signed in and out every day, lining up to have our temperatures taken. we offered our ears to a probe like fingers to an ink pad. the job changed significantly under the influence of sars, and i'm not sure i could have stayed if sars had.new clinical rotations were delayed in an attempt to diminish intersite contamination when residents changed locales. 11 in the end, many rotations were abbreviated or omitted entirely. in an effort to prevent the spread of disease beyond toronto, out-of-city electives were either not permitted (medical students) or required a quarantine period (residents). the restricted mobility impinged on specialized clinical electives and even mandated a delay in the national residency match. 17 when sars arrived in toronto, i was playing neurosurgeon, and the daily shipments of head-injured patients from around the province decreased dramatically, reducing my neurosurgical exposure to the acutely operable or unstable. some patients would make it part way, before mounting a fever en route, only to be sent back to the referring hospital to await the shifting of their brains.learning was also affected in the nonclinical setting. grand rounds, workshops, seminars, and simulations were either cancelled or greatly diminished in scope. the reduction stemmed from 2 predominant factors. the first was that, to limit cross-contamination between hospital sites, mixing of residents and faculty from a university program with 6 teaching centers was severely retarded. thus, for a period spanning nearly one third of the academic year, the normal course of educational activities was altered.i woke up one morning and coughed. just once. i didn't feel very energetic, and i wondered if i should board the subway to go to work. having already missed significant training because of the restrictions, i didn't want to miss any more of the rotation. i focused on my breathing in the quiet subway car; during those months in toronto, all heads would turn on a single cough. when i left the subway, i felt short of breath, and i wondered if i would be the case that brought toronto to its knees. but on stepping into the fresh air, i realized i had just ascended 30 stairs, and i recalled the previous late night, hence my lack of energy.the other factor impinging on nonclinical education involved new administrative roles of emergency medicine faculty. at a municipal and provincial level, numerous emergency medicine faculty were providing leadership and administrative support in detailing and containing the epidemic. with these additional time-sensitive, unanticipated roles, previous faculty commitments to education were impaired.when i started my icu rotation in august, one of my patients had ''sars'' written on the board under ''diagnosis.'' ''yeah, but he doesn't have the disease any longer,'' intoned the icu fellow. yet some nurses gowned up, while others did not. i wanted to gown, but i did not want to publicly dress up in my fear. so i avoided the patient for the first week, until i saw that others who cared for him remained healthy.at an informal level, there were attempts to limit resident exposure to potential sars patients. the attending staff often facilitated resident learning by seeing the rule-out sars cases; the resident would see a patient in the time it took the staff physician to gown. in this way, resident exposure to a variety of clinical cases was somewhat maintained.when the sanctions were finally lifted, i was amazed at our tolerance and endurance. when i put on an n-95 mask now, i smell sars, but the association is merely of a time of uncertainty, and even a modicum of security, now that we survived it.rarely does a month pass without the toronto media heralding the next plague. even the most optimistic physician recognizes the high probability of recurrence of infectious epidemics. there are lessons to be learned from the toronto experience; so far, the emphasis on such lessons relates to the more pressing issues of disease surveillance and containment. yet, the education of future physicians in the midst of an epidemic is not an issue that we can afford to dismiss. the balance between the educational necessity of direct patient contact and exposure of practitioners-in-training to lethal diseases without established transmission mechanisms will have to be evaluated. from the loss of formal educational sessions to the time required to treat patients in isolation to the disenchantment of altered job descriptions, these factors need to be acknowledged in order to conceive of potential means of mitigation. as emergency physicians, we have the capacity to weather (nearly) any transient storm. regardless of whether the storms become more frequent or protracted, it would be wise to consider and address the impact of infectious epidemics on the education of future practitioners of emergency medicine before the next storm arrives.who (the world health organization) has already published their warning reports on gaming disorder and its mental addiction (who 2015) . and their site also says: "gaming disorder is defined in the 11th revision of the international classification of diseases (icd-11) as a pattern of gaming behavior ("digital-gaming" or "videogaming") characterized by impaired control over gaming, increasing priority given to gaming over other activities to the extent that gaming takes precedence over other interests and daily activities, and continuation or escalation of gaming despite the occurrence of negative consequences". those who can be identified as icd-11 case are not globally well known, but suspicious cases are roughly estimated as adults (approximately 4.2 million) and youths (approximately a million) in japan (data at 2017).since the beginning of the internet revolution, internet communication and online activities among the youth had been frequently accused by serious concerns in mental health. the first is violent behavior induced by playing violence game. until recently, video game has been argued by media psychologists (xu 2018) . they often verified violent behavior of adolescents related to experiences and the extent of game playing. the causal relationships across those patterns have not been clarified enough yet. some reasons endorsed by experimental designs are still difficult to interpret clearly (bruner and bruner 2006) .secondly, there are still controversial issues on online addiction cases (griffiths 2013) . colleagues (2012, 2016) have been publishing serial reports on online addictions. the number of people diagnosed with the condition of addiction for internet usage has been increasing in the era of social media. especially, adolescents and young adults are eager to immerse in online cyber-world activities. they consume their time through browsing web, watching online video, participating in online games, and internet communication.in japan, mic 2 (ministry of internal affairs and communications) at 2018, reported the latest statistics that the total average of internet usage time of young citizens (ages vary from 10 to 17) was 2 h and 49 min every day. their motivations for internet usages diversified categories such as watching online movie (79%), playing games (76%), and communicating by sns and emails (66%) (multiple answers).the most important is how we think about such online additions and youth's sound development. these are a kind of mental illnesses and conditions as a maladaptation of gaming and social withdrawals from actual society, or they are overadaptation in somewhat online communities rather than physical environment. the former is to step further grounding in social living, and the latter may suggest that they extraordinarily prefer to online human relationships. it should be clinically observed in each case.thus, online gaming and social networking sites are indeed based on somewhat human relations and such online communities organized by providers often offer to share some comforts, cooperative achievements, and entertainments among active participants. and simultaneously those services require much engagement among participants, and then such mental obligations enforce each participant to keep playing online game and committing with the other online partners during longer times (oberst et al. 2017) . here, it experientially indicates that group commitments reduce anxiety of members and enhance comfort and mental bonding among members (leary and baumeister 2000; baumeister et al. 2005) . their group life intends to maintain such conditions in in-group memberships, and commitment belonged in group whether offline or not has crucially important meaning for them.to date, advanced data analysis on our phr (personal health record) and personality dispositions has been conducting in medics (pol and thomas 2013) . further, the advancement of big data and the ai driven medical services is to rush into the daily life contexts (marin et al. 2016; king et al. 2017) . namely these services can offer to assess and promote both mental and physical health of each individual.first, as mentioned valuation by the ai at chap. 4, those services already contain some questionnaires on psychological assessments related to personality characteristics, health attitudes, and social adaptation in daily life. those assessed data might intend to statistically reveal our strength of mental health and degree of adaptation in social relations, and then automatic prediction for those who answered personality tests enables to trustfully measure financial limitations for loans and transactions in actual contexts. therefore, our mental conditions and its social adaptations, to date, have been unveiled by such ways, and those applied services could be built for somewhat vigilance system on mutual trust among citizens. mental disorder and maladaptation of each individual have possibilities to further pervade unsound influences among the others, and vice versa. financial bad-debt by personality dysfunctions of individual will also engender chain bankruptcy among stakeholders, but those services would intend to predict such consequences in advance through checking personality maladaptation in daily life. hence, our digital life has been already founded in those mechanisms, and the ai and big-data operations indeed interlude into our mentality.secondly, wearable devices and sensing tools for human behavior can help monitoring and analyzing latent patterns of physical and mental conditions in daily life (morahan-martin and schumacher 2003; clifton 2016; zhu et al. 2019) . and telephone communication patterns using smart phone can be interacted by identifiable chronotype of each user in daily activities (aledavood et al. 2018) . medical cares in each country has the demands to organize national health information systems, and it includes big data in the relations to national assurances for health cares, medical quality, demographic statistics, financial investment, quality of life (qol), quantifications for modeling (shibuya 2006) , and other social welfares (brady et al. 2012) . those information systems may be governing own centered database, but it will be replaced by distributed blockchain database in the future.during the previous era, there were some troubles yet to bridge between clinical psychology and sociological studies as well as computational models and experimental cases. sympathy interpretations for client's latent mental process and their needs should be taken carefully. but case studies often mean that there are no effective ways to explore future patterns and expectations based on past clinical cases in the daily interactions (leary 1983; kircher and leube 2003) . traditionally, the clinical psychological way is usually beneficial to manage mental dynamics that are impossible to be generalized and formalized. clinical psychology and its fundamental assumptions usually hesitate to do generalizations from clinical case studies. that is because each personal condition and mental distress may be too individualized, and rather researchers in this field recommend qualitative and intensive caring ways for understanding each personal experiences embedded in actual conditions.historically, emerging diseases have been suffering us ever since our civilization (roeser et al. 2012) . human history could be said as somehow survival process from lethal diseases. for example, there were smallpox, pest, dysentery, tuberculosis, and other diseases. otherwise recent outbreaks of emerging diseases such as hiv, ebola, sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome : shibuya 2006) , zika, and others are still ongoing matters, and those medical ways such as drugs and examination tools have not completed enough yet.in contrary, smallpox can be exemplified as a success case. the humankind had finally achieved the extinction of this disease threat in natural conditions using vaccine as a land-breaking medical way. parts of above diseases could be cured by specific medicines, but known well, there is another problem on resistant bacteria against those medicines. to date, in those fields, immunological and medical investigations have been accelerated by biotechnological and gene-technological advancements. those who obtained the nobel prize in physiology or medicine, and nobel prize in chemistry contributed toward enhancing medical progress for wellbeing of the humankind. in fact, there were contributions by japanese scientists in the medical field (e.g., tonegawa, s, yamanaka, s, ohmura, s, ohsumi, y, etc.).but, the humankind cannot completely repel both disease and death. according to the who report "top 10 causes of death globally 2016 3 ," infectious diseases such as lower respiratory infections (over 2 million deaths), diarrheal diseases (nearly 2 million deaths), and tuberculosis (nearly 2 million deaths) still remain within list of top 10. otherwise, the worst three cases were ischemic heart disease (nearly 10 million deaths), stroke (nearly 6 million deaths), and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (approximately 3 million deaths). additionally, total deaths caused by alzheimer disease and other dementias can be estimated to approximately 2 million per year globally.in those areas, as mentioned before, computational searches by the ai driven system and big-data analysis will boost enhancing diagnosis of subtle symptoms, image processing on medical data, pharmacologic utility discovery, and statistical precisions for future risks of each patient. precision of diagnosis by the ai's pattern recognition systems on medical images has outperformed more accurately than human doctors (zhang et al. 2019) . as larger growing size of knowledgebase on medical science increasingly requires much experience for them, and it will be impossible to operate any clinical cases unless the ai's supports can be provided.and other computational contributions to epidemics can enumerate such as computer simulations of mathematical models on spreading infectious diseases (e.g., sir (susceptible-infected-recovered), small-world networking model (moore and newman 2000; newman 2002) ), gene analysis of virus in bioinformatics (ksiazek et al. 2003) , and risk management on health data of patients and medical policies for future controls of emerging diseases (shibuya 2006) .in terms of medical cares, epidemiological actions should lay weights on governmental policy, because there are great needs to control against secondary contagions and predict precisely dynamic trends on diseases. traditionally, those fields must be accumulated from onsite clinical data on diagnosis of patients and analyze statistical trends which localized in each region. regarding these concerns, to date, online query results mostly reflect citizens' intentions and latent needs for specific actual events in society. recently, ginsberg and his colleagues (2009) had unveiled such facts by their big data, and their findings by statistical analyzations on logistic positive correlations between actual trends of data from cdc 4 (centers for disease control and prevention, usa) and web-query data among citizens had become a pioneer for big-data age. namely this study clearly suggested that citizens were usually apt to seek more accurate and necessary information in uncertainty conditions such as disaster (see chap. 10), unwelcome infectious disease, terrorism, and other fascinated events. their study seemed to be a first breakthrough for researches using web data analysis. as an implication of this finding, many researchers realized significant meanings on synchronizing and corresponding evidence between web trends and offline events. namely "big data" can be analyzed by computational engineering methodologies such as artificial intelligence, statistical machine learning techniques, and natural languages processing, and it can open the gate to investigate novel findings automatically.let me exemplify an actual case. according to data from the who, 5,6 from the spring of 2009 to 2010, global pandemic caused by new type of influenza (h1n1) had suffered global citizens. the total amount of the death was estimated as 14,286 in globally (the present data at 2010).at the peak of this pandemic, the author investigated those trends using google insights for search services. japanese patients were roughly estimated as totally 15.6 million (it finally includes at least 203 death cases), nevertheless many citizens have traditional customs encouraged to treat and keep their hygiene in daily living. below fig. 11 .1 indicates a trend of google query result inputted into keyword "influenza" in japanese. at 2009, it was certainly that there were mostly three peaks during this year. and fig. 11 .2, in contrary, shows only seasonal trends of ordinary influenza (except for data of pandemic patients), and both peaks (earlier weeks of this year and the late of year) can be identified during 2009 year. seasonal trends on influenza can be also recognized in each year, and only bizarre peak around the middle of this year can be specified. namely, because the pandemic caused by new type of influenza virus occurred around the beginning of may 2009, it can understand that the middle peak in fig. 11 .1 was underlying in above pandemic influences. and then, in this japan case, google trends could entirely indicate correlational patterns between information needs among citizens and actual influenza trends, and each peak corresponded with seasonal or pandemic ones.as an alternative of google query, using twitter as one of microblogging tools, signorini et al. (2011) revealed synchronizing phenomena on online tweets about influenza corresponded with actual trends of influenza given from cdc data, and 5 https://www.who.int/csr/disease/swineflu/en/ https://www.who.int/wer/2009/wer8421.pdf?ua=1 6 implementation of the international health regulations (2005) http://apps.who.int/gb/ebwha/ pdf_files/wha64/a64_10-en.pdf?ua=1 fig. 11 .1 trends of google query result which inputted into a keyword "influenza" in japanese. y axis means frequencies of a query on a specific keyword and x axis shows each year in this case they could find efficient results. those metrics have stronger merits being qualified for online and real-time analyzation than trend data obtained from google query. similarity, broniatowski et al. (2013) reported significant correlation between normalized prevalence data on influenza filtered from twitter's real-time tweets data and cdc actual trends of influenza. they further attempted to forecast influenza trends using data from twitter (paul et al. 2014) , and then social media consequently enables to do real-time sensing among citizens.as succeeding previous chap. 10, in the digitized society, disaster, environment, and climate data have also become a target for big-data analyzation. larger natural disasters and human-made hazards have globally potentials to corner to the crisis of humanity. because our global society has been endlessly threatened by various disasters (unisdr 2018), more than 160 million citizens have been globally harming by natural disasters every year. and this data contains more than 100,000 deaths per year. natural disasters are almost interrelated to numerous factors such as climate, demography, environment, and anthropogenic events. further, it seemed obvious that complicated factors related to climate changes in global level have . y axis denotes reported new patients, and x axis periodically shows serial weeks. each line (from 01 to 11) means each site given data from medical hospital. this figure was cited from idsc (infectious disease surveillance center, japan) (http://idsc.nih.go.jp/idwr/kanja/weeklygraph/01flu.html) been influencing those meteorological disasters (e.g., hurricanes, drought, flood, etc.). of course, the anthropogenic factors (e.g., industrial damages to the environment, carbon gas emissions) should be occupied in system models in order to examine detail mechanisms (meadows et al. 2004) .especially, at 2015, after serial tragedies of the tohoku quakes and fukushima nuclear disasters, the unisdr as a part of the united nations (at 2019, unisdr was renamed to undrr 7 : the un office for disaster risk reduction) held the global conference on disaster management at both tokyo and sendai city of japan. as consequences of much discussion, the committee finally proposed following the four priorities for global actions which entitled "sendai framework for disaster reduction 8 ."1. priority 1: understanding disaster risk 2. priority 2: strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk 3. priority 3: investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience 4. priority 4: enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to "build back better" in recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstructiondisaster management means just our preparedness against disasters. certainly, the digitized global world can offer artificial space satellites, wireless internet, mobile computing, social networking services, and other mechanical relief robots. and the ai driven systems and big-data analyzations on the disaster can be useful for us. recently, noaa (the national oceanic and atmospheric administration, usa) has released their online services, which is named as the coastal inundation dashboard. 9 it visually enables people to know and prepare for floods. in this way, nevertheless digitized systems for global monitoring the earth, collaboration with each nation and analyzation of vast necessary data had been pervasively equipped, but our acquired technologies for forecasting and preventing disasters have not been achieved enough yet. as above four priorities said, the undrr as a part of the united nations lays heavier weights on rather mitigations and resilience from disasters. because of such inevitable reasons why our survival efforts from the tremendous disasters are never diminishing, there are still greater needs to consider the human existential issues in disaster management.here, as introduced a bit at chap. 10, the author had a chance to conduct own researches on the tohoku quake and nuclear disasters in fukushima. and this time, a part of findings and evidences can be exhibited in health topic (shibuya 2012 (shibuya , 2015 (shibuya , 2017 (shibuya , 2018 (shibuya , 2021 ).after 2011, the fukushima case 10 of nuclear power plant accident had incubated another problem (oecd/nea ines (international nuclear event scale) ranked level 7 (the worst)). this fukushima case can be called as a nuclear power plants' crisis (nrc 2011; roeser et al. 2012; oecd/nea 2016; shibuya 2017) .at the time, many of fukushima citizens lost not only hometown, but background of their identities. in this point, they forced to be laid in identity crisis. according to theoretical sociologists berger et al. (1973) and giddens (1991) , they commonly argued that western post-modernizations could reconstruct mindsets on reality and social identification ways among citizens during achieving industrial progresses, if above severe incidents of nuclear power plants and those systems failures could be regarded as malfunctions as a symbol of modernity, above consequences of nuclear crisis on the fukushima case (and other human-made disasters) might be contextualized to reexamine social adaptation and consciousness among fukushima citizens by sociological verifications. how did daily belief systems among fukushima naïve citizens against the safety surrounding in nuclear power plants deal with? their attitudes had been rather steadily stabilizing among many of them before the crisis. however, risk cognition, social constructive senses of reality, and meaningful understanding against nuclear disasters among citizens would be collapsed in those conditions. they were betrayed by advanced technologies, government, and optimistic beliefs shared among them. it is probably that their theoretical discussions have few suggestions for any policies on fukushima case more than awkward theoretical bases, and rather there are quite needs to tackle grounding in actuality, resilience of identification, purifying environment, and rebuilding community for the fukushima citizens (science council of japan (scj) 2011; shibuya 2021 (in press)).actually, this fukushima case was a reluctantly controversial issue on an accident of nuclear power plant by academic researchers in japan. since the tohoku quake, many natural scientists in japan were very criticized by ordinary citizens. especially these were academic scholars such as nuclear physicists, governmentside natural science researchers and engineers at nuclear power plant, and of course politicians must be also confronted with such serious criticisms (funabashi and kitazawa 2012) . with deep reflections, the science council of japan (scj) (2011) published globally their investigated documents by belonging scientists and researchers in various academic fields. this report laid stress on the fact description of the fukushima nuclear power plant accidents and the statement of actual conditions for researchers in foreign countries.here, the author conducted to investigate this scj's statement (2011) in depth using text mining. table 11 .1 shows a result by text mining analyzation on the whole contents of scj's statement, and it depicted a part of frequent and important words (it extracted around top 10 words among the most frequent words) and its total counts within above scj's statement text. at a glance, it appeared that their motivations were implicated by some words such as nuclear, radioactive, cooling, accident, safety, emergency, evacuation, and so on. tepco means an abbreviated name of administrative company for electric power plants in fukushima. figure 11 .3 shows an example of network structure of words' co-occurrence. in this case, it configured mathematically to color each separated subgraph structure that limited to important co-occurrence words. the author found some clusters of words on radioactive materials, fukushima nuclear plant, accident inside-out and others. these patterns were weighted and frequently articulated by document writers. otherwise, fig. 11 .4 depicts a result of three-dimensional visualization which analyzed by mds (multi-dimensional scaling: this time was configured by kruskal and jaccard models). this method located statistically each word in cubic dimensions, and it appeared some clusters such as power plants (e.g., power, plant, nuclear, and fukushima), quake (e.g., tsunami, earthquake, situation, and operation) and others. as result of these malfunctions, confidence for ruling party critically had been fallen down.what text mining analysis made clear was that this report concluded the negative consensus against the nuclear hazard among scientific community in japan, and their statements explicitly described that mythical beliefs among stakeholders were no avail in the case of fukushima nuclear power plant accident. obviously, they intended to publish the truths for globally foreign academicians and citizens in terms of mainly nuclear physics and energy engineering after the fukushima crisis. as mentioned at chap. 10, without doubts, many of global citizens were eager to know more accurate and immediate information in detail at that time of moment. those results by text mining could exhibit japanese governance of risk management against nuclear power plants and energy policies before the fukushima case. there were no rational reasons for excuses that risk communication and consensual discussion had not been openly organized among stakeholders in fukushima, as it was differently the canada's case (johnson 2008) . rather, tepco and governmental ministry had oppressed to scientifically contemplate and examine nuclear risks and their published data by ordinary citizens and external professionals. with these backgrounds, the focal point of disputes on the compensations has been accused by plaintiff (i.e., citizens, evacuees, and victims) under trials in courts (oecd/ nea 2016).for the digitized society, this fukushima case indicated further unneglectable facts. iot and xaas will be deployed anywhere (geng 2017) . many of those systems such as computational controls and sensing networking related to power plants and sensitive artifacts will be impossible to keep under controls unless electric fig. 11 .3 it depicts a part of network structure of co-occurrence words by text mining. this configuration was to separately color each subgraph structure which limited to important co-occurrence words power can be continually provided. nuclear power plants and its control systems per se always also require independent electric power for controlling those mechanisms. serial incidents of the fukushima nuclear power plants can be determined by the serious factors on both the loss of external electric power supply and vent malfunctions for refrigerating systems caused by tremendous tsunami attacks. besides, until now, the ai-driven robots sensing inner-damaged power plants cannot be activated over the physical limitations because inner-damaged power plants still remain with higher radiation dose (i.e., the human dies immediately and computational mechanisms will be disabled by radiations sooner). then, the lessons for the digitized future must be intensively deduced and learned by convincible investigations.in the usa, after this disaster, a taskforce team was immediately assembled for investigations to report the cause of the nuclear power plants, reconstruction of the nuclear power plants for safety, and future policy on energy management in the after that, it should turn eyes to persevering purification from the radiation damage caused by the nuclear accidents, its environmental restoration, health monitoring, and socioeconomic reconstruction in community (nrc 2011; iaea 2011) . consequently, the fukushima case definitely needs to solve nuclear accidents and future design for long-term reconstruction on their devastated communities and hometown. at least, the following points should be tackled.1. decommissioning work for the wrecked nuclear power plants in fukushima 2. removal of nuclear fuel and substances 3. chemical management on nuclear substances 4. purifications in polluted places 5. temporary storage and final disposal of contaminated soil, water, and garbage 6. medical health survey and care for victims 7. risk assessment against environment and people exposed by nuclear substances 8. city and socioeconomic reconstructions as consequences of serial incidents of the nuclear power plants in fukushima, nuclear pollution provoked the severe disputes on human rights, health, radiation contaminations to foods and environmental restorations. both environments (soil, waters and air) as well as ordinary peoples who lived in fukushima were polluted and exposed by both nuclear substance and radiation (gibney 2015; merz et al. 2015; oecd/nea 2016) . sampling data accumulated by agricultural scientists endorsed that many of crops absorbed radioactive substances such as 90 sr, 134 cs, 137 cs, and others (takahashi 2016) . and excessive intake and exposure of radioactive pollutants will endanger citizens' and workers' health (hiraoka et al. 2015) .consequentially, enacted provisions often reflect social actualities. for conquests against those hardships of citizens and evacuees, the "basic act on reconstruction in response to the great east japan earthquake (24th, june 2011)" enacted the basic policies for reconstructions. for example, a part of provisions clearly stipulated as follows.• article 2. the reconstruction in response to great east japan earthquake will be implemented based on the following -the unprecedented disaster resulted in enormous damage, where countless lives were lost, numerous people were deprived of their basic living infrastructures and have been forced to evacuate in and out of the disaster-affected regions. also, the disaster's influence extends over the entire nation; the economic stagnation in the disaster-afflicted areas is affecting business activities and peoples' lives nationwide…(hereafter omitted)at the 2014fy, the total budget of fukushima prefecture for reconstruction after the disaster was approximately 1714.5 billion yen (including both quakes and nuclear disaster countermeasure portion of 870.5 billion yen). and it includes population declining and aging countermeasures as well as restoration of birth number (142.3 billion yen). in addition, other items were 245.5 billion yen for environmental restorations, 144.3 billion yen for living reconstruction assistance, 36 billion yen for expenses to protect medical health of the citizens, 31.6 billion yen for expenses for children and youths who will be responsible for the future, and other expenses. further, in addition to above costs, the fukushima case requires unprovoked compensations and its litigation disputes are ongoing matters in courts (shibuya 2017) . namely, there are still requirements to solve future designing for reconstruction from devastation in their hometown.next, the total amount of casualties in japan was more than 20,000 at the time of 2012. moreover, as aftermath of the fukushima disaster, one of the hardest matters was collective immigration of evacuees from their hometowns to other places in japan (akabayashi and hayashi 2012; library of congress 2013) . at the peak (may 2012), gross migrants from fukushima (e.g., total population of evacuees) were estimated over 160,000. and including this, gross migrants (e.g., total evacuees in japan) were estimated over 340,000 at the time of 2012. this estimation was not too low. please recall similar past cases, for example, the case of chernobyl in 1986 reported that total population of evacuees was approximately 116,000 around 30 km (ines level 7). and, in 1979, the case of the three mile island accident was estimated over 240,000 around 24 km (ines level 5). table 11 .2 shows a part of outflow data on migrants across major cities (it includes mobility data within same city). it queried into big data of mic (e.g., demographic data of migration and population) and the geospatial information authority of japan (e.g., geospatial data and distance information). the numbers of citizens lived in fukushima prefecture has been notably decreasing from 2.1 million (2011) to 1.9 million (2015) . and this area is statistically 13,780 km 2 (the third widest area in japan). and it compares fukushima with people lived in major metropolis such as tokyo area (total population is approximately 13 million people and within 9 million people in 23 special districts), nagoya area (approximately 2.2 million people within central city), and osaka area (approximately 2.6 million people within central city) in japan. it namely denotes moving flows within fukushima cities, moving toward one of metropolises from fukushima and moving patterns between metropolises.actually, there is still another problem in residential data. in year 2015, a national census every 5 years was carried out in japan, and it has achieved to unveil many data discrepancies and inconsistencies of population in each local area of fukushima. comparing with statistics on resident data holding municipal government office and actual population from census, the latter cases were almost too lower than estimated populations in many cases of fukushima. to date, these missing populations have not been traced properly and many evacuees did not intentionally apply immigration cards to municipal government office. it means that many of them still have strong intentions to go back to fukushima in the near future. however, the stumbling blocks still remain against their returns, even though the government purifies radioactive substances and pollutions around their towns.according to the general surveys by tokyo capital government for evacuees and interviews for evacuees by the author (shibuya 2017), they found that evacuees' motivations which choose the destination and refuge were relying on following critical factors: (1) to tie with any kindred relationships (a factor of human relationship), (2) rich opportunities for jobs in the new address (a factor of new job opportunity), (3) conveniences to manage their own real estates, farms, livestock, and factories in their hometown (a factor of holding estates).first factor implies mutual cooperation and helping among local acquaintances, and second answer clearly reflects their needs for jobs in new dwelling. and third factor relates to geospatial location, and parts of them have been living in two places of both fukushima and refuges. namely, their conditions were back and forth between hometown and refuge. thus they could not leave to far refuges, and geographical area around 300 km within fukushima and refuges satisfied their above motivations using transportations such as the bullet train, highways, and other land transportations (it drives toward the destination within 2 h). for those who required living needs, tokyo and nearby area of tokyo could properly offer new job opportunities and dwelling availabilities for them.our identifications are often determined by not only own cognitive factors but human relational and spatiotemporal factors, and their daily conditions of mental health would be interlinked with those internal and external surroundings. the fukushima case similarly indicated those mental malfunctions of evacuees caused by the human-made disaster.when such individuals lose all (or a part) of the linkages with both human relationships and living place, their mental foundation for identification will be seriously damaged in severe situations. such accidents and events caused by both natural and human-made disasters will be easy to engender secondary damages against social adaptation and subjective well-being of each individual. it is too important to care for each, but there are resilient needs to wholly repair and revive the community among them and their human relationships such as social capital (putnum 2000; kawachi and berkman 2003; kawachi et al. 2008; oecd/nea 2016) and family bondages. even though digitized communication styles renewed our daily commitment for online community, physical-contact based commitments in onsite community have still special meanings for their well-being. frey and osborne (2013) reported how will contemporary industries and jobs be changed and replaced by computerization and the ai-driven robotics, and they simulated socioeconomic trend patterns of jobs fitted by gaussian stochastic model. their estimations have indeed shown that the ai society will engender emerging job market and require other skills for citizens. but it will be clearly understood whether correct or not in the future.but, will a meaning on working life be steeply altered by such innovation? some theorists said that both living and working are indispensable relations each other. as one of the renown episodes, psychoanalyst freud answered that it requires "lieben und arbeiten" for becoming sound and independent adult. the former "lieben" means the accepting and loving for the others as a partner. and the latter "arbeiten" devotes to achieving the goals for maintaining daily living by own works and pursuing enhancement of own intellectual abilities and skills. both are still certainly the fundamental necessary factors for people.and a life-course approach in developmental psychology has much suggestion to wholly understand our mental development and health promotion during the life process (erikson 1950 (erikson , 1959 (erikson , 1982 . in each development stage of identity, each individual closely faces the problems and what should be conquered by each of them. such tasks can be furnished for own rich experiences of each, and each can be reorganized to adapt in own life process (e.g., self-actualization). working, learning, and other daily activities will be achieved by undertaking self-development and adaptation in social surroundings. it motivates to enhance each quality of life (qol) through own working experiment.it is certainly that the ai and big-data-based society enables to change our qol and working life. such innovation progress in our working styles has already become the cascading to collapse larger barriers by the big wave of digital transformation. working environment has been crucially invested in the contexts of either employees or employer. but quality in working environment cannot be determined by factors of material and physical surroundings, and it should be cared about human factors such as enhancement of human relationships and well-being (oecd 1976; strack et al. 1991; buunk and gibbons 1997) . for example, oecd 11 proposed total framework ("measuring well-being and progress: well-being research") , and they enumerated necessary factors related to measuring both economic and well-being value in working and daily life. the digital transforming society will enlarge our working from actual physical space to virtual online space through tele-existence and online collaboration tools. and our working skills and abilities will be required conquering the harder roads of uphill progress of the ai and data sciences (boyd and holton 2018) . further, traditional stressful working environments can be attempted to quantify and coordinate with each parameter of employees such as personality characteristics, demanded skill levels, abilities, chemistry among members, and other necessary factors. now, such hr (human resource) technology (i.e., a case using business microscope 12 ) enhances our working styles and improves productivities in various situations (khartri and samuel 2019) . analytics teams have vividly rushed to dive into the ocean of big data, but matching between the needs and their analyzed solutions can be improved by further efforts.active workers are usually facing issues at the marriage and family in their life courses. in some developed countries, the reasons, due to which unmarried rate during the lifespan of the youth generation has been increasing, may be understandable in work-life balance context. in japan, statistical data of ipss (national institute of population and social security research, japan) 13 show such facts: men's case of unmarried rate excessed 20%, and women's case was 10.6% at 2010. many adolescents frequently hesitate to lose their free time and conformity, and it simultaneously means that they hate any interruptions by others and physical contacts. as necessary, they can choose tentative friends online (su and hu 2019) . using smartphone, many matching service applications for marriage among future partners have been launched in japan. and then, the matching needs can be bridged with the youths for their marriages. those matching services might be applied by stable matching problem in economics of mechanism design (roth 1982) . such algorithm can be formalized for matching pairs of stable marriage.otherwise, daily living enriches its big data (ganchev et al. 2019) . especially, there are strong requirements for children and elder people in their local community and living environment. first, smart sensing and ubiquitous technologies aim to enhancing our daily life (shibuya 2004) , and smart cities and smart house have cutting-edges for improving health services for us (lee 2012) . for example, the digital human research center in japan proposed an autonomous caring system and simulators 14 for toddlers and little infants. due to their sudden and unpredictable manner of behaviors, serious accidents such as injuries and death at home often happen. this system intends to monitor and analyze daily patterns for improving their safety. of course, those systems which are equipped in smart houses are also applicable for elder people to watch their daily cares and health monitoring.on the other hands, secondly, airbnb and similar sharing house services have been launched in many nations, and big data on those paring patterns between house-owners and visitors will be arranged to analyze such trip purposes, sharing durations, other preferences by the ai-driven services (koh et al. 2019) . in these regards, digitization has already reshaped our quality of living in those contexts.using smartphone, mental health monitoring can be possible recently (ben-zeev et al. 2015; bakker et al. 2016) . especially, using social media data, there were innumerable examinations to analyze the relations with mental health and diagnosis of discourses on twitter and sns services. for example, there were enumerable cases on depression trends in community corresponding with data of geospatial location (yang and mu 2015) , depression detection on twitter (guntuku et al. 2017) , adhd (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) diagnosis using discourses on twitter (coppersmith et al. 2015) , and other borderline cases in clinical psychology (e.g., hopeless, loneliness, social withdrawal). as social networking services clearly indicate a part of human relationships online (lazakidou 2012) , it can consider that their relations itself still have sharing illness personalities and depressed mental health. namely, there is a possibility that latent patients were apt to be participating in such social media, and some of them flocked online each other. inclusive cares within communal and relationship level can be also very effective for each person.traditionally, in the studies of communication and communal health, the concept on illness identity in interactive communication has potentials to recognize identification process for caring illness and health (hecht et al. 2004) . illness identity could be regarded as interactive processes from personal to communal layers in terms of the communication theory of identity. these mechanisms should be inclusively cared by various viewpoints from personal to social communal level. that is because, for example, social anxiety, depression, and other mental (and physical) illness could not be easily emancipated from not only individuals but also more diverse interactions and social groups.according to wegner et al., they discussed mental control and relationships with the others. and their findings can be understood only by including perspectives of social contexts. that is, it should pay attention to not only individual experiences of depression and mental distress but social relationship and interaction process with standpoints from the others (aneshensel et al. 2012 ).as implied earlier, rapport interaction between clinical psychologists and clients has been better focused in empathy oriented understanding as client-centered therapy (rogers 1995) . clinical psychological cases such as autism, psychopathy and other diagnoses usually display specific patterns of behaviors and assertions. especially, those who have specific disabilities against soundly interactions with the others are managed by tom (theory of mind), and this study intends to reveal our mental manners to recognize and coordinate with the others in dyad models (semeijn 2019; freitas et al. 2019) . such client cannot understand any intentions asserted by the others, and they often confuse meanings pretending and deceptions by the others. namely, understanding for the others flexibly requires more imaginable coordination in social context. and the loss of such basic intellectual skills becomes difficult for them to behave appropriately against troublesomeness with the others. in other words, some evolutionary psychologists and neuroscientists told that the humankind could be evolved both to lie against the others and detect 11.4 therapy for human by ai deceptive intentions. they further said that acquisitions for those neural mechanisms of social intelligence took advantages of beating against other wild animals during surviving history of ancient peoples.according to attachment theory by developmental psychologist bowlby, it authorized that physical attachment between mother and children offers strong and comfort foundation during child development (bretherton 1992) . suggestively, serial experiments also shown that an alternative of "mother" could be sufficiently replaced for children. for example, a fluffy doll as alternative of mothership could fulfill having comfort emotions for child (in their experiments, they tried to use a child of monkey).in this concern, personal intelligent robots have potentials to assist our daily life (coeckelbergh 2010) . as an example case, paro already achieved improving many patients of mental illness and alzheimer diseases. it calls robot therapy assisted by ai and adorable doll-like robots. such new services can be adapted in the social welfare institutes, daily cares in home and hospitals (wada et al. 2007; yu et al. 2015) . their attachments with physically autonomous entities may offer them some reliefs and comforts.in such ways, as mentioned earlier, there are certainty to automatically diagnose clients by the ai using telecommunications and smartphone. sensing data accumulated by wearable devices in daily life has strong potential to detect mental illness and bad mental-physical conditions in earlier stages.with its unique features, vanadium (v) receives a great deal of attention from chemists, biologists, biochemists, toxicologists, and pharmacologists. the biological activity of this element has prompted investigations of many organic v complexes and its inorganic compounds in terms of their potential use in the treatment of certain diseases in humans. studies carried out so far on v have shown that the bioactive complexes/compounds of this metal can be therapeutically active at low concentrations [1, 2] .taking into account the clear interest in the anti-viral, anti-bacterial, anti-parasitic, anti-fungal, anti-cancer, anti-diabetic, anti-hypercholesterolemic, cardioprotective, and neuroprotective activity of v and in the possibility of using this element in the treatment of obesity, the present review focuses on mechanisms underlying the pharmacological potential of this metal and obstacles to use it as a metallopharmaceutical in the future. key information about the mechanisms of the toxicity, essentiality, physiological role, and metabolism of v is collected as well along with selected aspects illustrated on the timeline. the review paper also summarizes the available literature data on the use of v in the tissue engineering and industrial sectors with a brief description of the risk for human health. in addition, our report draws attention to the directions of further research on v and to interactions of this metal with other elements, especially those with antioxidant potential.comprehensive research on the interactions of v with antioxidant elements (summarized graphically in a separate chapter of the present report) is particularly important in view of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fas illustrated in figure 3 , vanadium (v) is commonly used in many industries, especially in glass, paint, ceramic, photographic, chemical, electrochemical, and refining industries. it is also used in metallurgical industry for production of steel and non-ferrous alloys [1, 9, 10] . vanadiumcontaining steel (with high hardness, strength, elasticity, and abrasion resistance) has been widely used as spring steel, tool steel, and high-speed steel. currently, steel with the addition of v and vcontaining non-ferrous alloys are used to build jet engines, machine parts (including construction equipment), as well as aircraft and automobile components. non-iron alloys containing v are also used in space technology and nuclear power industry. moreover, steel with v was well suited for production of armored fighting vehicles used during the second world war [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . more details about v-containing steel and alloys, which were and still are used to produce various structural components of aircraft, weapon, rocket engines, etc., are summarized in the following table (table   1 ).as shown in figure 3 , vanadium is also a potential candidate for therapeutic applications. its anti-viral, anti-bacterial, anti-parasitic, anti-fungal, anti-cancer, anti-diabetic, and anti-hypercholesterolemic activity and cardioprotective, neuroprotective, and anti-obesity effects have been arousing interest of many research centers worldwide for many years. it has been reported that in human beings, pharmacologic amounts of v, i.e. 10 to 100 times higher than the normal intake, affect cholesterol and triglyceride metabolism, influence the erythrocyte shape, and stimulate hepatic glucose oxidation and glycogen synthesis [21] . in addition, v (in certain conditions) has been found to act as an antioxidant (fig. 3 ), as evidenced in animal studies [22] [23] [24] [25] . more details about the mechanisms of the pharmacological activity of v are graphically illustrated and summarized in another part of the present report.the research on certain aspects of the biological activity of v (presented in fig. 4 ) has demonstrated an essential role of this element in the metabolism of carbohydrates (through the effects on the glycolysis, glycogenolysis, glycogenogenesis, and gluconeogenesis pathways), lipids (by stimulation of lipogenesis and inhibition of lipolysis), phospholipids, and cholesterol. the influence of v on bone mineralization, thyroid and erythrocyte metabolism, accumulation and transport of calcium in the cell, and the synthesis of secondary transmitters mediating in the transduction of intracellular signals is known as well. furthermore, v also regulates the activity of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f key enzymes involved in the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of proteins, kinases, and phosphatases, taking part not only in carbohydrate and lipid metabolism but also in cell proliferation and differentiation [1, 2, 4, 26, 27] .with its physiological duality, vanadium is essential in trace amounts (0.05 µm) and toxic in excess (>10 µm) [28, 29] (fig. 5) . its deficit and excessive concentrations can lead to a range of pathologies and cause irreversible damage to various tissues and organs.at low concentrations, v has been found to exert a beneficial effect on the growth and physiological functions of some microorganisms, plants, and fungi. the essentiality of this element has been demonstrated for bacteria (genus azotobacter), cyanobacteria (genera nostoc and anabaena), certain algae (genera scenedesmus, chlorella, fucus, and bumilleriopsis), brown algae (ascophyllum nodosum), fungi (genera aspergillus, culvularia, and amanita), and lichens [35] [36] [37] ( fig. 5 ).a positive effect of v on nitrogen (n) fixation (by azotobacter) has been suggested by bortels in 1933 (fig. 6 ). in 1984 and in 1986, v turned out to be essential for the activity of certain enzymes [42] [43] [44] such as bromoperoxidase (brop), nitrogenases, and chloroperoxidase isolated from algae, nitrogen-fixing bacteria, and fungus culvularia inaequalis, respectively [36, 37, 45] ( fig. 6) .furthermore, vanadium has also been recognized as essential for proper growth and development of certain animals [29, 35] . the first suggestion about the essentiality of v for animals appeared in 1949, i.e. nearly 150 years after the first discovery of this metal [after 38] (fig. 2) .about 22 years later, in 1971, schwarz and milne, hopkins and mohr, and strasia reported that v is necessary for rats and chicks (fig. 6 ). in turn, in 1989, anke and co-authors also reported that v is essential for goats (fig. 6 ). in the meantime, in 1981, the first review about the physiological and biochemical effects of v was published (fig. 6 ).to date, symptoms of v deficiency have been described, inter alia, in birds, chickens, rats, guinea pigs, and goats [35, 38, 46] . the most substantive evidence for v essentiality was found in rats and goats [after 35]. on this basis, nielsen and uthus proposed considering vanadium as an essential trace element for proper growth and development of higher animals [38] in contrast, the essentiality of this metal for humans is unproven (fig. 5) , although some authors suggest that it is an essential trace element for man [38] , mostly because vanadium has broad pharmacological activity, which points to the biological importance of this metal. the american dietetic association (amdassoc) considers v as essential in human nutrition [after 41] (fig 5) . nevertheless, no symptoms of v deficiency in humans have been described yet. the final proof for the essentiality of v for humans requires confirmation of the specific function of this element, as in the case of algae or fungi. however, it is definitely known that the high content of v in the environment and diet is harmful to animals and humans [1] .as generally accepted, the toxicity of v is dependent on many different factors, including the composition of the diet, type of the v compound (inorganic/organic), nature of ligands attached to v complexes, valence, dose, route of entry of this metal into the organism, duration of action/exposure, and individual and species sensitivity (fig. 7) .the history of research on the adverse effects of action of this metal dates back to 1876 when priestly described toxicity of v in certain animals (fig. 6 ). as regards animals, rabbits and guinea pigs were found to be more sensitive to this element than mice and rats [5, 47, 48] (fig. 7) . in turn, a classic paper about the toxic and pharmacologic action of vanadium was written in 1912 and analyses of the content of v in various organisms were initiated 18 years later in 1930 (fig. 6 ).it is known that, in some conditions, v can act as a strong pro-oxidant and interact synergistically with other oxidants enhancing oxidative stress [2, 31, 49] , which in turn can result in many negative consequences including disintegration of cell membranes, denaturation of proteins, and degradation of dna [50] (fig. 7) . it may also weaken the antioxidant barrier [49, [51] [52] [53] and intensify lipid peroxidation (lpo) [49, [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] i.e. the free radical process underlying one of the mechanisms of cell damage [50] (fig. 7) . in addition, v can reduce the thiol status [49, 59] , release some transition metals [60] , interact with other elements [49, 53, 61] , and accumulate in certain internal organs including the liver and kidneys [46, 56, [62] [63] [64] evoking hepato-and nephrotoxic effects, respectively (fig. 7) . in higher concentrations, v can also act as a pro-apoptotic factor (by j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f induction of oxidative stress) and lead to programmed cell death (apoptosis) with damage to mitochondrial membranes, cytochrome c (cyt c) outflow, and activation of caspases and poly (adpribose) polymerase (parp) [5] (fig. 7) , which plays a role of a cell death promoting factor [65] .disorders of the electron transport chain and oxidative phosphorylation resulting in a decrease in the level of atp [1] are the other adverse effects of v action (fig. 7) .the mechanisms of toxicity of v require further experimental work, as they have not been fully elucidated yet. some of them have been reported to be implicated in the adverse effects of v action.for example, the mechanism by which v produces a reprotoxic effect is believed to be linked to oxidative stress [66] and/or actin cytoskeleton damage [67] (fig. 7) . it has been suggested that the hepatotoxic, nephrotoxic [48, 62, [68] [69] [70] [71] , cardiotoxic [72] , genotoxic [73, 74] , neurotoxic [72, 75, 76] , and carcinogenic [48, 77] effects of this metal as well as inflammatory and fibrotic changes in the lungs [78] are associated with the pro-oxidative potential of v and its ability to intensify lpo ( fig. 7) . it is known that lpo products can stimulate the expression of oncogenes [79] , which in turn can lead to transformation of normal cells into cancerous cells (fig. 7) . epidemiological studies suggest that exposure to elevated levels of v may be a risk factor for cancer development [80] .studies on an animal model have revealed a positive correlation between the frequency of neoplasia and susceptibility to v-induced inflammation [80] , which is involved in the pathogenesis of many diseases (not only malignant diseases) and results from v-induced oxidative stress. in turn, longlasting oxidative stress with simultaneous weakening of the antioxidant system (present in every living organism) can lead to permanent cell/tissue damage and, consequently, to initiation of the disease process. therefore, the generation of reactive oxygen species (ros) under oxidative stress (one of the main factors affecting morbidity) can lead to damage to dna and, consequently, to initiation of carcinogenesis.the risk for animal and human health related to exposure to v is largely dependent on the degree of its oxidation state. it has been highlighted that v at the highest oxidation state (+5) is the most toxic vanadium form [9] . one of the compounds of this metal, vanadium pentoxide (v2o5), which contains v at the highest oxidation state +5, has been reported to easily reach the alveolar surface, subsequently enter circulation directly, and diffuse in the entire organism inducing diverse injuries [9] . the risk of poisoning with the pentavalent v form is constantly growing due to its extensive release into the environment by metallurgical industry, chemical plants, oil refineries, and coal and mazut-fired heating plants [8, 9, 45, 81] . moreover, relatively high pollution of the environment with v2o5 is also caused by dust derived from the combustion of liquid and solid fuels j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f as well as municipal waste [10, 81] , resulting in an increased risk of exposure of anyone who lives near such areas. consequently, the level of this metal in the soil increases. in turn, higher concentrations of v in the soil lead to more intensive uptake of this metal being by plants due to the lack of a selective mechanism protecting plants against excessive absorption of the element. thus, v can enter the animal and human organism via the food chain. additionally, the lack of proper industrial wastewater management containing this metal can be another risk factor for animal and human health [9, 82] .in the case of occupational exposure, workers repairing thermal power boilers and highpressure combustion engines as well as those responsible for production of v2o5 and replacement of v-based catalytic converters are the most vulnerable to the most toxic pentavalent form of this metal [9] . in the literature, occupational exposure to v2o5 is described as the etiological factor of the asthmatic syndrome known as "boilermaker disease" [83] .the most important symptoms of exposure to v via the oral route (presented in fig. 8 ) include gastrointestinal disorders, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, loss of appetite, weight reduction, and green-black tongue. in turn, the symptoms of exposure to this metal through inhalation (illustrated in the same figure) include rhinitis, chest pain, pharyngitis, bronchitis, pneumonia, bradycardia, cough, dyspnoea, bronchial asthma, headache, dizziness, conjunctivitis, blurred vision, apathy, and depression [9, 31, 81, [84] [85] [86] .the most important issues of the metabolism of v and forms in which this metal is present in physiological fluids/tissues are collected in figure 9 . as illustrated, v consumption, which depends on the diet, is estimated to be around 15-20 µg/day (typical daily dose consumed by humans) or 10-60 µg/day (daily dose ingested by the u.s. population) [8, 87] . after intake, vanadate (mainly as vo4 -) reaches the gastrointestinal (gi) tract and, in the acidic environment of the stomach, most of the anionic vanadate (absorbed more effectively than vo 2+ ) is transformed into vanadyl (vo 2+ ), precipitated to insoluble vanadyl hydroxides [vo(oh)2] in the slightly alkaline medium of the intestine, and excreted with feces (~94-98 %) [33, 39] . in turn, resorbed v is removed from the organism through kidneys [87, 88] probably in the form of unidentified complexes with high-(protein-bound) and low-molecular-weight species (vo 2+ -complexes) [38, 89] . the level of v in urine is estimated to be around 12 % of the intake amount [87] . as reported, the absorption of v from the gi tract is mainly estimated in the range of 0.2-2%, although amounts greater than 10% have been indicated to be absorbed as well (fig. 9 ) [21, 46, 92, 93] . additionally, sanchez et al. [94] found an absorption rate of v at the level of 52% in rats treated with bis(maltolato)oxovanadium(iv) (bmov, 6.22 mg/day) in drinking water for five weeks. it has been highlighted that such differences may be associated with several factors, inter alia, the diet composition and/or chemical form of ingested v [38] . furthermore, after entering the bloodstream, 80-90% of v is bound by albumin (alb), which plays a pivotal role in the transport of various metals [95] or transferrin (tf) (preferably), which is the main v transporter in the blood plasma [8, 33] . both tf and alb bind v in the 4+ and 5+ oxidation state [96] .it has been reported that v in the form of vanadyl (vo 2+ , tetravalent v 4+ state) binds to tf at the same binding site as the fe 3+ ion [97] and that v 5+ , for which the cationic form (dioxovanadium cation, vo2 + ) has been indicated, also occupies the same pockets as fe 3+ [98] . studies conducted by azevedo et al. [99] have confirmed that both v 4+ and v 5+ can bind to apo-tf and holo-tf, thus they can be efficiently up-taken by cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis of tf. in addition, tf can bind v iii forming di-vanadium(iii)-tf [(v iii )2-tf], which can be up-taken by cells via receptormediated endocytosis as well [100] . it has also been reported that v species can enter cells via membrane citrate transporters, the lactate transporter, and the organic anion transporter (organic-at) [101] . additionally, vo 2+ can be up-taken via passive diffusion [102, 103] and bound by immunoglobulin g (igg) or low-molecular components of plasma such as phosphate, citrate, lactate, and oxalate [33, 39, 91, 104, 105] . in turn, v 5+ ions such as h2vo4 -/hvo4 2can enter cells through anion channels, i.e. phosphate or sulfate channels [106] . in cells, v 5+ is reduced to vo 2+ by some reducing substances such as ascorbic acid and thiol-containing cysteine [107] . for instance, in erythrocytes (rbc), v 5+ is principally reduced by glutathione (gsh) to vo 2+ , which binds to hemoglobin (hb) [108, 109] (fig. 9 ).the total content of v in the organism of adults is about 100-200 µg (equivalent to the mean tissue concentration of about 40 nm) [6] . half of this amount is located in bones, which are the major storage pool for long-term v accumulation and where vanadate can substitute phosphate in the mineral hydroxyapatite [ca10(po4)6(oh)2] [33, 37, 106] (fig. 9 ). the other amount is mainly deposited in the liver, kidney, and spleen [108] due to the importance of these organs in detoxification of the organism and excretion of harmful substances. muscles, lungs, and brain are the other sites of v accumulation [108] (fig. 9 ). as regards v speciation, most of this metal in the liver is present in the transferrin and low-molecular mass fraction (tff and lmmf, respectively) j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f [108] as well as a vanadyl-ferritin [(vo2 + )-fer] complex [26] . the fer-v and lmmf-v fractions have also been identified in the spleen [108] . in kidneys, v was divided between a high molecular mass fraction (hmmf) and lmmf; additionally, an exchangeable fraction of this metal has been indicated [108] (fig. 7) . in turn, large amounts of v in the lungs have been identified in the hemoglobin and tf fraction (hb-f and tff, respectively) and in the readily exchangeable fraction [108] (fig. 9 ).while discussing v in terms of its medical application, it has to be mentioned that this metal is applied in tissue engineering to obtain biomaterials that allow regeneration of damaged tissues/organs and restoration of their lost functions [110] . as presented in another subsection of this paper, v is part of metallic biomaterials (mainly titanium alloys), bioactive coatings (including polymeric coatings), and diamond-like layers applied to the surface of some titanium alloys in order to increase the bioactivity of implants and improve osseointegration [11] .two titanium alloys with v such as ti-6al-4v and ti-6al-4v eli are used as biomedical materials, mainly in bone surgery, due to their good mechanical properties, very high resistance to corrosion, and biocompatibility [11] (table 2 ). in addition, 2v-49co-49fe (named permendur) is another vanadium-containing alloy. 2v-49co-49fe with 2% of v is mainly used for production of devices supporting the work of the heart (table 2) [11] .the presence of vanadium in biomedical materials requires our additional comment. since implants made of titanium alloys (containing v) are exposed to body fluids, v may be released into surrounding tissues, exerting adverse effects. the fact that the implant surface has a significant impact on reactions that occur at the implant-tissue interface should also be taken into account. therefore, the surface layer of the implant is often modified in order to induce a specific reaction of the tissue to the implant. in the case of some implants (e.g. orthopedic and dental implants), a surface with appropriate bioactivity and roughness is created to achieve rapid osseointegration and a durable connection between biomaterial and tissue [11] .as reported, layers with varied composition are often applied on the surface of metallic alloys in order to improve the biological activity of the implant and provide an additional barrier against the release of metals from metallic biomaterials [11] . for example, titanium oxide(tio2)-based coating containing nano-hydroxyapatite (n-ha) and silver particles (ag) is applied on the ti-6al-4v alloy (table 2 ) [120] . the tio2:n-ha:ag layers are used as bioactive coatings with antimicrobial properties to increase biological activity, osseointegration, and biochemical stability in implantable medical devices (table 2) .moreover, polymeric v-based coatings made of a (poly)lactide-co-glycolide copolymer (plga) with antimicrobial activity ( table 2) [122] and a diamond-like layer including v (v-dlc) are also formed to be used as implant materials [11] (table 2 ).research on the pharmacological potential of v (in vitro and in vivo experimental models) has shown that some compounds/complexes of this element can be effective against: the mechanisms of antibacterial activity of v, which have not been fully elucidated yet, include: (a) inhibition of the activity of na + /k + -atpase ( fig. 11 ) [26, 123, 137, 143] , (b) generation of ros (fig. 11) , (c) impact on transport of substrates (e.g. thymidine, uridine, leucine, glucose) into the cell through the bacterial cell membrane (fig. 11 ) along with induction of potassium (k + ) outflow from the cell [137] , (d) interaction with topoisomerase type ii (gyrase) (fig. 11) , which is necessary for the proper functioning of the genome and bacterial growth, with the atp-binding site used as a target for antibacterial drugs [144, 145] , (e) interaction with dna in an intercalative manner [133] resulting in modification of the dna structure (unwinding, stiffening, and elongation of the double helix) with formation of an intercalative complex [146] , (f) interaction with components of the cytoskeleton, which results in morphological alterations of bacterial cells thereby preventing proper division [137] , and (g) other nonspecific mechanisms of action ( fig. 11) , with emphasis on the better bioavailability of v complexes due to the presence of a specific ligand allowing the complex to penetrate the hydrophobic lipid-rich bacteria wall [acc. to 123, 124].most data in this area were obtained in in vitro studies of the influence of v on human immunodeficiency hiv-1/hiv-2 virus [33] . some complexes of this element have been shown to inhibit the activity of viral reverse transcriptase (rt) [after 33, 123] , which is responsible for the synthesis of dna on the viral rna matrix in the reverse transcription process facilitating integration of the viral dna into the genome of the host cell. thus, by inhibiting rt activity, vanadium blocks viral replication. furthermore, the binding of v complexes to the cd4 molecule (present on the surface of t-helper cells) and the chemokine cxcr-4 co-receptor has been suggested as well (fig. 11 ). this leads to blockage of the passage of the virus to the host cell [after 123], thereby preventing its multiplication and protecting against the development of infection.among the mechanisms of the anti-fungal activity of v complexes which, likewise the mechanisms of the anti-bacterial and anti-viral activity of this metal have not been fully recognized yet, interactions with dna by intercalation have been proposed [133] . additionally, inhibition of biosynthesis of an important component of the fungal cell membrane, i.e. ergosterol [134] (fig. 11 ), by affecting the expression of genes involved in the synthesis of this compound [135] have been suggested.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fthe mechanisms of the anti-parasitic activity of vanadium (against trypanosomiasis, amoebiasis, and leishmaniasis) mainly suggested in in vitro studies include: (a) intercalation of v complexes into dna (fig. 11 ) [after 123] (anti-tryposomal and anti-amoebiasis activity), (b) inhibition of the activity of phosphatases [125] (fig. 11 ) due to the structural similarity of vanadate to phosphate [39, 45] ; these enzymes are involved in gluconeogenesis -a metabolic pathway necessary for the growth of leishmania spp. [126] , (c) inhibition of the activity of acid phosphatase (sacp) (fig. 11 ) [127] , which is a virulence factor most commonly secreted by leishmania during growth [128] , and (d) activation of macrophage/th1-type response with the release of ros and proinflammatory cytokines (including il-1 and il-6) [129] capable of destroying intracellular pathogens [147] (activity against leishmania).among the mechanisms of the antitumor activity of v compounds/complexes, which still require further studies, intensified ros generation (including iron-induced ros following ferritin disintegration due to v action) is suggested [33] (fig. 11 ). ros production is commonly known to lead to disturbance in cellular metabolism and damage to lysosomes and mitochondria (critical for maintaining cellular homeostasis) [148] , resulting in activation of caspases and apoptosis [123, 149, 150] . inhibition of the cell cycle by hyperactivation of the ras-raf-mek-erk pathway is also proposed [after 123] (fig. 11 ). this pathway activates inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases and thus maintains the retinoblastoma protein (prb) in the hypophosphorylated form capable of blocking the cell cycle [151] . the involvement of v in suppressing neoplastic transformation through apoptotic signaling and/or cell cycle arrest has also been suggested by chakraborty et al. [152] as based on evidence from animal studies. moreover, focus is placed on: (a) interactions of v with the components of the spindle [123] , (b) intercalation with dna [33] (fig. 11 ), (c) potentiation of anti-proliferative activity [136] , (d) inhibition of the activity of ib topoisomerase (top-ib) [153] ( fig. 11 ) capable of relaxing highly twisted dna molecules [154] , (e) inhibition of the activity of neutral endopeptidase (nep) [155] , which inactivates anticancer enkephalins [156] , (f) modulation of phase i and/or ii xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes [157] [158] [159] [160] , and (g) alteration of antioxidant status (as) [158, 160, 161] (fig. 11) . a reduction in the gsh/gssg ratio [153] (fig. 11) , which can lead to intensification of oxidative stress in the cell [49] , is highlighted as well. additionally, some v compounds have been reported to be able to counteract tumor metastasis [155] .much attention is still focused on studies of the design of v compounds for cancer treatment, as evidenced by recently published articles. however, all v compounds/complexes (used in these studies) were mainly tested in different cell lines, not in vivo conditions (in an animal model). for example, the results from a study conducted by ni et al. [162] showed that certain multidentate oxovanadium(iv) complexes have promising anti-cancer activity against human hepg2 and smmc-7721 hepatocellular carcinoma cells. one of these compounds exhibited much more potent anti-tumor properties and turned out to be less toxic to normal human cells than the cisplatin complex. it suppressed tumor cell proliferation by causing cell cycle arrest and directly induced apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner. as emphasized by the authors, structural elements (i.e. metal components, variations of the coordination mode, labile water molecules, and chelated ligands) probably exert an essential cooperative effect on the anti-tumor activity. another in vitro study demonstrated that v as oxido-vanadium(iv) complex [vol(bipy)] was able to induce early apoptosis more efficiently in the hepg2 cell line than in normal l929 cells [163] . moreover, the authors revealed that the rates of necrosis/late apoptosis were also induced in the hepg2 cells more potently than in the l929 cells.based on these results, they suggested that the vol(bipy) complex can be considered as a new strategy for treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma. in addition, they hypothesized (on the basis of studies conducted by other researchers) that the vol(bipy) complex may be modified by coapplication with an antioxidant to be safer than the administration thereof alone. in turn, a study reported by kowalski et al. [164] revealed that oxidovanadium(iv) coordination complexes containing a 2-methylnitrilotriacetate ligand are good candidates for preclinical development of novel anticancer drugs targeting pancreatic cancer. as suggested, the molecular mechanisms of cytotoxicity of these complexes were dependent on generation of ros and cell cycle arrest in the g2/m phase with simultaneous activation of the p53/p21 pathway. an earlier study conducted by the same author [165] showed a selective cytotoxic effect of v complexes containing phenanthroline and quinoline as organic ligands against a human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cell line (panc-1). the results from this work revealed that v complexes caused cell cycle arrest in the g2/m phase and induced a significant increase in ros generation in a time-and concentration dependent manner. in addition, at a higher concentration, v complexes induced a mixed type of cell death in panc-1 cells, including apoptotic and necroptotic processes [165] . the authors emphasize that the type of cell death induced by v complexes is mainly determined by ligands and recommend further studies supporting the therapeutic potential of v in pancreatic cancer treatment. in turn, data from another research group [166] , who examined the effect of a substituent in the hydrazone ligand of a family of oxidodivanadium(v) hydrazone complexes on the structure, dna binding, and anticancer activity, have revealed that v complexes exhibited promising anti-cancer activity against siha cervical cancer cells. their experiments demonstrated that these complexes acted in an apoptotic mode and were nontoxic to the normal t293 cell line [166] . more recently, the anticancer properties of a family of vanadium(v) complexes with a diaminotris(phenolato) chelating ligand have been explored by reytman et al. [167] , who demonstrated their promising in vitro efficacy against ht-29, ovcar-3, one of the mechanisms suggested for the insulin-like effect of v is linked to the inhibitory action of this element on the activity of protein tyrosine phosphatases (ptp) [123] (fig. 11 ). this effect results from the antagonism related to the structural similarity of vanadate anions (vo4 3-) to phosphate anions (po4 3-) [39, 45] . by inhibition of protein tyrosine phosphatase 1b (ptp-1b) responsible for inactivation of the insulin receptor (ins-ir), which plays a key role in glucose metabolism, vanadium contributes to activation of the receptor presumably by preventing dephosphorylation of tyrosine phosphorylated residues of the beta subunit of ins-ir [169] . this in turn activates the pi3k-akt pathway (3-phosphatidylinositol kinase (pi3-k)/akt protein kinase) responsible for the metabolism of carbohydrates and lipids [2] and thus leads to potentiation of insulin-induced signal transduction. in consequence, the transport of glucose into cells increases [39] (fig. 11) . the inhibitory effect of ros (generated by v compounds) on the activity of ptp-1b is also proposed [170] (fig. 11 ). in addition, vanadium (a) causes an increase in the number of glucose-type 4 (glut-4) transporters in the cell membrane [171] (fig. 11) , which allows glucose molecules to be transported to adipocytes and muscle cells [172] , (b) affects the insulin-like growth factor receptor (igf-ir) by inactivation of associated ptp, (c) activates receptor and non-receptor protein tyrosine kinases (ptk), (d) stimulates glycogenogenesis, and (e) inhibits glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis [172, 173] (fig. 11 ). it has also been highlighted that the interaction with membranes may be important in the stabilization of v complexes, and structural changes in membrane proteins may contribute to their insulin-mimetic mechanisms and toxicities [102] .as illustrated in figure 12 , the first report describing certain effects of v action in patients with diabetes mellitus (dm) appeared in 1899. some 80 years later, tolman and co-workers [175] demonstrated that v can directly influence glucose (glu) metabolism and suggested that it may play a role in the regulation of glu in vitro. over the same period, other authors reported that v in the form of vanadate and vanadyl can stimulate glu oxidation in rat adipocytes [176, 177] . in turn, in j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 1985, heyliger et al. [178] described the antidiabetic properties of v in vivo for the first time. since then, the number of experiments (in an animal model) in which some v compounds (i.e. vanadyl sulfate -voso4, vs; sodium metavanadate -navo3, smv; sodium orthovanadate -na3vo4) were used as potential antidiabetic drugs has been constantly growing. for example, in 1987, meyerovitch and co-investigators [179] reported that v is able to normalize the blood glu level (in vivo model) (fig. 12) . besides, other authors described the use of v in diabetes mellitus (dm) (fig. 12) . in 2000, one of the organic v compounds, i.e. bis(ethylmaltolato)oxovanadium(iv) (beov) first synthesized in the late 1990s [180] was used in the first phase i clinical trial in non-diabetic volunteers (fig. 12) .a few years later, in 2007/08, the same v compound was used in a phase iia trial in seven type 2 diabetic subjects [180, 181] (fig. 12) . however, in 2009, the diabetes program was ceased (fig. 12) .akesis pharmaceuticals, inc. (in january 21, 2009) announced it has discontinued its sole clinical development program for akp-020, a phase iia drug candidate for the treatment of diabetes mellitus [182] . as reported, the renal changes resulting from the doses used in the preclinical safety program were the cause of this decision [174] (fig. 12 ). vanadium is well-known to be nephrotoxic in vivo.data on the effects of this metal on the animal kidney are available in the literature. for example, a study conducted by de la tore et al. [183] showed that certain markers of nephrotoxicity such as the serum creatinine and urea levels as well as the urinary creatinine concentration increased and decreased, respectively after v administration, compared to the v-untreated animals. the creatinine clearance was also found to be lowered in the v-supplied rats [183] . moreover, v-induced morphologic changes in the kidney and a significant influence of age on the renal effects of this metal were observed as well [183] . all those findings gave rise to the following statement: "the obtained results can be of concern if in the future, vanadium compounds can be administered in the treatment of diabetic patients" [183] . in addition, another study in rats demonstrated v-induced kidney fibrosis [184] at glomerular tuft, preglomeruli, pretubules, and interstitium (cortex and medulla) [185] . in turn, an earlier study conducted by boscolo et al. [186] also showed alterations in the urinary excretion of certain electrolytes in rats chronically treated with v.vanadium compounds/complexes are generally known to exhibit ins-mimetic properties through which they are involved in the regulation of glu metabolism. as illustrated on the timeline (fig. 13) , vanadyl sulfate (vs) was one of the inorganic v forms most often used in studies with diabetic patients. overall, the history of these studies dates back to 1995 when cohen and coworkers [187] conducted the first trials on the effects of vs in patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (niddm). in 1996, halberstam et al. [188] and boden et al. [189] also used vs in niddm patients (fig. 13 ). in turn, sodium metavanadate (smv) was administered in patients with niddm and in those with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (iddm) by goldfine et al. [190, 191] . the researchers used vs in studies with niddm patients in 2000 [192] (fig. 13 ). in the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f subsequent years, i.e. in 2001 [193] , 2008 [194] , and 2013 [195] , vs was applied in studies with niddm, obese, and iddm patients, respectively (fig. 13) .it has been estimated that the dose of v capable of normalizing the glu level in the blood of rodents is about 100 mg v/kg/day (at the level of v in the blood within the range of 10-20 µm).the same effect in humans was achieved at a dose of 1.5 mg v/kg/day (at the level of v in the blood within the range of 1-5 µm) [30] (fig. 14) .to sum up, the highest scientific interest was devoted to studies on the potential use of vanadium in the treatment of diabetes, which is related to its antidiabetic properties. positive results of administration of v compounds were demonstrated both in diabetic animals and in human patients.with regard to various animal models of diabetes, many reports in this research area have been published and there are ongoing studies focused on this issue, as evidenced by the works by adam et al. [196] and krośniak et al. [197] . briefly, adam's research group focused on the synthesis of a new anti-diabetic complex containing vanadium(iv) and vitamin a. the authors showed a reduced blood glucose level, a lowered creatinine concentration, and a decrease in the activity of glutamate-pyruvate transaminase (gpt) in the serum of diabetic mice treated with a v(iv)-vitamin a complex, compared to the untreated diabetic mice group. in turn, data from mouse studies conducted by krośniak et al. [197] , in which the influence of eight new v compounds on organs mass were tested, revealed that v complexes had a remarkably different effect on organ weight despite the similar composition and the same co-ligand. as stressed by the authors, this may point to separate metabolic pathways of these compounds in the body and a role of tridentate l schiff base ligands. more recently, a report has been published by szklarzewicz et al. [198] showing studies that compared v complexes with diverse structures and correlated them with their properties. the investigators synthesized three new complexes of this metal (at three different oxidation levels; iii, iv, and v) with schiff base ligands showing differences in the coordination of the metal with the ligand in order to compare their physicochemical and spectroscopic properties as potential antidiabetic drugs.as far as application of v in diabetic patients is concerned, this may be a considerable problem and may pose a risk of toxicity, as this element is highly toxic and is able to accumulate and interact with other metals. a summary of its serious side effects, including tissue v accumulation in experimental animals (in rats with diabetes) treated with this metal orally, was reviewed in the work j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f by domingo et al. [62] . other reports by domingo [48, 199] provided a summary of side effects derived from the oral administration of v compounds observed in diabetic patients. as known, such diseases as diabetes mellitus or cancer are chronic diseases requiring chronic treatment; therefore, as emphasized by the author, the long-term/chronic administration of v may be unavoidable and can lead to long-term side effects resulting from significant tissue v accumulation. thus, the toxicity of v that could derive from the chronic treatment with this element is of particular concern. hence, researchers [174, 199] question the legitimacy of the possible application of v in oral diabetes therapy (fig. 13) . moreover, as stressed by some investigators [after 168], it also has to be kept in mind that diabetes mellitus is sometimes characterized as a metabolic disease with which patients live for many years; therefore, low toxicity of potential drugs should be of particular concern.the results of previous studies on both organic and inorganic v compounds have shown that this element can act as a cardioprotective agent. it may protect the heart against ischemiareperfusion injury, prevent hypertension and hypertrophy of myocardium, and improve heart performance [200] . inhibition of ptp activity and activation of the 3-phosphatidylinositol kinase (pi3-k)/akt protein kinase signaling pathway (pi3k-akt) have been proposed as mechanisms responsible for v-induced cardioprotection [200] (fig. 11) . akt, known as protein kinase b (pkb), is responsible for the phosphorylation of many different proteins involved in basic cellular processes such as proliferation, growth, migration, and metabolism [201] and plays an important role in the regulation of myocardial hypertrophy and in angiogenesis [acc. to 33] . activation of the pi3k-akt pathway results in the phosphorylation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (enos) responsible for catalyzing nitric oxide (no) production (fig. 11 ). in turn, as an initiator and mediator of cardioprotection, no has anti-hypertrophic activity and plays an important role in the regulation of vasorelaxation [202, 203] . diffusion of no from the endothelium to vascular smooth muscle activates cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cgmp), which inhibits the influx of ca 2+ ions into the cell and/or the activity of the calcium pump (ca 2+ -atpase) and activates potassium channels leading to vasodilation [202] . furthermore, stimulation of glucose transport by the influence of v on the glut-4 glucose transporters (fig. 11) , resulting in normalization of their level in myocardial cells [204] , is another mechanism of the v cardioprotective action [200] proposed in studies conducted on rats with pharmacologically induced diabetes. in addition, vanadium (as vanadate, which shows pro-hypertensive properties) [186] can induce vascular smooth muscle contraction (acting as a vasoconstrictive agent) by increasing the intracellular calcium (ca 2+ ) concentration [205] (fig. 11) . in vivo studies carried out on smooth muscle (isolated from guinea pig's airways) [206] have shown that the inhibition of the activity of the sodium-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f potassium pump (na + /k + -atpase) by this element [143] does not seem to be linked to the mechanism responsible for smooth muscle contractility [206] . a vasoconstrictive effect has also been demonstrated for vanadyl, for which a different mechanism of action was suggested, compared to that proposed for vanadate [207] . in addition, vanadium as vanadyl may also have an antihypertensive effect, as demonstrated by studies conducted on spontaneously hypertensive rats (shr) and in those with hypertension induced by a fructose-rich diet (fhr rats) receiving vanadyl sulfate (voso4) or bis(maltolato)oxavanadium(iv) (bmov) [208] [209] [210] .in terms of mechanisms underlying the neuroprotective effects of v, it has been speculated that this element activates the pi3k-akt signaling pathway (survival signals) by inhibiting ptp, thereby inactivating forkhead box class o (foxos) family members (such as fkhr, fkhrl1, afx) and finally resulting in suppression of expression of apoptosis-inducing factors such as bim and fas ligands (fasl). it has also been assumed to activate extracellular signal-regulated kinase (erk) [211] [212] [213] [214] [215] (fig. 11) in vivo studies in a rodent model (on rats) have shown that v administered in the form of bmov leads to an increase in the intake of v and a decrease in the water and food intake, body weight, and serum leptin (lep) concentration (leps) [216] (fig. 15 ). the influence of this metal on the signaling pathway through lep (jak2/stat3 pathway) [217, 218] was suggested as a mechanism underlying these changes [216] (fig. 15 ).it is believed that the increase in the activity of ptp-1b blocks janus tyrosine kinase 2 (jak2), i.e. a substrate for ptp-1b [219, 220] , resulting in blockage of leptin signaling (jak2/stat3) and cascades of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (pi3-k) involved in the signaling pathway of both insulin (ins) and leptin (lep) [220, 221] (fig. 15) . therefore, the signal from ins and lep is blocked (fig. 15 ). in turn, by inhibition of the activity of ptp-1b [222] , vanadium leads to activation of the jak2/stat3 leptin signaling pathway [217, 218] (fig. 15 ) and thus inhibits the synthesis of neuropeptide y (npy) and its release in the hypothalamus. consequently, appetite, body fat mass, and body weight are reduced [221, 223] (fig. 15 ). there is also an increase in leptin (lep-s) and insulin (ins-s) sensitivity and a decrease in insulin (ins-r) and leptin (lep-r) resistance [138, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 218, 220, 224] (fig. 15 ). ins-r (which causes disturbances in the synthesis of lipoproteins and their changes in blood plasma) [225] along with lep-r and lep-r-related hyperleptinemia (hyper-lep) have been reported to be significant risk factors of hypertension, type ii diabetes, dyslipidemia, atherosclerosis, and cardiovascular diseases [138, 226, 227] (fig. 15) . thus, by affecting the activity of ptp-1b, v induces the jak2/stat3 signaling pathway, which improves sensitivity to lep and ins and makes this element (as suggested) useful for treating obesity [138, 217, 218] . an increase in ins-s was found in diabetic rats receiving vanadyl sulfate (voso4) for 30 days [228] and in type i and ii diabetes patients after administration of sodium metavanadate (navo3) for 2 weeks [190] .noteworthy is also the fact that, through its direct influence on the organization of membrane lipids and cholesterol/sphingolipid-rich microdomains (where proteins involved in signal transduction are concentrated, e.g. the ins receptor), v enhances the effects caused by ins and, consequently, results in ins-r reduction [229] . a decrease in ins-r was demonstrated in obese rats (fa/fa zucker rats) receiving v in the form of an organic derivative bmov for 6 weeks [230] and in hypertensive rats chronically treated with voso4 [209] . both v compounds were administered in drinking water.the mechanism of the anti-hypercholesterolemic action of v is related to the effect of this element on the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway shown in figure 16 . in vitro studies have demonstrated that v can inhibit the synthesis of this steroid [231] by blocking the utilization of mevalonate [232, 233] , which is formed from 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme a (3-hmg-coa) in a reaction catalyzed by hmg-coa reductase and further transformed into isopentenyl-5pyrophosphate (ipp) in phosphorylation/decarboxylation reactions [234] (fig. 16i ). an increase in the catabolism of cholesterol by v is another possible mechanism of action of this element [235] ( fig. 16i ).the impact of v on stimulation of the lipoprotein lipase (lpl) activity has been highlighted as well [29, 236] . the lpl enzyme controls many metabolic processes, e.g. it participates in the metabolism of lipids and lipoproteins [237] . thus, any disorders in its proper functioning (during ins-r) [211] result in development of atherosclerosis, obesity, and type ii diabetes [237] .unfavorable changes have been found in the lipid profile of individuals that are occupationally exposed to v (working in production of v-containing steel) (fig. 16ii) . there was an increase in the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (hdl-c) and apolipoprotein a (apo-ai, main hdl apolipoprotein) in the serum and a decrease in such atherogenic indices as tc/hdl-c, ldl-c/hdl-c, and apob/apoa-i [238] (fig. 16ii) . a decrease in cholesterol and/or low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (ldl-c) have also been found in the serum of type ii diabetes patients after 6 weeks of administration of voso4 [192, 193] and in type i and ii diabetes mellitus patients after 2-week treatment with sodium metavanadate (navo3) [191] (fig. 16iii) .a reduced cholesterol level has been demonstrated in the blood of healthy rats receiving v2o5 (0.56 mg v2o5/kg) once a month for 12 months [78] , in obese rats (fa/fa zucker rats) treated with sodium orthovanadate (na3vo4, 0.8 mg/ml) in drinking water for 4 months [239] , and in diabetic rats receiving voso4 (0.75 mg/ml, 1 mg/ml, 1.1 mg/ml or 0.5 mmol/kg/day) [240] [241] [242] [243] , sodium metavanadate (navo3, 0.20 mg/ml), sodium orthovanadate (na3vo4, 0.50 mg/ml) [241] , or organic v complexes such as v5dipic-nh2 (0.1 mg/ml) [244] or bis(curcumino)oxavanadyl (bcov, 0.05, 0.1 or 0.2 mmol/kg/day) [243] in drinking water for different periods (20 days, 2, 4, and 10 weeks, or 5 months). in turn, a decrease in the level of triglycerides (tg) in the blood was found: (a) in obese rats (fa/fa zucker rats) receiving na3vo4 (0.8 mg/ml) in drinking water for 4 months [239] , (b) in obese non-diabetic zucker fatty rats (zf) and diabetic zucker fatty rats (zdf) after administration of organic (maltolic) vanadium derivatives, i.e. bis(maltolato)oxovanadium(iv) (bmov, 0.19 mmol/kg/day, in drinking water) and bis(ethylmaltolato)oxovanadium(iv) (beov, 0.1 mmol/kg/day, with a probe), respectively, for 3 weeks [245] , and (c) in diabetic rats receiving voso4 [240, [242] [243] [244] , v5dipic-nh2 [244] , or bcov [243] . bcov has also been shown to reduce the serum ldl level significantly in these animals [243] .given the increasing practical application of v in medicine and the fact that accumulation of this metal in certain internal organs/tissues during the treatment of chronic diseases may be a significant problem, it is still advisable to carry out studies on v toxicity and mechanisms of its toxic action (fig. 17) . it is also necessary to study the pharmacological activity of v as well as the mechanisms of absorption and excretion thereof. moreover, the mechanisms of transport of v to target organs and its uptake by cells as well as the in vivo form of this metal and its influence on the immune system deserve further exploration (fig. 17) . the mechanisms of immune response upon v exposure should also be better clarified. additionally, comprehensive research on the interactions of v with other elements is needed as well (fig. 17) .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fmetal interactions affecting the cell metabolism, action of organs and, consequently, the function of the entire organism is still an important issue in toxicology, pharmacology, and medicine. therefore, examination of the consequences, character, and mechanisms of interactions of v (which raises hopes for the use thereof in the treatment of certain diseases in humans) with elements, especially those with antioxidant potential, in an in vivo experimental model are still a current and vital issue. moreover, considering the well-known pro-oxidant properties of v, the fact that the increased generation of ros and oxidative stress play a crucial role in v-induced toxicity, and the suggestions of other authors that the hepatotoxic, nephrotoxic, cardiotoxic, genotoxic, neurotoxic, and carcinogenic effects of this metal as well as inflammatory and fibrotic changes in the lungs are associated with its redox-active nature and ability to intensify lpo (see figure 7) , detailed investigations to evaluate the consequences of possible interactions of v with antioxidant elements during combined chronic treatment are even more desirable. this aspect is also important in the context of occupational exposure and growing environmental pollution with v.the results of studies conducted in a rodent model by ścibior et al. [57] showed protective action of mg against the pro-oxidant activity of v. they also provided evidence that the beneficial mginduced limitation of the increase in the hepatic lpo during the administration of v may result from the independent action of mg and from the antagonistic interaction with v. these effects were observed when healthy rats were exposed to v (as smv) at the concentration of 0.125 mg v/l with supplementation with mg (as ms at the concentration of 0.06 mg mg/ml) for 18 weeks. however, further studies are needed to explain the exact mechanism(s) accounting for the protective effect of mg (at the dose used) against the v-induced oxidative stress in the liver. the other findings reported by ścibior et al. [52] demonstrated a markedly reduced level of lpo in the bone of healthy rats supplemented with mg (as ms) during the 12-week smv exposure (0.125 mg v/ml). these changes, as those mentioned previously for the liver, were also influenced by the independent action of mg and by its antagonistic interaction with v. moreover, the distinct trend toward the antagonistic interaction between v and mg was revealed with regard to the level of lpo in the erythrocytes of healthy rats exposed to smv (0.125 mg v/ml) during 12-week ms supplementation (0.06 mg mg/ml) [53] . it should be added that the concentration of v mentioned above was selected based on earlier studies conducted by other researchers [246] [247] [248] [249] [250] who tested similar v concentrations in a rat model as well as reports of the levels of this metal in the blood and urine of occupationally exposed people [251, 252] , which were comparable with those noted in smv-exposed rats. based on the results obtained, it can be concluded that the issues related to the interactions of v with mg (as one of the elements with antioxidant potential) are important not only for extending the knowledge of the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f mechanism of the effect of v on the organism. they are also essential to improve the understanding of the role of mg in prevention of v toxicity and clarify the mechanisms underlying the potential protective action of this bioelement in v poisoning. this is even more relevant in view of the fact that long-lasting oxidative stress with simultaneous weakening of the antioxidant system can lead to permanent cell/tissue damage and, consequently, to initiation of the disease process. in addition, the examination of the combined v-mg effects in mammalian organisms may also be helpful for the future safe use of v in medicinal applications. undisputed is the fact that recognition of doses of elements showing synergistic/antagonistic action towards each other may play a role in both medicine and pharmacology. however, although some studies cited above reveal that supplementation with mg during v exposure has beneficial effects reflected in reduction of the level of lpo in certain cells/tissues of healthy rats, further studies (in other animal models) have to be conducted to recognize whether the antagonistic effects of mg on pharmacological amounts of v will allow v to exert beneficial effects, or whether their synergistic actions yield beneficial effects at lower amounts of v.some time ago, matsuda et al. [253] demonstrated for the first time that v and mg administered in combination as smv (0.3 mg/ml) and ms (0.3 mg/ml), respectively, to diabetic rats in drinking water for 3 weeks had a synergistic effect, as they augmented whole-body insulin sensitivity and glycogen synthesis. based on these findings, the authors suggested a potential role for combination therapy with trace elements in type 2 diabetes mellitus and other insulin-resistant states. diabetes is accompanied by changes in the level of mg in tissues [254] and by weakening of the antioxidant barrier [255] and oxidative stress [256] . with regard to this issue, sanchez et al. [94] showed that treatment with v of mg-deficient rats corrected many alterations generated by mg deficiency.subsequently, bermúdez-peña et al. [257] evaluated whether v treatment might affect alterations in mg metabolism associated with diabetes. the authors revealed the existence of interplay or other interactions between both elements in diabetic rats. as they stressed, these results might help to clarify the role of v as an anti-diabetic agent.the existing literature comprises a few articles about the interactions between v and mg [51-53, 57, 63, 94, 253, 257-260] , which has been reported to be able to protect against the harmful effects of ros [261] [262] [263] [264] . a summary of data about the interactions between both metals (demonstrated to date in relation to parameters investigated in a rodent model) is presented in figure 18 . and in the liver (cal). synergy has also been determined for such roughness parameters as (d) mean roughness (sa) and (e) root mean square roughness (sq) (fig. 18i ), which were measured by optical profilometry in a three-dimensional (3d) scale in morphological studies of the femur of rats receiving v and mg separately and in combination [260] . in turn, a trend towards synergistic interactions between both metals has been observed for (a) the level of sodium in erythrocytes (narbc) and bone (nab), (b) the concentration of calcium (cak) in the kidney, and (c) the ten-point height (sz) defined as the arithmetic average height of the sum of five local maxima and five local minima (fig. 18i) .the interactive effects between v and mg (studied in an animal model) have also been revealed for such parameters as v intake, v absorption, urinary and fecal v excretion, serum mg and insulin concentration, and insulin resistance index (homa-ir) (fig. 18ii ).as far as the historical outline of interactions is concerned, in 1970, hill and matrone proposed the theory of mineral interactions (fig. 19 ) suggesting that metals with similar chemical and physical properties would interact with each other biologically [after 265]. in 1982, georgievskii described synergistic and antagonistic interactions between certain elements, whereas o' del defined the term "interaction" in 1997 [after 265] (fig. 19 ).studies on the influence of combined administration of v and elements with antioxidant potential date back to 1966 when berg [258] described the effect of co-administration of v with mg on the growth and mortality in chicks (fig. 19 ). in 1989, yamaguchi et al. [266] reported that zn prevented the toxic effect of v (fig. 19 ). in the late 1990s, two reports described the effect of se on v toxicity in different regions of the rat brain [267] and a synergistic interaction between v and mg on glucose metabolism in diabetic rats [253] . additionally, the influence of combined j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f administration of v with zn or se to rats [268] has been described (fig. 19) . the research on the interactions of v with antioxidant elements has been gaining popularity since 2005. since that time, more reports have appeared about the effects of co-application of v with cr(iii) [59, [269] [270] [271] [272] ormg [51-58, 63, 259, 260] to rats (fig. 19) . moreover, there have also been reports on the effect of v administered as bmov on bioavailability, biochemical parameters in serum, excretion and content of v and mg in certain internal organs/tissues of healthy rats receiving v-containing feed and varying levels of mg (magnesium oxide, mgo) [94] , and the effect of v (bmov) on the metabolism and distribution of mg and some biochemical blood parameters in diabetic rats receiving feed containing v and mg (mgo) [257] .it should also be added that more attention should be given to studies on treatment with v in association with compounds with antioxidant properties to optimize the therapeutic potential of v compounds and minimize their possible side effects. this is even more relevant in view of the work conducted by wang et al. [273] , who showed that the treatment with n-acetylcysteine (nac), i.e. a thiol antioxidant reducing the accumulation of ros and oxidative damage [274] , inhibited v-induced ros generation in human normal liver l02 cells but did not attenuate the antitumor activity of v in human hepatoma hepg2 cells. as emphasized by the authors, these results may be helpful in the therapeutic application of v compounds along with antioxidants as synergistic agents in order to reduce their potential toxicities in normal cells without affecting their antitumor activities in cancer cells. in addition, the same researchers suggest that combined administration of v with an antioxidant might be beneficial for diabetes therapy [273] . recently, protective action of pyruvate against vinduced oxidative stress and cytotoxicity has been demonstrated in chinese hamster ovary (cho-k1) cells [275] . it has been suggested that the antioxidative effects of pyruvate, especially its ability to neutralize hydrogen peroxide, may be involved in the observed mechanism of protection.to sum up, comprehensive investigations in an animal model on the interactions of v with antioxidant elements, such as mg or certain compounds with antioxidant properties or dietary/plantderived antioxidants, are particularly important. they would allow us not only to recognize a potential antidote minimizing the adverse effects of v resulting from its strong pro-oxidative activity but also to evaluate the potential efficacy of combined v-mg treatment in certain modern-age diseases.due to its multidirectional biological activity and a wide range of effects on the mammalian organism, vanadium has been arousing interest of many research centers worldwide for many years. the use of this metal in medicine is of particular concern. some v compounds/complexes have been found to be promising for potential therapeutic use. their beneficial therapeutic properties have been reported and diseases of interest against which they could be effective have been suggested. the number of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f studies on the use of v in medicine is constantly growing and its potential medical application remains an open question. given the recent progress in the research on the pharmacological activity of different v compounds/complexes, it can be assumed that new v-based drugs will be available for therapeutic purposes in the future. recently, much attention has been focused on the design of v compounds that can be useful for potential applications as anticancer agents. there are also ongoing studies on different anti-diabetic v complexes for their future safe use in the treatment of diabetes.on the other hand, however, many multidirectional studies on v (which has a narrow therapeutic index) have shown that further analyses are still required for this element to be used as a metallodrug in the fight against certain life-threatening modern-age diseases. it has been highlighted that the ability of v to accumulate and its strong toxicological potential are an important obstacle limiting the use of this metal in pharmacology. therefore, it would be advisable to shift the balance towards the beneficial action of v, whose pharmacological potential has repeatedly been revealed, as evidenced by the results of many studies conducted in a variety of different cell lines and in animal models.however, this is a serious challenge and considerable research is still devoted to design v complexes with low toxicity and sufficiently high efficacy.besides the issues mentioned above and those presented in section 9 titled 'vanadium -important research trends' and the need to identify the susceptibility of different cells/tissues to the effects of v, the following aspects draw researchers' attention: (a) identification of v species as an important factor in the assessment of toxicity of this element and its potential health risks to humans [276] (fig.   20 ), (b) examination of the well-defined forms of this metal in terms of their availability, selectivity, and specificity [277] with recognition of key factors that may affect the mode of v action (fig. 20) , (c) biotransformation of v compounds in the organism and distribution between blood bioligands as a relevant issue of the drug metabolism and mechanism of action [103, 109] , (d) the role of the carrier ligand that may not be limited only to facilitating the transport/absorption of v compounds [278] with establishing the toxicity profiles of the ligand [167] , (e) elucidation of the role of v species in interactions with immune system modulators and other transcription factors influencing immune signaling [277] , and (f) recognition of therapeutic targets, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics in detail, which may help to design better and more effective v-based drugs [101] .the authors declare no conflict of interest, financial or otherwise.the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. [33] , ** after [38] , † † after [39] , * after [40] , ## after [41] . . historical outline of certain issues linked to mineral interactions and studies on the effects of combined administration of vanadium and elements with antioxidant properties to animals (mainly to rats). mg: magnesium, zn: zinc, se: selenium, cr: chromium. *after [265] . [19] combat aircraft/parts for aircraft and rockets/otherti-6al-4v components parts for weapons and aircraft (engine parts, fasteners) ti al 90 5.5-6.76 v 3.5-4.5 [12] [13] [14] [15] ti-13v-11cr-3al sr-71 blackbird component parts aircraft, missile applications ti cr al ~75 10-12 2.5-3.5 v 12.5-14.5 [13, 14, 20] ti-3al-2.5v component parts for aircraft (pipes in hydraulic systems) ti al 95.755-95. 5 2.5-3.5 v 2-3 [13, 14] ti-8al-1mo-1v [14] ti-6al-6v-2sn component parts for aircraft (jet engines), rocket engine housings, weapon components ti al sn 82.89-87. 8 5-6 1.5-2.5 v 5-6 [14, 20] ti-10v-2fe-3al component parts for aircraft (landing gear, parts responsible for take-off and landing) ti al fe 82.8-86. 8 2.6-3.4 1.6-2.2 v 9.0-11.0 [12] [13] [14] 16] ti-15v-3cr-3al-3sncomponent parts for aircraft (hulls, wires) ti al cr sn 76 2.5-3.5 2.5-3.5 2.5-3.5 v 14-16 [13, 14, 16] ti-3al-8v-6cr-4mo-4zr 7.5-8.5 [14, 16] ti-3.5al-5mo-6v-3cr-2sn-0.5feti al mo cr sn fe ~86 3.5 5 3 2 0.5 v 6 [16] ti-5al-5mo-5v-1cr-1feaerospace industry ti al mo cr fe ~88 5 5 1 1 v 5 [16] ti-5al-5v-5mo-3cr-0.5feti al mo cr fe ~86 5 5 3 0,5 v 5 [16] ti-5al-5mo-5v-3cr-1zraerospace industry ti al mo cr zr ~86 5 5 3 1 v 5 [16] ti-5v-5mo-5al-3craerospace industry ti mo al cr ~87 5 5 3 v 5 [16] ti-3al-8v-6cr-4zr-4moaerospace industry [16, 20] j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f table 2 . vanadium-containing biomaterials and their use in medical devices.ti-6al-4v ti 90 al 6 v 4hip joint replacement knee joint replacement dental implants (zygomatic implants), bridges/crowns, dental bridges orthodontic implants spine stabilizers trauma devices/bone fixation (intramedullary rods and nails, surgical screws/bone plates) encapsulation of cardiac pacemaker [11, 13, [111] [112] [113] [114] [115] [116] [117] [118] [119] ti-6al-4v eli ti 90 al 6 v 4 medical implants [11, 13] ti-3al-2.5v ti 92.755-95.5 al 2.5-3.5 v 2-3 dental implants hip and knee joint replacement (orthopedic implants) trauma devices (intramedullary rods) [11] magnetic alloys 2v-49co-49fe (permendur) co 49 fe 49 v 2 devices supporting the work of the heart [11] biocompatible coatings applied on metallic alloys [11, 120, 121] v2o5/plga antimicrobial activity implant materials [122] ti: titanium; al: aluminum; v: vanadium, eli: extra low interstitial (max. fe: 0.14%, max. o: 0.13%). tio2:nha:ag-ti-6al-4v: titanium oxide-based coating containing hydroxyapatite nanoparticle and silver particles, sc-ti-6al-4v: surface-coated ti-6al-4v, v-dlc: diamond-like layer with vanadium (dlc type carbon layer), v2o5: vanadium pentoxide; plga: (poly)lactide-co-glycolide copolymer.we have created a web-based workflow application, supramap (http://supramap.osu.edu). using a web browser, a user inputs text files containing sequence and or phenotypic data, latitude and longitude coordinates, and (optionally) a date of isolation for each strain. our application then executes a workflow that entails integrated sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis, computation of character changes (e.g., mutations and host shifts), and geographical projection of the tree on a computing cluster. once the analyses are complete, the user can download a phylogenetic layer expressed in kml file and view the file with a geographic information system (gis). the user can use the phylogenetic layer to visualize several aspects of pathogen evolution including: spread of lineages, mutations, shifts among hosts, and phenotypic changes over geography and time. we illustrate the use of the system with a case study on h5n1 and discuss use of visualization in conjunction with statistical validation.supramap is superficially similar to other efforts for projecting phylogenetic trees in gis, such as migraphyla (hodac et al., 2007) and geophylobuilder (kidd and liu, 2008) . there are also papers that use gis to study the spread of pathogens but do not provide accompanying applications (lemey et al., 2009) . some have released applications that project trees but have not published research case studies (e.g., piel, 2007; maddison and maddison, 2009) . gengis combines data visualizations, including trees and gene frequency data, with r scripts (parks et al., 2009) .in contrast to these efforts, the supramap web application provides a complete workflow including parallel direct optimization of raw data into trees and implied alignments, tree projection into a keyhole markup language (kml) file, and character diagnosis with presentation of mutation or other character change data implied by the phylogeny for each node of the tree. the diagnosis functionality is similar to a user performing character mapping on a traditional cladogram using the ''trace character history'' feature in mesquite or ''map characters'' feature in tnt (goloboff et al., 2008) . in the case of supramap, character changes are optimized on the projected tree. thus, supramap enables character evolution studies in biogeographic and temporal contexts. below, we include a case study for character evolution in hypothesis driven research on the spread of key mutations in lineages of infectious diseases (janies et al., 2007 (janies et al., , 2008 hill et al., 2009) .supramap is distinct from all the efforts described above in that it is both a client and a web service that is instantiated on a computing cluster freely available for use by the scientific community. in this respect, supramap resembles the raxml web-server (stamatakis et al., 2008; http://phylobench.vital-it.ch/raxml-bb/) or swami (rifaieh et al., 2007; http://www.phylo.org/ portal2) in that a phylogenetic search application is spawned via a web interface to a computing cluster. raxml requires the user to upload a precomputed alignment. in contrast, supramap does not require an alignment (although it can use pre-aligned data if the user prefers). a typical supramap run performs integrated alignment and phylogenetic analysis as implemented in poy (varo´n et al., 2009) . swami supports poy but not the geographical projection capabilities of supramap.many services for syndromic surveillance of infectious diseases are available. these services scrape, filter, and map news or search data from the internet on the occurrence of disease symptoms (brownstein et al., 2008; ginsberg et al., 2008) . supramap complements these services. syndromic surveillance is patient-centric whereas supramap is pathogen-centric. as supramap focuses on genomic and geographic data, it allows the user to understand the key mutations and pathogen phenotypes as diseases spread over time, geography, and among hosts, including animals and humans.like syndromic data, pathogen genomic data are a key source of medical intelligence that aid public health officials in controlling an outbreak of disease. for example, in the early days of the sars epidemic, the cases were reported as atypical pneumonia, which often indicates a bacterial agent. only through serological, microscopic and nucleotide sequence characterization was it understood that sars was caused by a previously undiscovered coronavirus (cov) . furthermore, it was not until the full genome of sars-cov was sequenced, shared and compared via phylogenetics to related coronaviruses from a variety of animals that the zoonotic origins of sars-cov could be put in the evolutionary and geographic context necessary for disease surveillance (guan et al., 2003; marra et al., 2003; rota et al., 2003; janies et al., 2008) .in this report, we focus on the implementation and use of supramap to track the evolution of phenotypes and mutations in sequence data derived from h5n1 influenza over time, hosts, and geography. supramap has been used to visualize the spread of pathogens carrying key mutations that confer the ability of the pathogen to replicate in novel host species or to resist drugs (janies et al., 2007 (janies et al., , 2008 hill et al., 2009) . studies in natural history and anthropology are also underway with supramap.the supramap server consists of two main elements. the first is a web service created via a jboss application server (http://www.jboss.org). the web service executes poy processes and generates kml files on the cluster. the second is a client written in ruby using the ruby on rails ò framework (http://www.rubyonrails.org). a phusion passengerô (http://www.modrails.com) server supports the client. both elements use mysql ò (http://www.mysql.com) as the data store.we have created a web interface where users can upload data files, name projects, and organize sets of data files into jobs to be executed. the user may study one or many loci and set up various types of analyses by choosing from uploaded files. we post a detailed manual: http://supramap.osu.edu/sm/supramap/ tutorials. once the user starts a job, the supramap system will perform a phylogenetic analysis using dynamic homology (integrated alignment and tree search; wheeler et al., 2006) , generate a tree and kml file, and present statistics on the run. statistics include the optimal tree cost found during the search and the number of times this tree cost was hit. if the user prefers, multiple sequence alignment and or tree search can be pre-computed locally with edit costs, search heuristics and optimality criterion specified by the user. then the user can upload aligned data and or a tree and use the supramap web service for character diagnosis and tree projection resulting in a kml file.phylogenetic analyses using dynamic homology are performed in parallel on a cluster made of personal computer components running linux. poy uses mpi v1.0 for parallel execution (http://www.mpiforum.org/docs/mpi-11-html/mpi-report.html). at present, the default script for poy in the supramap web service includes a simple set of key commands (discussed below). however, the user is free to vary the commands and their arguments in their own local runs of poy. a stand-alone binary of poy can be enabled for supramap by compiling from source code with a plug in (http://supramap.osu.edu/sm/supramap/ tutorials#section2).key commands include: transform (tcm:(1,1)) these commands set the edit costs for ancestor-descendent changes in nucleotide bases.search(max_time:0:0:3, memory:gb:2) these commands implement numerous tree search heuristics including wagner building, branch swapping, tree fusing, and ratcheting (varo´n et al., 2009 ). these commands set a stopping rule at a wall clock time limit (e.g., 3 min) and amount of memory (e.g., 2 gigabytes). poy will use the computing resources allocated to it within the limits set by the search commands to find the best heuristic length tree. select(best:1) if more than one tree are found at heuristic minimum length, this command randomly chooses a tree from the pool of trees. in some cases, many heuristic minimum length trees are implied by the data. in the web service, we select one best tree at random for display using this command. if the user compiles their own binary of poy from source, then the user can explore results implied by multiple trees. a more thorough exploration of the use of multiple trees in phylogeography is available in hovmo¨ller et al.,(http://routemap.osu.edu).transform(static_approx) using these commands, dynamic homology characters are transformed into static homology characters akin to a multiple alignment (wheeler, 2005; varo´n et al., 2009) . report(' 'result.kml' ', kml:(supramap, ' 'latlongdata.csv' ') these commands perform the geographic projection of the tree, diagnose the apomorphies (e.g. mutations and host shifts implied by the tree), and create the output as a kml file. the kml file can be viewed with a variety of online mapping services, gis, and virtual globes.report(' 'result.tre' ' , trees) these commands export the best tree in nested parenthesis format, suitable for viewing with flat tree viewers.report(' 'result.stats' ', treestats) these commands export the heuristic length the best tree found and the number of times this length was hit during the search.the algorithm that generates the kml file computes three data points: altitude, longitude, and latitude for each node of the tree. the altitude of each node is calculated by multiplying its tree height by a constant (janies et al., 2007) . the root node is assigned the highest altitude, internal nodes are lower, and terminal nodes have an altitude of zero.leaf nodes of the tree represent observed taxa (e.g., viral isolates), whose gis coordinates are found in the csv file. the algorithm must compute the latitude and longitude of the internal nodes, which represent common ancestors. in a post order traversal of the tree, each nodeõs latitude and longitude equals the calculated geographical midpoint of its two children. once the geographical data have been computed for the tree, the algorithm generates the kml tags, includes apomorphy data in the pop-up windows of the kml, and writes a kml file that is viewable with a gis (fig. 1) .output a heuristic, minimum length tree found by the poy search is presented to the user as a text file with taxa in nested parentheses. this file can be viewed with a flat tree viewer such as treeview (page, 2001) . the results of the tree projected onto the earth are presented to the user as a kml file suitable for viewing with a variety of software including google earthô (http://earth. google.com), arcgis explorerô (http://www.esri.com/ software/arcgis/explorer/index.html), nasa worldwind (http://worldwind.arc.nasa.gov), and google mapsô (http://maps.google.com).we used 239 nucleotide sequences for the polymerase basic 2 genomic segment of recent isolates of h5n1 influenza. these isolates represent a sample of the diversity of lineages spreading westward from china across russia, the middle east, africa, and europe. we chose the strain a ⁄ goose ⁄ yunnan ⁄ 3315 ⁄ 2005 as an outgroup. this strain was discovered to be the most closely related isolate to the root of the westward clade in our analyses of datasets that contained much more background data, including many isolates from china, japan, korea and south east asia ranging back to 1996.for character evolution studies we chose two characters. one character was chosen to illustrate host data (i.e. avian, feline, human, mustelid, or an environmental isolate) and another character was chosen for amino acid genotypes (i.e., glutamic acid or lysine) for position 627 of polymerase basic protein 2 (pb2). when the pb2 protein contains lysine at position 627, the influenza virus is able replicate in the lower temperature (relative to avian) of the mammalian respiratory tract (tarendeau et al., 2008) .the phylogenetic analysis found a single best tree of length 1528 steps. the tree in the visualization suggests that h5n1 lineages carrying lysine-627 in pb2 are spreading westward (fig. 1) . for raw data, results, and an interactive kml file, see: http://supramap.osu.edu/ sm/supramap/publications.we used the concentrated changes test (cct; maddison, 1990) to provide an independent check on two hypotheses generated by the visualization and tree. the cct is a measure of covariation between two binary characters on a phylogenetic tree. the cct was calculated using macclade (maddison and maddison, 2003) . as the tree and the number of changes are large, we used a simulation of 500 000 iterations. we examined covariation in shifts from avian to mammalian hosts and mutations from glutamic acid (e) to lysine (k) at position 627 of the pb2 protein (e627k). we also examined covariation of the spread of the virus west of 100°east longitude with e627k mutations.in the tree resulting from analysis of 239 pb2 sequences, there are eight shifts from avian to mammal hosts for h5n1 influenza and eight e627k mutations. two of the eight avian to mammal host shifts are coincident with e627k mutations. we found a correlation (cct = 0.0059) between the shift from avian to mammalian hosts and the e627k mutation.the westward movement of the virus is less well correlated with e627k (cct = 0.0289). the virus is highly mobile eastward and westward. there are 16 eastto-west transitions and two of these transitions are coincident with e627k mutations. this leads to the higher cct value.as we conducted two tests, we adjusted for multiple testing using a bonferroni correction resulting in a cutoff of 0.025 for statistical significance. based on this cutoff, avian to mammal host shifts in h5n1 are significantly correlated with e627k mutations. although close to the cutoff, the westward spread of the virus is not significantly correlated with e627k mutations.these results for e627k are consistent with those of janies et al. (2007) . the correlation between avianmammalian host shifts and the e627k mutation remains clear in phylogenetic work as well as in research on laboratory animals (subbarao et al., 1993) . the visualization suggests that h5n1 is mutating at position 627 while it is spreading westward. this is an intriguing hypothesis, but as shown in janies et al. (2007) , cannot be supported statistically. we highlight this case study because it underscores the point that visualizations should be treated with caution. although visualization is a great tool for inspiration of hypotheses and communication of ideas, results should be checked for statistical significance. we choose to use the concentrated changes test as it explicitly takes into account the interrelationships of the organisms whereas other methods do not (grupe et al., 2001) . felsenstein (1985) argues that due to common ancestry, organisms cannot be treated as statistically independent entities. the interrelationships between organisms can be obtained via phylogenetic analysis and should not be ignored. as data are updated frequently, our easy-to-use workflow enables researchers to periodically rerun phylogenetic analyses and retest hypotheses on the spread of zoonotic pathogens such as h5n1.the supramap workflow initially depended on using extensible stylesheet language (xsl) transformations (xslt) to filter and convert results from poy to kml. this information includes the tree structure and character changes associated with each branch in nested elements.however, xslt processing is memory intensive. trees with large numbers of isolates and character changes can exceed the memory available and prevent the process from completing xslt.to address the limitations of xslt, we have implemented plug-ins for poy. the plug-in contains functions that perform the kml generation inside poy. thus the user can complete the entire supramap workflow using poy as a stand-alone application. no xslt steps are needed using plug-ins. the data are kept in memory that is allocated to the poy process and used therein for calculating and generating the kml visualization.the use of a workflow that is entirely contained within poy has the disadvantage over the web-based application in that the user has to learn the command line syntax of poy and use their local computing resources. however, an important issue in research on emergent infectious diseases is data security. one solution to this problem is that users can run a binary of poy enabled via plug-ins for kml generation on local computers without the use of a remote cluster and without transmission of their data outside of their organization. we include instructions for: the web and stand-alone implementations of supramap and poy, projection of precomputed trees, and colouring tree branches in kml at this web page: http://supramap. osu.edu/sm/supramap/tutorials.we hope that our tools will complement data sharing efforts such as nihõs genbank (http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and the global initiative on sharing all influenza data (http://gisaid.org). in supramap, we share powerful software tools and computing via an easy-to-use interface. our overarching goal is to build communities of researchers and public health officials to leverage combined strengths and expertise to fight infectious diseases. once produced and shared, kml encoded maps can be layered in a gis. layering pathogen phylogenies with other data such as host distributions, transit systems and environmental conditions will provide a common analytical framework in which a multidisciplinary team can work to understand the origin and spread of emergent diseases.pacific salmon (oncorhynchus spp.) species have supported coastal ecosystems and indigenous populations surrounding the north pacific ocean for tens of millennia. today, through their anadromous life history, salmon continue to transport nutrients between aquatic and terrestrial environments (cederholm et al., 1999) , supply the primary food sources for orca whales and sea lions (wasser et al., 2017; willson and halupka, 1995; chasco et al., 2017; thomas et al., 2017) and provide economic livelihoods for local communities (noakes et al., 2002) . in the northeast pacific, widespread declines of chinook (o. tshawytscha) and sockeye (o. nerka) salmon have occurred in the last 30 years, leading some populations to the brink of extirpation (peterman and dorner, 2012; heard et al., 2007; miller et al., 2011; jeffries et al., 2014) , and a cause of great concern to indigenous groups, commercial and recreational fishers, and the general public. although the exact number of salmon spawning in rivers is unknown, there are large declines in sockeye salmon over a large geographic area (peterman and dorner, 2012) . similarly, chinook salmon stocks are at only a small percentage of their historic levels, and more than 50 stocks are extinct (heard et al., 2007) .it is thought that infectious disease may contribute to salmon declines (miller et al., 2011) , but little is known about infectious agents, especially viruses, endemic to pacific salmon. infectious disease has been identified as a potential factor in poor early marine survival in migratory salmon; an immune response to viruses has been associated with mortality in wild migratory smolts and adults (miller et al., 2011; jeffries et al., 2014) , and in unspecified mortalities of salmon in marine net pens in british columbia (bc) (miller et al., 2017; di cicco et al., 2018) . for instance, immune responses to viruses such as infectious haematopoietic necrosis virus (ihnv) and potentially undiscovered viruses, have been associated with mortality in wild juvenile salmon (jeffries et al., 2014) . this is an important observation as mortality of juvenile salmon can be as high as~90% transitioning from fresh water to the marine environment (clark et al., 2016) . together, these suggest that there are undiscovered viruses which may contribute to decreased survival of pacific salmon but a concerted effort to look for viruses that may contribute to mortality has been absent.here, virus-discovery was implemented to screen for viruses associated with mortality. together, sequencing of dead or moribund aquaculture salmon and live-sampled wild salmon, in-situ hybridization, and epidemiological surveys revealed that previously unknown viruses, some of which are associated with disease, infect wild salmon from different populations.fish were screened against a viral disease detection biomarker panel (vdd) that elucidates a conserved transcriptional pattern indicative of an immune response to active rna viral infection (miller et al., 2017) . for instance, in a previous study, we showed that 31% of moribund atlantic salmon were in a viral disease state, and half of these were not known to be positive for any known rna viruses (di cicco et al., 2018) . individuals that were strongly vdd-positive, but negative for any known salmon viruses (e.g. piscine orthoreovirus, erythrocytic necrosis virus, infectious pancreatic necrosis virus, infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus, infectious salmon anaemia virus and pacific salmon paramyxovirus) were subject to metatranscriptomic sequencing. the sequencing revealed viral transcripts belonging to members of the arenaviridae, nidovirales and reoviridae, elife digest keystone species are animals and plants that play a pivotal role in supporting the ecosystems they live in, making their conservation a high priority. chinook and sockeye salmon are two such species. these fish play a central role in the coastal ecosystems of the northeast pacific, where they have supported indigenous populations for thousands of years.the last three decades have seen large declines in populations of chinook and sockeye salmon. one factor that may be involved in these declines is viral infection. in the last ten years, advances in dna sequencing technologies have led to the discovery of many new viruses, and mordecai et al. used these technologies to look for new viruses in pacific salmon.first, mordecai et al. looked for viruses in dead and dying salmon from farms and discovered three previously unknown viruses. next, they screened for these viruses in farmed salmon, hatchery salmon and wild salmon to determine their distribution. two of the viruses were present in fish from the three sources, while one of the viruses was only found in farmed fish. the fact that the three viruses are distributed differently raises questions about how the viruses are transmitted within and between farmed, hatchery and wild salmon populations.these findings will aid salmon-conservation efforts by informing the extent to which these viruses are present in wild salmon populations. future work will focus on determining the risks these viruses pose to salmon health and investigating the potential for exchange between hatchery, farmed and wild salmon populations. while farmed pacific salmon may pose some transmission risk to their wild counterparts, they also offer the opportunity to study disease processes that are not readily observable in wild salmon. in turn, such data can be used to develop policies to minimize the impact of these infectious agents and improve the survival of wild salmon populations. three evolutionarily divergent groups of rna viruses (figure 1) (yun and walker, 2012; liang et al., 2014; weiss and leibowitz, 2011) .one of the challenges of viral discovery in fish is that the proportion of viral transcripts in vertebrate metatranscriptomic libraries is small compared to the number of transcripts from the host and other contaminating sequences (geoghegan et al., 2018; zhang et al., 2019) . however, we were able to achieve near-coding complete genomes for the three new viruses (figure 1 -figure supplement 1a and b). the genomic organisation of the newly discovered viruses was consistent with related viruses in fish. for instance, spav has three genomic segments, as shown for other arenaviruses in fish . high-throughput rt-pcr screening of >6000 wild juvenile chinook and sockeye salmon showed dissimilar geographical distributions of infected fish, reflecting differences in epidemiological patterns of transmission and infection dynamics for each of the viruses ( figure 2) .the distribution and abundance of the different viruses varied markedly. arenaviruses were relatively common ( with the exception of their relatively recent discovery in snakes (stenglein et al., 2012) and frogfish , arenaviruses were thought to solely infect mammals. the arenaviruses reported here share less than 15% amino-acid sequence similarity (in the rdrp) to those from mammals and snakes, and define a new monophyletic evolutionary group, the pescarenaviruses ( figure 1a ). the absence of clear sequence homology in the glycoprotein, the difference in genome segmentation , as well as phylogenetic analysis of the replicase demonstrate that pescarenaviruses share a common but ancient ancestor with arenaviruses infecting snakes and mammals. we recommend these fish-infecting arenaviruses are assigned to the new genus pescarenavirus, with those infecting chinook and sockeye salmon being assigned to the species salmon pescarenavirus (spav), strains 1 and 2, respectively.farmed chinook salmon positive for spav-1 displayed pathology and symptoms consistent with disease including inflammation of the spleen and liver, as well as tubule necrosis and hyperplasia in the kidney. clinically, salmon presented with yellow fluid on the pyloric caeca and swim bladder, pale gills with haemorrhaging on the surface, and anaemia. wild chinook and sockeye that tested positive for arenavirus infection, but which were clinically healthy when sampled, showed few histological lesions. in-situ hybridization revealed that arenaviruses were concentrated mainly in macrophage-like cells, melanomacrophages, red-blood cells (rbcs) and endotheliocytes ( figure 3) . these findings are consistent with localisation of arenaviruses in mammals and snakes, although in contrast to snakes and fish, mammalian red blood cells are not nucleated so the similarity likely only extends to nucleated cells. spav-1 and à2 shared similar cell tropism within chinook and sockeye salmon, respectively (figure 3-figure supplement 1). in one out of the eight chinook samples examined, moderate chronic-active hepatitis was reported, and staining for spav-1 was identified in the area affected by inflammation ( figure 3c and d) , while in the other samples spav-1 was confined to reticuloendothelial cells in the liver tissue or in the sinusoids. more lesions were observed in dead farmed chinook, where disease progression is more advanced. our observations indicate that arenaviruses are replicating in red-blood cells, and occur in the macrophages and leukocytes that consume the infected cells. moreover, the observed pathological changes in arenavirus-infected fish, including anaemia, and lesions in the gills, kidney and liver would be expected for viruses that infect red-blood cells. these results are the first empirical evidence for arenavirus infection in fish, and suggest that spav, like many other arenaviruses, has the potential to be a causative agent of disease.sequencing of cultured chinook salmon also revealed a previously undescribed nidovirus and reovirus. phylogenetic analysis of the reovirus, named chinook aquareovirus (cav), predicts that it is part of the genus, aquareovirus ( figure 1b) . rather than being most closely related to known reoviruses of salmon (winton et al., 1981) , cav groups with a growing number of aquareoviruses, some of which are known to cause haemorrhagic disease and have led to serious losses to aquaculture in china (nibert and duncan, 2013; wang et al., 2012) . the observed clinical signs (anemia, dark spleen, and blood-filled kidneys) in dead farmed chinook salmon with high loads of cav are consistent with a haemorrhagic manifestation.the novel nidovirus, named pacific salmon nidovirus (psnv), is most closely related to the recently described microhyla alphaletovirus 1, which forms a sister group to the coronaviruses (bukhari et al., 2018) . this sequence, alongside psnv are basal to all other nidovirus families, and their long branch length suggests they each belong to a different genus ( figure 1c) . while not all coronaviruses cause serious disease, many do, such as sars and mers, which cause severe respiratory infections (de wit et al., 2016) .both spav-1 and spav-2 were relatively widespread along the coast of southwestern british columbia, in ocean caught chinook and sockeye salmon. currently, it is unclear what is driving differences in spav-1 and spav-2 prevalence among regions, but the virus appears to be transmitted to juvenile salmon throughout southern bc soon after they enter the ocean, a period known to be critical to their survival (beamish et al., 2012a) . spav-1 was also relatively common in farmed chinook populations. the distribution of spav-1 in wild chinook populations was more localised to the west coast of vancouver island than spav-2, which was most prevalent on the east coast of vancouver island, near the discovery islands and the johnstone strait, and was rarely detected in sockeye salmon in northern bc and alaska (figure 2-figure supplement 2) .on the east coast of vancouver island, the johnstone strait and discovery islands have been identified as a potential choke point for the growth and survival of juvenile salmonids (healy et al., 2017) . the availability of prey to juvenile sockeye in the northern johnstone strait is extremely low, resulting in food limitation and increased competition for prey (beamish et al., 2012a; mckinnell et al., 2014; godwin et al., 2015; godwin et al., 2018) . these regions of high spav-2 infection could represent a stressful part of juvenile sockeye outmigration, possibly resulting in higher susceptibility to infection. moreover, spav-2 was detected at high loads in fish sampled from regions where finfish aquaculture facilities are abundant and accordingly, sea lice infestation is high (price et al., 2011] . it remains an open question whether an alternative host could play a role in virus transmission between fish, and/or result in an increased susceptibility to infection (valdes-donoso et al., 2013) .the distribution of cav was markedly different from spav. cav was not detected in any juvenile wild or hatchery chinook salmon, despite being detected in farmed fish on both the west and east coasts of vancouver island. over 20% of moribund chinook aquaculture fish tested positive for cav, with most detections occurring in fish at least 1.5 years after ocean entry, well past the time when migratory salmon were sampled. hence, infection by cav may take a considerable time to develop, or be an infection that is only acquired by older fish. cav was also detected in a small number of farmed atlantic salmon (seven positive detections of 2816 fish tested). the monophyletic grouping of cav with other disease causing aquareoviruses and the consistency with haemorrhagic disease suggest that the virus is important to monitor in cultured fish, and potentially wild adults returning after several years at sea.psnv distribution was strongly associated with a handful of salmon-enhancement hatcheries but was also detected in 18% of aquaculture chinook and 3% of wild chinook (figure 2-figure supplement 1). in hatchery fish, infection by psnv was primarily localised to gill tissue ( figure 4a ), reminiscent of the respiratory disease caused by the related mammalian coronaviruses such as mers and sars ( figure 1c ). psnv is of particular concern as it proliferates while fish are undergoing smoltification, a process during which the gill tissue undergoes cellular reconfiguration to prepare for saltwater. notably, branchial proliferation of no known cause was noted in some farmed salmon infected with psnv. in one of the hatcheries, where pre-and post-release sampling took place, the virus increased in prevalence during smolt development in fresh water, was detected shortly postrelease, and was barely detected in the month following ocean entry ( figure 4b ). this suggests that infected fish either cleared the infection, or did not survive after entry into the marine environment. the second interpretation is consistent with the lower rates of ocean survival in fish produced from hatcheries versus wild salmon (beamish et al., 2012b) .viral disease is a potential threat to wild fish stocks; yet little is known about viruses circulating in wild, farmed, or hatchery salmon. here, through metatranscriptomic surveys, we reveal several previously unknown viruses that were discovered in dead and dying aquaculture fish, and show them to also occur in wild and hatchery-reared fish. depending on the viral and host species, the viruses range from being localised to widespread, from infecting <1% to >20% of fish, and being from within the limits of detection to very high loads. our results are consistent with some of these viruses being causative agents of disease, making it critical to understand their possible roles in salmon mortality and the decline of wild salmon populations, and their potential interactions with net-pen fish farming and hatchery rearing. viral discovery in moribund individuals followed by extensive surveillance and histopathological localisation are powerful tools towards the ultimate goals of identifying causative agents of disease and understanding the impact of infectious agents in wild populations. these insights are crucial as juvenile salmon that are in less than optimal health are expected to have lower rates of survival in the wild. continued surveillance and knowledge of endemic and emerging virus infections in these iconic salmon species is beneficial for their conservation. samples were provided by the fisheries and oceans, canada aquaculture management division and salmon enhancement program. additional samples were collected by the hakai institute juvenile salmon program. hatchery samples are identified by fin clipping, and in this study, wild fish could also encompass unmarked hatchery fish. dna is extracted for detection of dna viruses, bacteria and parasites from the same tissues from which we extract rna to target rna viruses. nucleic acid extractions on the audit samples (eight tissues-gill, atrium, ventricle, liver, pyloric caeca, spleen, head kidney and posterior kidney) were as previously described (laurin et al., 2019) . for the wild chinook and sockeye samples, homogenization using tri-reagent was performed in a mixer mill (qiagen, maryland) on each tissue independently (five tissues-gill, liver, heart, head kidney and brain). tri-reagent homogenates were organically separated using bromochloropropane, with the rna-containing aqueous layer removed for rna extraction and the lower dna-containing organic layer separated from the organics using a tnes-urea buffer (asahida et al., 1996) . for the dna extractions, a pool of 250 ml (5 tissues contributing 50 ml each) from each of the tissue tnes aqueous layers was processed for dna using the biosprint 96 dna blood kit (qiagen, maryland) and the biosprint 96 instrument (qiagen, maryland) both based on manufacturer's instructions. dna was quantified using spectrophotometer readings performed on the infinite m200pro spectrophotometer (tecan group ltd., switzerland) and normalised to 62.5 ng/ml using the freedom evo (tecan group ltd., switzerland) liquid handling unit, based on manufacturer's instructions.similarly, a pool of 100 ml (5 tissues contributing 20 ul each) of the aqueous layer was processed for rna using the magmaxà96 for microarrays rna kit (ambion inc, austin, tx, usa) with a biomek nxp (beckman-coulter, mississauga, on, canada) automated liquid-handling instrument, both based on manufacturer's instructions. the quantity of rna was analysed using spectrophotometer readings and normalised to 62.5 ng/ml with a biomek nxp (beckman-coulter, mississauga, on, canada) automated liquid-handling instrument, based on manufacturer's instructions. mixed tissue rna (1 mg) was reverse transcribed into cdna using the superscript vilo master mix kit (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca), following the manufacturer's instructions.we applied a panel of host biomarkers (genes) that when co-expressed are indicative of a viral disease state (vdd) (miller et al., 2017) . samples that displayed a positive viral disease state, but were not positive for viruses based on our 45 microbe panel screening, (as described in bass et al., 2019) , were selected for high throughput sequencing of rna (dual rna-seq) to discover new viral agents.total rna from the mixed tissue samples was evaluated for quality using the total rna pico chip on the agilent 2100 bioanalyzer (agilent, santa clara, ca) and quantified using the qubit rna br kit (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca). a 1/100 dilution of the ercc rna spike-in control mix 1 (ambion, carlsbad, ca) was added to each total rna sample prior to ribosomal depletion and library preparation. the sequencing libraries and ribosomal removal were performed using the epicentre scriptseq complete gold kit (epidemiology) (illumina, san diego, ca) according to manufacturer's instructions and included a positive control (universal human reference rna) (agilent, santa clara, ca) and negative control (no total rna). the rrna depleted total rna was purified using the zymo rna clean and concentrate-5 kit (zymo research, irvine, ca) according to manufacturer's instructions and quantified using the qubit rna hs kit (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca). the scriptseq index reverse primers were added to the cdna during the final amplification step which involved 14 cycles. the 3'-terminal tagged cdna and final amplified library were purified using the agencourt ampure xp system (beckman coulter, brea, ca). the final library size was determined using the hs dna chip on the agilent 2100 bioanalyzer (agilent, santa clara, ca) and the concentration was determined using the qubit dsdna hs kit (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca). sample libraries were normalised to 4 nm, pooled appropriately and denatured and diluted to obtain a final library of 17pm. prior to loading into a v3 2 â 300 bp kit (illumina, san diego, ca), 2% phix was spiked in. finally, a paired-end 251 bp sequencing run was performed on the illumina miseq system (illumina, san diego, ca), with four samples barcoded and pooled for each run.to sequence spav-2, psnv and cav, the samples were prepared using the same method as above but sequenced by bc cancer agency using a hiseq (2 â 125) protocol (four different samples indexed over one lane).the quality of the raw reads was checked using fastqc (v0.11.7) (https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/). low quality reads or regions of adapter sequences were removed using trimmomatic (v0.36) (bankevich et al., 2012) . reads were aligned to the atlantic salmon genome using bwa mem (v0.7.17-r1188) and unmapped reads were retained. the unmapped reads were then balanced using trimmomatic and assembled into contigs using spades (v3.9.1) genome assembler (bankevich et al., 2012) . putative viral contigs were identified by aligning translated contigs using diamond (v0.9.16.117) (buchfink et al., 2015) to the nr database. reference alignments of all the reads to the viral contigs were used to ensure that no assembly artefacts occurred and the contigs were trimmed appropriately using geneious (v10.1.3). assembled sequences are available on genbank (bioproject: prjna547678, genbank accession numbers: mk611979 -mk611996) and raw sequencing reads have been uploaded to the sequence read archive (samn11974798 -samn11974801).the phylogeny of each virus was resolved based on the predicted replicase (cav and spav) and orf1ab (psnv) amino acid sequences, as nucleotide sequences were too dissimilar to reliably align. alignments were generated with maftt (v7.42) (katoh and standley, 2013) employing the e-ins-i algorithm. this alignment algorithm is suited for evolutionarily distinct sequences with conserved motifs (such as viral rna polymerase) that are embedded within long unalignable residues. the novel salmon viruses were aligned with other viral genomes with shared amino acid similarity as detected by diamond (buchfink et al., 2015) . in addition, viral genomes which are known to be evolutionarily related to these were included. the multiple protein alignments were then used as to build phylogenies using phyml 3.0 (guindon et al., 2010) plugin within geneious with 100 bootstraps to generate branch support values. trees are mid-point rooted for clarity only, and do not necessarily represent the ancestral relationship of the viruses.assembled viral sequence contigs from the appropriate sample were imported into primer express v3.0.1 software (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma) where qpcr taqman assays were designed using default parameters (supplementary file 1) . these assays were then tested using the fluidigm biomark microfluidics-based qpcr system following the same protocol as described below except with the new viral primer pairs included in the sta step and controls. from these initial screens, the most consistent assay was chosen and apc standards were constructed to include in future fluidigm biomark qpcr microbe panels. the assay-specific theoretical limit of detection was calculated as previously described (miller et al., 2016) . the limit of detection was applied to categorise fish with amplifications above the 95% detection threshold that is the concentration of the analyte in the sample matrix that would be detected with high statistical certainty (95% of the time). epidemiological maps were generated using these data with the limit of detection applied. the maps were created within r using ggplot2 (wickham, 2016) and ggmap (kahle and wickham, 2013) .for all samples, after reverse transcription, resultant cdna was combined with the normalised dna in a ratio of 1:1 and used as the template for the specific target amplification (sta) step. the sta involves a pre-amplification of all primers to be run on a single dynamic array at low concentrations (0.2 mm of each of the primers), and upon completion, excess primers were removed by treating with exo-sap-it (affymetrix, santa clara, ca) according to manufacturer's instructions and then diluted 1:5 in dna re-suspension buffer (teknova, hollister, ca).the 96.96 gene expression dynamic array (fluidigm corporation, ca, us) was run according to the procedure outlined previously (miller et al., 2016) . specifically, a 5 ml template mixture was prepared for each sample containing 1 â taqman universal master mix (no ung), 1 â ge sample loading reagent (fluidigm pn 85000746) and each of diluted sta'd sample mixtures. five ml of assay mix was prepared with 1 â each of the appropriate taqman qpcr assays (agent probe in fam-mgb and artificial positive construct (apc) probe in ned-mgb, 10 mm of primers and 3 mm of probes) and 1 â assay loading reagent (fluidigm pn 85000736).controls were added prior to running the dynamic array (miller et al., 2016) . note, apc clones to all assays were contained in a single serially diluted pool, loaded last, minimising the likelihood of contamination of any single apc clone. once loading and mixing of the dynamic array was completed within the ifc hx controller, the array was transferred to the biomark hd instrument and processed using the ge 96 â 96 standard taqman program for qpcr which includes a hot start followed by 40 cycles at 95˚c for 15 s and 60˚c for 1 min (fluidigm corporation, ca, usa). the data were analysed with real-time pcr analysis software (fluidigm corporation, ca, usa).chinook smolt samples positive for psnv from 2014 were used for tissue localization ( figure 4a ). gill, liver, heart, kidney, and brain were individually homogenized, processed for rna extraction (as described above), and 1 ug normalised rna was used for reverse transcription. resultant cdna for each individual tissue was used as the template for psnv relative quantification using an abi 7900ht (abi) in 384-well optical plates. the qpcr reaction volume was 12 ml, which comprised 6 ml of 2x taqman gene expression master mix (abi pn 4369016), 4.3 ml of water, 0.22 ml of mixed forward and reverse primers (900 nm final concentration of each), 0.24 ml of each probe (200 nm final concentration; assay specific probe and apc control probe), and 1 ml of cdna template. temperature cycles included one 2 min hold (50˚c), a 10 min denaturation (95˚c), and 40 cycles of denaturation (95˚c for 15 s), annealing and extension (60˚c for 60 s). amplification conditions on the abi 7900 were not optimised for this platform, but rather closely reflected those used on the biomark platform. samples run on the abi did not undergo sta enrichment. standard curves were constructed using the same apc clone standards spiked in with chse dna as on the biomark. serial dilutions were made to obtain concentrations of 24, 1.2 â 102, 6 â 102, 3 â 103, 1.5 â 104, 1.5 â 105 copies of the clone per reaction. clone standards, unknown samples, positive and negative controls were all run in duplicate. the abi software calculates the relative copy number based upon the serial dilution of the standard curve.before the discovery of these viruses clinical signs of disease and histopathological lesions were assessed for approximately 230 farmed chinook salmon sampled in the audit program. consequently, gills, skeletal muscle, spleen, liver, heart, anterior and posterior kidney, pyloric caeca and brain from eleven samples of chinook (eight wild fish and three farmed fish) and ten sockeye (all wild fish) positive for spav were histopathologically analysed to assess the presence of lesions. all tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, dehydrated through an ascending gradient of alcohol solutions, embedded in paraffin wax, cut at 3.5 mm thickness, and stained with routine hematoxylin and eosin (h and e) for morphological evaluation by light microscope.rna-ish was performed using rnascope 2.5 hd duplex assay (advanced cell diagnostics, newark, california, usa, catalog# 322500) according to the manufacturer's instructions. briefly, consecutive sections of chinook and sockeye salmon samples utilised for the histopathological analysis were dewaxed by incubating for 60 min at 60˚c and endogenous peroxidases were quenched with hydrogen peroxide for 10 min at room temperature. slides were then boiled for 30 min in rnascope target retrieval reagents (advanced cell diagnostics, newark, california, usa) and incubated for 30 min in rnascope protease plus reagent prior to hybridization. the slides underwent hybridization with rnascope probes against a portion of spav-1 and spav-2 genome (advanced cell diagnostics, newark, california, usa, catalog #513591-c2 and 538881-c2, respectively). a rnascope probe against coil-p84 housekeeping gene in chinook salmon (advanced cell diagnostics, newark, california, usa, catalog #512391) was used as positive control probe to confirm the efficacy of the probes and the viability of the samples. two samples which were negative for spav-1 and spav-2 were used as negative controls to confirm absence of background and (or) non-specific cross-reactivity of the assay. signal amplification was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions, followed by counterstaining with gill's hematoxylin and visualisation by bright field microscopy.epidemics, such as the present covid-19 pandemic, usually spread at a rapid rate. standard models, e.g., the sir model [1] , have stressed on the importance of finding the susceptible cases to flatten the growth rate of the spread of infection as early as possible. in the present scientific world, location traces in the form of gps coordinates are logged by mobile device manufacturing and their operating systems developing companies, such as apple, samsung, google etc. however, due to the sensitive nature of this data, it is usually not shared with other organizations, mainly to protect individual privacy. however, in disaster situations, such as epidemics, data in the form of location traces of a community of people can potentially be helpful to proactively locate susceptible people from the community and enforce quarantine on them as early as possible.since procuring such data for the purpose of restricted use (possibly by government organizations) is difficult (time-consuming) due to the sensitive nature of the data, a strong case needs to be made that how could such data be useful in disaster situations. the aim of this article is to to demonstrate a proof-of-the-concept that with the availability of massive amounts of real check-in data, it is feasible to develop a scalable system that is both effective (in terms of identifying the susceptible people) and efficient (in terms of the time taken to do so). we believe that this proof-of-the-concept will encourage sharing (with restricted use) of such sensitive data in order to help mitigate disaster situations.in this article, we describe a software resource to efficiently (consuming a small run-time) locate a set of susceptible persons given a global database of user check-ins and a set of infected people. specifically, we describe a system, named infectracer 1 , that seeks to find out cases of close proximity of a person with another infected person. since a naive approach of pairwise checking on billions of check-in records is clearly not scalable, we employ an indexingbased solution (similar in principle to what is used in standard web search systems). first, we index billions of check-in records (analogous to indexing web pages). second, a number of records in this index is marked to be infected (due to available information of reported infection). third, given the location trace of each infected person (analogous to a keyword-based query executed on a web search system), we find out a list of susceptible people (analogous to the 10 blue links found by google in response to a query). merging the results for each infected person in a community thus gives a list of all susceptible people for whom appropriate measures can then be undertaken.as a different use-case, it is also possible for an individual enduser to formulate a query (comprised of a set of his personal checkin records) and then find out if he had come in close contact (in terms 1 https://github.com/gdebasis/infectracer of the space and time of his own check-ins) with another infected person. this individual can then impose appropriate measures on himself, such as self-isolation or visiting a gp. the objective of the retrieval approach is then to find the set of ghost-users given a real user, because as per the ground-truth of the simulated data these (pseudo) users came in close contact with a known infected user.in a real life situation, one has a massive database of user checkins of a population out of which it is known that a number of persons are infected. the goal is to rapidly find the candidate set of people who came in close contact with the infected. however, a brute force search to locate the candidates would take a huge time (since it is a quadratic time complexity operation).in our approach, we undertake an approximate nearest neighbor search approach to solve the problem. the two main research questions in this setup are:(1) how does efficiency (run-time) vary with the fraction of people infected, e.g., if 10% of a population gets infected, is this still a feasible solution? (2) what is the effectiveness of the approximate nearest neighbor search? since it is an approximate method, it can make mistakes. is there a satisfactory bound on the error rate? if you want to generate your own data (using a different simulation approach then read the appendix section). else to conduct experiments on the provided dataset, simply execute gunzip data/* wc -l data/data.txt wc -l data/data.txt.extyou should see the following output 266909 data/data.txt 1601454 data/data.txt.extthe indexing step enables a very fast retrieval of susceptible cases. to perform the indexing step you then need to execute python index_checkins.py -d data/data.txt.ext -i simusers.idx where you specify the data file (comprising the user-id, locations, time-offsets) and the index file to save the data.the next step is to retrieve the susceptible cases. the program simulates the case that a fraction of the population (whose data exists in the index already) has been infected. the 'retrieval' program formulates and executes a query for each of these infected people and reports a list of 3 most susceptible persons that came in close contact (in terms of space and time) with an infected person. you simply need to execute python retrieve_susceptibles.py -d data/data.txt.ext -i simusers.idx -s 0.01 -n 266909 where you specify the data file (to simulate infected people), the index file (to retrieve susceptible people) and the fraction infected (in the example set to 0.01 or 1%). the last argument is the number of real users in the data (this is useful for the program to compute the ground-truth information and compute recall).the program prints out output in the following format (the search time is reported in seconds): reading data file.. people in real quick time. exact brute force distance computation involves scanning through billions of check-in locations for each infected person (a new query), which is not scalable. pandemics can be better fought if susceptible people to catch an infection are quickly identified and quarantined. we believe that this tool can contribute to such a cause. we also observe that the recall achieved is satisfactory.to reproduce the simulation results with the code provided in the repository, download the foursquare 2 global check-in data in the project folder. after the files are downloaded execute the script 'prepdata.sh' to create the data file (named 'data.txt') by following command sh prepdata.shthe real foursquare check-in data is not directly applicable for our study because it is much less likely that two foursquare users would check-in to the same location (a point-of-interest, e.g. a museum/restaurant) at near about the same time. however, to model an infectious disease spread, we need to have users that came in close contact with each other (in terms of both space and time). we undertake a simple simulation model to generate pseudo-user interactions (likely contacts). first, we filter the 'data.txt' file to retain only one check-in per user. this makes the simulation algorithm easier to manage. next, for each user 'u' (having a unique id), we generate a set of mutually exclusive 'pseudo-users' or 'ghost-users', which comprises the ground-truth information for each user. note that since all the original/real user check-ins were sufficiently apart in space-time coordinates, it is likely that the neighbourhood of a user comprised of the ghost-user check-ins are also far apart (in which case one can rely with sufficient confidence on the simulated ground-truth data). for each user 'u' we generate p+n number of ghost-user in δ neighbourhood, out of them 'p' number of ghostusers are belong to ϵ neighbourhood, if user u is positively infected person then these 'p' ghost-users will be considered as vulnerable person, whom we need to identify, and remaining 'n' people will be considered as non-suspicious persons as they are in safe distance from the infected person 'u'. in figure 2 we presented a visualization of simulated 'ghost-users' corresponding to a real infected user (red person in the figure) .to generate the simulated data, simply execute sh addusers.sh data.txtto address the correctness of our algorithm we employ 'recall' as evaluation metric because the task of finding susceptible users is a recall-oriented task (false positives are acceptable but not the false negatives). while the parameter ε controls the number of people to whom the disease spreads from a single person, the parameter δ controls the number of false positives (intentionally introduced to see if the algorithm can filter out the true positives from the false ones). in table 1 , we present some results for our initial sets of experiments. table 1 : some preliminary results with variations in the number of infected persons (total number of persons in the dataset being 266909). the number of pseudo-susceptible users (the ground-truth) was set to 5 in the simulations. th e genus past eur ella , a t present in clud ed in bergey's manual (breed, murray & smith 1957 ) as a m ember of th e fami ly bruce lla ceae, is listed as co ntaining nine spcci.es , mu.llocida , se plicaemiae, haem olylica, anatipeslifer, pes tis, pfaj'fi, pseudotuberculosis, tular ensis and novicida. sin ce publication of th e current edition of th e manual th e las t two sp ec ies on this li s t ha ve on account of their special cu ltural requirements b een re-classifi ed as francisella lularens is ( 0 /sufiev, em elyan oua & danayum 1959, philips & owen 1961 ) and f. no vicicl a (o w en et a/ . 1963 ) , usin g lh c gen eri c n a me orig in a ll y sugges ted by dorof ee v (194 7) . three oth ers, pnsl. pj'affi 1 , septicaemiae and ana lip es lifer a rc of dubiou s s tatu s : lh c fir st is a lm ost indi s tin gui sh abl e fronj pas t. fjseud o tub erculosis whil e th e latter two , holh gc latinc-liqu cfi crs, arc exclud ed if on ly by th e manual's own definition of th e genu s which un equivoca lly s tates th at gelatin e is not liqu efi ed.th e g rouping of th e remainder, pasl. mullocida , h aemo lylica, pes /i s and pseudotub erclllos is, and of ce rtain more r ecentl y desc rib ed form s, prese nts further difficulti es. pas t. mullocida (s yn . pas t. septica) wh ich in clud es th e o rgani sm s of bov in e hacmorrhagic septi caemia , a common form of pneumoni a in pi gs, fowl chol era a nd a variety of other di sease co nditions in mammals and birds, though bioch emi ca ll y (s mith 1958) and se rologi call y (r oberts 194 7, carter 1955 , na miolw '~ murata 1961 hete rogen eo us , is u suall y rega rd ed as a sin gle species. lls rela tion ship with past, jw em olutica (newsom & cross 1932) , a g roup of b ac teria associa ted w ith som e form s of pn eumonia in cattl e and sh eep, is however not clear, a lthough th er e a z·e som e r esembl a n ces b etween th e two. th e qu es tion of th e sys tematic position and species r ank of past . haem olytica h as bee n furth e r co mplica ted by th e isolation from sh eep of two· di s tinct types, a and t (smith 1961 ) a nd, from th e human r espira tory tract, of another g roup of supe rfi ciall y simil a r stra ins 1 .th e amer ican type cultur·e coll ec ti o n h as n o p as t . pfaffi o n it s li s t s. th e ~a tr o n a l coll ecti on of type culture o f grea t brita in h as on e cultur e, l a bell ed 11 02, :~o l ated b y dr. f. pfaff fr om an un st a t ed s our·ce; it was r ece ived in 192 1 and is a a s t. pse ud o tub ercul os is g ro up i. · termed past . lw emolytica var. ureae (h enriksen & jyssum 1960 (h enriksen & jyssum , 1961 . past. pneumotropica, first obtained from the lungs of mice (.jawetz 1950) and later from humans (henriksen 1962) is also of uncertain s tatu s but resembl es in m any respects past. mullocida.the close relationship of the plaque bacillus, past. pestis, with past . pseudotub erculosis, causal agent of pseudotuberculosis in rodents, birds and other animals, has b een well auu1enticated (girard 1953 , pollilze r 1954 , thal 1956 , parnas 1961 ) but many properties of these two-species tend to set them apart from th e o-ther members of the genus. a furth er type isolated from various sources including pseudotuberculosis in chinchillas and lympadcnitis m esenterica in man and temporarily n amed " past eurella x" ( daniels&: goudz waard 1963) appears to be rela ted to but distinct from past ps eudotub erculosis (knapp&: thal1963 , m ollaret &: chevalier 1964 .the classification techniqu es revi ewed by sneath (1962) and variously term ed num erical, arithmetical, computer or adansonian taxonomy have been widely a pplied in bacterial systematics and arc of particular va lu e in the s tudy of h ete rogen eou s and closely r elated groups. on one occasion a collection of past. multocida strains was analysed ( talbot &: sneath 1960) but th e genus pas teurella has otherwise been n eglected. the present communication describes an attempt to elucidate th e r ela tionships between past. mullocida , haemolylica, haemolytica var. ureae, pneumotropica, pse udotub erculosis , pes tis and "x" by th e u sc of a num erical technique.25 s tr a in s we1·e u sed a nd fo 1· th e purpose o f the s tudy were temp o r a l'il y labelled a to y; deta il s o f th eir so urces a r c g ive n below: x. hum a n, plague vaccine s t1· ai n. g. girard, p a ri s, (ev. 76 ) past. haemolylica var. ureae y. hum a n , ozaen a. s. henriksen, oslo, (320/59 ) no cultures of past. p{a{{i, .~epticae miae or analipes li{cr w er e ava ilable for s tud y.all cultuj·cs w er e examined by the foll owing t es t s, th e m eth ods e mployed b eing th ose described by kau/'{mann 11 !j54) , r1. ving (1960 ) and edwards & ewing (1962 ) unl ess o th c nvi se s t a ted:motility (gard swa rm-pl a t es incub a t ed a t 22° c) ; di a m eter o f giant colonies on fi ve pe1· cent ox bl ood agar (ox o id , cm 55) plates, 3 mm thi c k, afte1· 24 hours a t 37 o c (chat·acte1·-states: 1.5 mm or l ess, 1.6-2.0 mm , 2.1 -2.5 mm , 2.6 mm or m or e) ; inc1·ease in gia nt colony s ize after a furth er 24 h ours in cub a ti on (character sl a t es : x 1.80 or l ess, x 1.81-2.10, x 2. 11 01· mo1·e) ; h aem olys is o n th e sa m e m edium; growth on ma cco nk ey's agar, in a mm onium citrate m edium ( fluid ) a nd in th e presence o f kcn ; ac ti o n o n litmu s milk; l\!.r. les t; production o f ind ole, acetoin , ca t al ase, ox id ase (using 0.5 per ce nt aqueous t. e tj·a m e th yl-p-ph c ny lc nc-d ia min eh y dj·ochloride), urease. gcl a tin asc and m·geninc, lysin e a nti ornithine dccaj'b oxy l ase; jli'o duction of ac id within 10 d ays f1·om aesculin , ado nitol , a m ygda lin , 1-a t·a htu osc, cellobi ose, dcxt1·in , dulcitol , fru ct ose, ga la cto se, glucose, glycerol , glycoge n, in os itol , inulin , lacto se, m altose, m a nnitol, m a nn ose, m el ezitose, j'affin osc, 1·hamnose, sali cin , so1·bitol, s t a r ch , suc,·ose, t1·eh a lose and xylose; ·width o f inhibiti o n zones a r ound oxo id multodi s ks containing ha cit1·acin 5 u , chl o rt c tj·acyclin e 10 1"!(, ery throm yc in 10 1"!(, fu1·azo lidon c 50 1"!(, n eo my cin 10 1-'g, nitro fm·a nlo in 10 1-'g, n ovobi ocin 5 i-'ll• ol ea nd om yc in 51"!(, oxyt e tra cyclin e 10 ill(, p eni cillin 1.5 u , polymyxin b 100-u, s trep t om yc in 10 1-'g, s ulph a fur azol c 100 1-'g a nd l clrucyc lin e 10 1-'g (chnract e1· s tat es : 0.5 mm l ess, 0' .6-3:0 mm , 3.1 mm or m o r e).th th e s t1·ai n s we1·e so rted manually by acc umulative p a i1·ing at f allin g simila rity level s, th e s impl es t o f th e m e th ods o f clu s te r analysi s describ ed b y sneath (1962 ), a nd. th e r esultant groupings de pi c ted di agi·amatically, elect1·onic or o th er co mputing d cv1ccs were not u sed a t a n y s t age in processing. sim il a i·ity matrix: 25 pasteu rell a stra in s.th e calcul a ted val u es of s ranged from 51 per cen t (strain s d and i ) to 97 per cent (b and d). in acco rd ance w ith the u sual practice in publications of this nature the cumbersome tab le of simil arity va lu es has been omitted but, u sing these va lu es, the stra ins were re-arranged into fi n al order v u "" y t q r s p j f g hi i m knox c b a c. fig . 1 , based on th e rea rranged lis t, is a sim il a rity matrix givin g in symbol form app roximation s of a ll s va lu es and thus sh owing c ross relat ion shi ps between s tra ins and clusters of stra in s. f ig. 2, a dendrogram, is also based on this li st.two main grou ps may be discerned, group 1 co nta inin g a ll stra ins of past. mull ocida, haemolylica, jw em olylica var. ureae and pneumolropica, and group 2, composed of past. pseudotubej·ctzlosis, "x" and pes tis. this is bes t seen in fig. 2 which sh ows th e two groups linkin g at 65 per cent simil arity. fig. 1 gives th e add ilio_ nal info rm ati on th a t th ere was little cruss rela ti onship between the two groups : th e rectangular area lv, li , ci. cv, conta in s only three entri es indicating simil arities g rea ter than 75 per cen t, and m os t are less th an 70 per cent.\vi thin the two main groups, the clusters r epresenting different spe- cies linked at 75 to 85 per cent similarity (fig. 2) . all strains of a given spec ies appeared in the same cluster in the re-arranged list and, excep t for tho se of past haemolytica, w ere li nked by s va lu es rang ing from 78 per cent ( mull ocida) to as high as 93-97 per cent (pseudotubercu losis). in genera l th e group 2 species were th e more homogen eou s, as shown in f ig. 1 by the denser shad ing of the triangu lar areas delin eating clusters, and were the more sh arply def in ecl.vvithin group 1, the two strains of past. lw emolylica type t formed a sma ll , homogen eou s subgroup (s = 92 per cent) bu t were linked to type a only at th e j'elatively low level of 76 per cent.although the principal object of th e s tudy was not to examine the differential reactions of t h e various pasteurella species, a summary of th e properties of the strains may be of valu e and is given in tables  1, 2 and 3.  table 1 shows the resu lts of a variety of biochem ical a nd other tests . past pseudotuberculosis and "pas t. x" reacted to these in a s imilar no comment on the reactions of past. pes tis and past. haemolylica var. ureae is made since only one strain of each wa exa min ed.fermentation r eactions arc su mmarized in tabl e 2. past. pseudotub erculosis and "past. x" differed co nsisten tl y in their action on aesculin, adonitol, cellobiose, rhamnose, sali cin and su c rose an d less con sis tentl y with sorbitol and sta rch , while past. mullocida and pneumotropica were di stinguishable by their t·cactions with dextrin, maltose, mannitol, s ta1·ch and xylose. cellobiose, ga lactose, glycogen, salicin and trehalose fermentation tes ts were among those for which typ es a and t of past. haemolylica gave different results.certain of th e antibioti c sen siti vity tes ts (table 3 ) arc: also of interest. past. pseudotuberculosis and "x" for example tended to be erythromycin a nd no vob iocin resistant, in co ntrast to mullocida a nd pneumotropica, while past. mull ocida and pneumotropica showed differences in th eir se nsitivity to sul ph afurazo le, oleandomycin a nd bacitracin.the major findin g of interes t was the clea r divis ion into group 1 (oxidase positive) and group 2 oxidase n egative). the low overall simila rity between the two groups gives justifi cation for van loghem 's (1945 loghem 's ( , 1946 proposal of a sepa rate yersinia, to accomodate the cau sa l organisms of plague a nd pseudotuberculosis, a nd in subsequ ent di scu ss ion these two species will be referred to as yersinia pestis and y. pseudotuberculosis respectively . thai (1954) considered that yersinia mi ght well be classified within the family enterobacteriaceae a nd thou gh th e present work offers n o help on thi s point it is noteworthy that sneath & cowa n (1958), in a more general com puter study of bacteria, placed y. pestis b etween escherichia and klebsiella.the results confirm frederiksen's (1964) ass ignment of th e so-call ed "pasteurella x" to the same genu s, yersinia; they also a fford valuab le supportive ev id en ce for its species statu s since th e str a in s exa mined formed a g roup whose homogen eity equall ed th at of y. pseudotub erculosis but which ·was as clea rl y differentiated from y. pestis and y. pse udotub erc ulos is as th ese two species were from each other (figs. 1 and 2). on g round s of prior description (schleifslein & coleman 1943) frederiksen favoured th e specifi c epithet enl erocoliticum for the "x" group but as the two ent erocolilicum stra ins avail able to him were atypical in producing indol e, a ch aracter of som e weight in co nventional taxo nomy, this question mi ght perhaps be left open for further stud y; mean· whil e "ycrsinia x" would serve as a conveni en t label.the residue, group 1 (oxid ase positive), m ay be regarded as co ns titutin g th e genus pasteurella. here th e differentia tion of th e subgroups is less sh arp tha n in group 2 ( yersinia), peripheral stra ins tending to possess interm edia te properties and thus cau sing the subgroups t o blend (see fig. 1) . past. mullocida appears as a somewhat h eterogeneou s cluster of s trains all sh ow in g a bout 85 per cent similarity with each other and probably therefor e accept able as a species. talbot & sneath ( 1960) in a computer stud y of past. nwllocida found no reason to subdi vid e the g roup but th eir coll ecti on of strains was by no m ea n s representative and several authors h ave noted biochemical and se rolog ical variations between strain s isolated from the differ ent h ost species (r oberts 1947 , cart er 1955 , smith 1958 , namioka & murata 1961 . further wo rk in the form of a detailed, comp a rative stud y of strains from a wide variety of m am m a lian and avian hosts is still needed to investi gate the va lidity of the formae speciales r ecognized by earlier authors und er such specific ep·ithets as bovis eptica, suis. eptica, aviseplica a nd others.the similarity qlatrix, fig. 1 , gives the better indication of th e affinities of past mzzltocida within group 1 and sh ows its main cross relationships to be with past. pneumotropica. (the impression given by fig. 2 may be mi slead ing h ere, since the dendrogram depends on simil arities of adjacent strains and clusters only. ) the single strain of past. haemolylica var. jli" eac appeared between pneumolropica and multocida, not with th e past. haemolytica group; .jones (1962) who examined 18 s trains of this bacterium also found its affinities with past. lw cm olytica to be slight and chose to call it past. ureae, a decis ion justified by the present r esults .the other finding of inter es t concern s past. haemolylica. smith (1961) r ecognized two types , a (a mbinosc positive) and t (trehalose positive) di stingui s hed by co lonial, ferm entative and oth er properti es . in this stud y , although the two types appeared side by side in th e final classification , they differ ed m a rkedly from each other, linkin g at as low as 75 per cent similarity (fig. 2) . the differ en ces were largely ferm entati ve (tabl e 2) but a more detail ed taxonomi c investiga tion of this group might well furni sh grounds for r ega rding a and t as sepa rate species rather than typ es of past. hacriwlylica.th e s tud y r eported, like others of its kind, illu strates the valu e of the numerical techniqu e in bacteri a l sys tem a tics as an a djunct to more conventional taxonomic procedures. thou gh tim e-con sumin g, the m ethod h ad severa l valu abl e features : it is objective (at leas t to the ex tent tha t selec tion of material and character s fot· examin a tion ca n b e rendered obj ective), it enabl es th e sys tem a ti s t to utilize, if h e wishes, all ava ilable data concerning his material rath er th an a few empirica lly ch osen properties, and th e a ffiniti es of the microorga nism s s tudi ed ca n be exp ressed in a quantitative form. provided u1e numb er of . strain s is k ep t r easo nably low, mu ch u seful work can be accompli shed without recourse to calcul a tin g dev ices . the m ax imum number of stra ins which mi ght conveni ently be h a ndl ed in thi s way would seem to be about 25, invo lving calculation of som e 300 values for s; for larger problems electronic computation is essential. l\fost work in thi s fi eld has so far b een confin ed to cultura l and bioch emi cal characteristics but there is no fundam enta l reaso n why serologica l, phage-typing and pathogenicity t es ts should not also be u sed; although th ere are difficulties in presenting th e results of su ch t es ts in a form suitabl e for analysis, th eir inclu sion would greatly increase th e u sefuln ess of th e techniqu e. sum mary 25 cultures, origin ally id entified as pasteurella species , were class ifi ed by a numeri cal (a dan sonian ) m ethod , and fell into two m ain groups. group 1 (ox idase positive) comprised pas t. mullocida a.nd pneumotropica, which were related , the two t ypes of past. haemolylica, a and t, which differ ed markedly from each other, a nd past. hacmolytica var. ureae; th e latter resembled past. pncumolropica rath er than past haemolytica and the n am e past urcae seem s m o re appropriate. it is su ggest ed that group 1 should be regarded as constituting the genu s pasteurella and that gmup 2 (ox idase n ega tive), conta inin g1 dr. zhang is the head of the center for infectious disease at huashan hospital of fudan university and serves as the leader of shanghai anti-covid-19 clinical expert team. 2 dr. zheng is the vice president of first people hospital, which is affiliated with shanghai jiaotong university. as the leader of the first shanghai medical assistance team to wuhan after the coronavirus outbreak beginning in january, he and his team worked on the frontlines battling the pandemic for 67 days and nights.novel coronavirus pneumonia caused by zoonotic 2019 novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) broke out in wuhan, china during december 2019, and was declared a pandemic by who on march 11, 2020. as of june 30, 2020, more than 10 million laboratory-confirmed cases and 500,000 deaths have been documented worldwide. among the tools used in the fight to contain such pandemics, forecast models are critical in helping support not only medical resource management decisions, but also in informing government policies, such as when and where "lock-down" and "stay-at-home" directives should be enacted and lifted.traditional epidemiology models use deterministic differential equations to forecast the population dynamics among various states, e.g., susceptible, exposed, infectious, or recovered in the well-known susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (seir) model recently used to model the covid-19 outbreak in wuhan (wu, leung, and leung 2020) . such models have also been expanded to include additional states for covid-19, e.g., giordano et al. (2020) . these models are by design aggregate models that track 3 https://www.brookings.edu/events/webcast-only-fighting-covid-19-experiences-and-lessons-from-thefrontlines-in-asia/ 4 https://www.caixinglobal.com/2020-04-02/fighting-covid-19-experiences-and-lessons-from-thefrontlines-in-asia-101537685.html 5 https://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202004/04/ws5e87f516a310128217284656.html 6 http://international.caixin.com/2020-03-14/101528645.html only the mean populations and do not incorporate stochastic effects directly and are highly sensitive to estimated parameters. for example, a key parameter is the basic reproductive number r0, or the rate (average number) at which one currently infected person infects new persons; thus, an r0 < 1 indicates that the epidemic is dying out. an inaccurate estimate of r0 is magnified in poor forecasts, leading to orders of magnitude differences in output.more recently, epidemiologists have been looking at agent-based models, very familiar to the operations research (or) community, where individuals can be modeled in detail, e.g., age, gender, health condition, and stochastic characteristics are directly incorporated. such models can be very useful for studying smaller communities, but since they typically require stochastic (monte carlo) simulation, may face computational challenges in scaling up to large cities or countries when the number of agents becomes large. also, if the amount of detailed individual data available is limited, then it would be challenging to estimate the model with any degree of confidence.we propose a discrete-time markov chain (dtmc) model, where the states of the chain are similar to the states in the compartmental models. since this dtmc modeling approach is analogous to a financial forecasting model called the transition matrix model (tmm), widely used in credit analysis (e.g., malik and thomas 2012, chen et. al 2018) , be it corporate rating migration, or individual consumer behavior, we will also refer to it as the tmm approach. for example, most major rating agencies, such as morningstar 7 , moody's investor services 8 , s&p global rating 9 , all publish their annual transition matrices for corporate rating migration, so corporate bond investors can estimate the likelihood of their investments getting downgraded in the future.transition matrices can also be stochastic, where the transition probabilities are dependent on both the individual characteristics and other external variables. for example, ife group (2012-2015 10 ) performed actuarial studies for the world's largest monoline insurance program, federal housing administration (fha)'s mutual mortgage insurance (mmi) fund, with approximately $2.7 trillion in assets under management. they provided forecasts for the fund's performance for as long as 37 years into the future. and tens of millions of mortgages are simulated for hundreds of paths, to calculate the future expected credit losses, and loss distribution. the calculation process is very time consuming, and can take as long as three hours, even after simulation optimization. transition matrices can also be hybrid (partially deterministic, partially stochastic), where some probabilities are constant, and some are time varying.transition matrix models share similarities with the above-mentioned agent-based model used in epidemiology study. our proposed approach has the following advantages: it incorporates stochastic features directly while retaining essentially the same states (compartments) as in the compartmental models; its discrete-time nature and degree of modeling detail make it straightforward to estimate model parameters from available data; it is computationally tractable both in terms of parameter estimation and in terms of model output analysis.the tmm approach has been shown to be flexible, robust, and accurate. from field experience, the tmm forecast results have been used to support real-time medical management decisions, allocate medical staff, and plan for business re-opening. here are some examples of the tmm forecasts used to support decision making in the fight against covid-19:• on february 10 th , the tmm forecast was adopted by the first shanghai medical assistance team (led by dr. zheng, one of this paper's authors) in wuhan's jinyintan hospital, the first designated hospital to take covid-19 patients in the world. the forecast has been used in preparing medical staff, icu beds, ventilators, and other critical care medical resources by central and provincial health commissions and local cdcs. • on february 14 th , we published an article 11 , indicating that under the cautiously optimal scenario, medical staff needed for taking care of severe and critical patients could reach 40,000-45,000. soon after this forecast, more medical assistance teams were dispatched from all over china to wuhan and other cities in hubei province. the total number of medical assistance teams reached 346, with more than 42,600 medical staff, on march 8 12 . • we also published our forecast for italy, south korea, and iran 13 on march 9 th , and channeled the italy forecast to one italian cabinet member on the same day, indicating a very dire situation with a forecast of more than 190,000 cases likely to occur by april end. the italian government implemented a national "lockdown" policy on the next day. • on february 15th, we forecasted the "back-to-normal" date for hubei province was most likely to be mid-april (4/13-4/20) 14 . on april 8 th , the "lock-down" in wuhan was lifted, and dr. zheng was able to come back to shanghai after fighting covid-19 for 67 days in the epicenter of wuhan.this paper is organized as follows. in section 2, we briefly discuss sir-type models, and discuss their major drawbacks. in section 3, we present the transition matrix model for covid-19 forecast and draw the analogy to transition matrix models used in the mortgage finance industry. in section 4, we discuss model robustness, accuracy, and flexibility of tmm, compared with sir-type models. in section 5, we discuss the effects of medical assistance teams dispatched from all over china to wuhan and other cities in hubei province, which effectively increased the cure rate and reduced the fatality rate, which is the major reason for the forecast errors for the cure and death tolls.prevailing epidemiological forecast models relevant to covid-19 are based on extensions of the susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (seir) model, which are deterministic continuous-time dynamic models that model the evolution of the aggregate population under consideration, where the population is separated into a fixed number of mutually exclusive "compartments". for example, in the original susceptible-infectious-recovered (sir) model of kermack and mckendrick (1927) , the compartments are defined as follows:• susceptible (s) -not infected yet;• infected (i) -assumed infectious with symptoms;• removed (r) -recovered (sometimes this is the definition) or deceased. the three compartments are represented by time-varying functions s(t), i(t), r(t), representing the (average) number in each compartment (state). the simplest set of ordinary differential equations (odes) modeling the dynamics is the following:which has just three parameters (a>0, r0>0, and the population n).this system can be solved analytically, but once any realistic features are incorporated into the model, which is the case for real-world applications, numerical simulation is required, e.g., the seir model of wu, leung, and leung (2020) used for covid-19. generally, compartmental models can be very effective epidemiology tools once a disease is well understood and in a mature phase. they are also good theoretical models for reference purposes, e.g., for comparing the infection rate of covid-19 against other respiratory infectious diseases such as sars and mers, by comparing the different values of r0, once accurate estimates of model parameters can be obtained. however, for forecasting purposes based on relatively sparse data, especially with regards to patient-level outcomes (as opposed to aggregate cases), they may exhibit high sensitivity to the estimated model parameters such as r0, limiting their robustness in forecasting in the early and middle stages of epidemics. in the seir model of wu, leung, and leung (2020) , r0 is estimated "using markov chain monte carlo methods with gibbs sampling and non-informative flat prior," so as we will shortly see, it is a more involved process than the parameter estimation process for our proposed approach, which relies directly on available empirical data.there are several serious drawbacks to sir-type models. the first drawback is its high sensitivity to model parameters, which poses serious challenges in terms of model robustness. a basic model driver in compartmental models (sir, seir, and their extensions) is the parameter r0, which indicates how contagious an infectious disease is, and is also referred to as the reproduction number, because it represents the average number of people who will contract the disease from one person with that disease.compartmental models are very sensitive to their model parameters, as well as initial conditions, so accurate estimates are crucial if these models are to be used for forecasting, which is not necessarily the primary usage for these types of models, especially in the early stages of a new outbreak. a wide range of r0 values were reported by different researchers, ranging from 2.0 to 5.7, as listed in table 1 below. given this level of difference, the forecasted number of infection cases will differ by 200% in one week, 800% in two weeks, and 8000% in one-month's time! if after 5 million infection cases and more than 330,000 deaths (may 21 data), scientists still cannot agree on the very fundamental parameter, that probably suggests there is no magic r0 that is universally applicable. and forecasts based on estimated r0 will be highly unstable. table 1 summarizes the forecast numbers of cumulative cases for the r0 estimates, assuming incubation period of 5.2 days, as estimated in li et al. (2020) . assuming the initial condition is 100 infection cases, within three weeks, forecasts vary from as low as 224 to as high as 3.5 million! even for the same paper, the forecast numbers can vary widely, and the max to min forecast ratio ranges from 5.3 to 720. this table clearly illustrates high parameter sensitivity exhibited by sir-type models. in one sir-extended model (giordano, blanchini, bruno, et al. 2020 ), the forecasts for italy's covid-19 outcome are 40%, 0.25%, and 0.09% of total population infected, thus the max/min ratio is close to 444 times, which basically make the forecast impractical for medical resource planning. secondly, sir-type models cannot easily incorporate npi measures. they generally assume that reduction of transportation and social interaction will reduce the coronavirus transmission gradually, which is reflected in the reduction of inflow and outflow of passengers, and transmissibility parameters such as r0. however, drastic npi measures taken by governments, such as lock-down of city blocks, communities, and mass quarantine of close contacts not only affect the inflow and outflow of people but also reduce the infection period, as close contacts are quickly tracked and quarantined. these features are not well captured by such models. as a result, some models over-forecast the infection cases by a large factor, e.g., wu et al. (2020a) estimated there would be 800,000 covid-19 cases in shanghai by the end of february. but due to massive testing and contact tracing efforts of more than 700 public health officials and 300,000 volunteers, all the close contacts of imported infection cases were quickly identified and quarantined. as a result, there was not a single case of community transmission and only 337 cases were reported by february end, for a metropolis of approximately 30 million people.in summary, from a practical perspective, if the goal of the forecasting model is to provide support for decisions such as medical resource planning, including staff (doctors, nurses, cleaning staff, etc.), supplies (icu beds, ventilators, n95 masks, etc.), and biohazardous waste disposal capacity, alternative modeling approaches may be more aligned with the available data for estimating model parameters. furthermore, adding new compartments in sir/seir models to allow differentiation between severe cases (requiring hospital beds) and critical cases (requiring icu beds and ventilators) results in additional model complexity and the introduction of even more parameters that are difficult to estimate from the available data.we model the patient treatment process as an absorbing markov chain with the following discrete states (analogous to compartments in the sir/seir traditional differential equation-based models): (under) medical observation, discharged, infected non-severe, infected severe, critical, death, and cured. the potential transitions between the states are shown in figure 1 , where self-loops are understood but omitted in the diagram for clarity, and the three states outside the treatment boxed labelled discharged, cured, and dead are absorbing states. note that "infected" (represented as a decision diamond) is not a separate state by itself in the dtmc model, as once a close contact is a confirmed case of infection, it is immediately classified as severe or non-severe. another state called infected asymptomatic could also be easily added to the model, but since there is sparse data to estimate this state 15 , we have not included it, and those patients would not have entered the medical observation state in the current version of the model.one of the main differences between the compartment models and the proposed modified dtmc model is that the former relies on parameters that have interpretative meanings, so specific data are required to estimate them, whereas the parameters of the proposed model depend only on transition probabilities between states defined based on medical classifications where available data can be used to estimate them directly. as an example, in the seir model of wu, leung, and leung (2020) , there are two parameters corresponding to the mean latent and infectious periods, which are challenging to estimate accurately from early data. note that the states "cured" and "discharged" could also have been put together into a single state (e.g., called "healthy"), but for purposes of parameter estimation and tracking statistics, the cure rate is of separate interest. the three states, discharged, deceased, and cured, are absorbing states, whereas the others are all transient states, assuming non-zero probabilities for existing transitions in the diagram. this is very similar to the transition matrix model (tmm) widely used in mortgage finance industry. in the following chart, we can see a normal (current) mortgage can go to early delinquency for missing 1-2 payments. if the borrower can make up the payments, then she can return to the normal state. if she keeps missing payments, her mortgage will be moved to the serious delinquency (sdq) department for special treatment. sometimes even the mortgage servicing will be transferred to a special servicer who is more sophisticated with sdq loan servicing. one option is to go through a loan modification via different payment reduction schemes, i.e., term extension, rate reduction, principal forgiveness and/or forbearance. if a borrower can successfully go through loan modification, she may return to the normal state. if a modification is not working out, the loan may go to default.the structures of figures 1 and 2 share many similarities, which convinced us to try a tmm approach to predict the covid-19 progression. the transition probabilities of the dtmc model can be either determined by regression or simply derived from empirical probabilities. table 2 compares sir-type models and the proposed tmm approach. the first application of tmm was to predict the covid-19 progression in china's hubei province, for which wuhan is the provincial capital city and which accounted for approximately 82% of the total reported covid-19 cases in the entire country. we adopted the empirical approach when estimating the model in our application to predicting the covid-19 spread in hubei province, china. specifically, we defined the states of the model as follows: l under medical observation (umo): state of a close contact of a potential infection case, who is traced, identified and put into medical observation, generally in a quarantine facility. from this state, the next day a patient may be confirmed with infection, discharged without infection, or remain umo (e.g., if the test results have not come back yet).l discharged (dis): terminal state for a close contact after undergoing medical observation, although one could possibly reenter as a close contact in the generation phase. l infected but non-severe (ins): state for a patient with mild symptoms (generally treated in makeshift shelter hospitals for hubei covid-19 patients). there are three possible states for the next day: cured, worsened condition to severe, or remaining non-severe. l infected and severe (ias): state for a patient who develops severe symptoms that require hospitalization and oxygen support (who 2020). there are again three possible states for the next day: worsening to critical, improvement to non-severe, or staying the same. l infected and critical (iac): state for a patient showing critical symptoms and requiring admission to an icu (who 2020). there are also three possible states for the next day: death, improvement to severe, staying the same. l cured (cu) and deceased (de) are two terminal states. for severe and critical cases, covid-19 can be complicated by the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), sepsis and septic shock, multiorgan failure, including acute kidney injury and cardiac injury. treatment for these patients is very complicated and requires extremely skilled specialists. for example, one of this paper's authors, dr. zheng led the first shanghai medical assistance team to wuhan, with 150 medical specialists. they worked at the icu in the world's first designated covid-19 hospital, jinyintan hospital, for 67 days, treating 170 severe and critical patients, with a cure rate of more than 80%. among these patients, 123 were critical cases, with a cure rate of 72.35%.note that "infected" itself is not an independent state, since the outcome is revealed instantaneously. in addition to these states, there are a few other covid-19 numbers worth mentioning, and we also provide forecasts for these numbers: l daily new confirmed cases (dncc) l cumulative confirmed cases (ccc) l daily active cases, or infected and under treatment (iat) thus, each day, a patient's state on day n is characterized by a state vector, defined as follows:, where the value of each element can be viewed as the probability of being in that state, so for each individual new close contact generated, the elements would sum to 1. for a given individual in a known state, the corresponding element would be equal to 1, and the other elements would be zero. for example, a patient currently in state "infected and non-severe" (ins) would have state vector [0 0 1 0 0 0 0]', and the next day, the state vector could remain the same or transition to either [0 0 0 1 0 0 0]' (severe) or [0 0 0 0 0 1 0]' (cured). thus, for the entire potentially exposed population, the state vector is defined as the count of people in each state. for example, at an early stage with say 100 patients being tested or treated, out of which 30 are awaiting testing results, 10 are critical, 10 are severe, and 50 are non-severe, the state vector would be as follows: if the population is limited and the transition matrix is stationary, the above formula will be sufficient in predicting all future outcomes, and of course, since it is an absorbing chain, all the transient states would eventually go to zero, and individuals already in the pool will eventually end up discharged, cured, or deceased (the absorbing states). in epidemic settings such as the covid-19 situation in early 2020, the population is not fixed, and additional individuals enter into the population via the generation of new close contacts in figure 1 . every day, new close contacts are added to the medical observation pool. in our modified dtmc model, these new individuals are generated as a proportion of the current new close contacts, i.e., viawhere the ncc change rate parameter is analogous to the basic reproductive number r0 parameter in sir-type models, in that when it is positive, the number of infected individuals in the population is increasing, corresponding to an r0 value greater than 1. just as when intervention measures cause r0 to eventually decrease below 1, correspondingly the ncc change rate will become negative. the ncc change rate is a critical parameter in our forecast, but it is readily estimated from available data, because it appears in a single equation, whereas r0 appears simultaneously in two (or more) equations in sir and seir models (e.g., the very simplest sir model in section 2 and the seir model of wu, leung, and leung 2020) .this dtmc state transition matrix model can be used for forecasts such as when the infection peak time (maximum number of active infection cases) occurs, as well as patient distributions (critical, severe, non-severe), which can be used for supporting medical resource allocation planning.although there are three hospitalization states -non-severe cases (ins), severe cases (ias), and critical cases (iac), for the covid-19 hubei province data, we had only the patient count in each state but not the actual pairwise transitions among these three states, so we combined the entire hospitalization period into a therapeutic state "infected and being treated" (iat) -also known as the daily active cases, which minimizes the need for estimation for those unobserved transitions. instead, we used the proportion of patients of each state (ins, ias, iac) within iat, to forecast the number of non-severe, severe, critical patients. in addition, the model also tracks daily new confirmed cases (dncc) and cumulative confirmed cases (ccc), since these metrics are tracked in actual data. from all these various data, the parameters of the model can be estimated directly as follows:• new close contacts (ncc) change rate : ancc = ln(ncc(t)/ncc(t-1)); • umo daily discharge rate: pumo,dis = dis(t)/umo(t-1); • pr {umo à iat}: pumo,iat = iat(t)/umo(t-1); • pr {iat à deceased}: piat,de = de(t) / iat(t-1); • pr {iatà cured}: piat,cu = cu(t) / iat(t-1). and as alluded to above, estimating the count of active severe cases and critical cases requires two additional parameters:• proportion of severe patients: ρs = ias(t)/ iat(t); • proportion of critical patients: ρc = iac(t)/ iat(t).we collected all data from caixin data (a subsidiary of caixin group), who retrieves the original data from china national health commission. we also collected supplementary data from hubei health commission, mainly for ias, iac count. the data period starts from 2019/12/31 and ends on 2020/2/8, updated on a daily basis. next, we describe how we choose parameters based on these observed empirical probabilities. the following empirical transition probabilities were observed on 2020/2/8. as mentioned in the previous section when describing the dtmc model, the ncc change rate (ancc) is closely linked to r0 but can be directly estimated from empirical data. this parameter has very strong policy implications, as it measures the effectiveness and efficiency of non-pharmaceutical intervention (npi) policies and actions. a positive value indicates that the npi measures are failing, as new close contacts are increasing, whereas a negative value indicates that the npi measures are effective, as fewer people are contracting the coronavirus on a daily basis. the higher the absolute value of the parameter, the more effective the npi measures are. since the 8-day empirical average of -6% is volatile, we considered three values for the model: -1%, -5%, -10%. we could not obtain the one-day probability of umo discharge rate in hubei province, so we used the national rates. since the one-day probability was 17%, and the 10-day moving weighted average was 13%, we tested the model with both 17% and 13%. in hubei province on 2/8, the one-day probability of transition from medical observation to confirmed infection was 2.15%, with a 10-day weighted average of 3.94%, so we used 4% as our model parameter. the latest single-day fatality rate was 0.35% and the 10-day moving weighted average was 0.63%. as this probability was declining, we used the latest value (0.35%) as our model parameter to be cautiously optimistic. the latest one-day cure rate was 1.40%, with a 10-day moving weighted average of 0.91%. as this probability was increasing, we used the latest value (1.40%) as our model parameter. from the historical data, the proportion of critical cases is relatively stable, whereas the proportion of severe cases fluctuated more. neither of these showed monotone behavior, so we used the average (14.50%, and 4.50%) of the latest value and 10-day moving weighted average as our model parameters to put more weight on recent observations. in addition to the parameter values just described, we considered six different scenarios to control for forecast uncertainty, based on three different values of the ncc change rate ancc (-10% optimistic, -5% cautiously optimistic, and -1% relatively pessimistic) and two different values of the umo discharge rate pumo,dis (17% and 10.5%, where 17% is more optimistic.). in wu, zheng, and chen (2020) , ncc change rate was assumed constant, whereas in follow-up work , it was allowed to be time-varying to capture changes due to npi implementations. table 4 summarizes the scenarios and parameter values used in our model. in this section, we discuss the model accuracy via back-testing in section 4.1. then we discuss model robustness, with respect to parameter sensitivity in section 4.2. afterwards we discuss model robustness, with respect to an external shock event in section 4.3. lastly, we discuss model flexibility in terms of adjusting to preventive policy effectiveness in section 4.4.after february, we performed back-testing for the forecast with the actual numbers. key performance metrics, such as peak value of critical cases, active cases, month end total cases were very close to model forecast under the "cautiously optimistic" scenario, which was picked by us as the most likely scenario. the relative errors of peak active cases, peak severe cases, peak critical cases, and february-end total cases were 1.0%, 20.1%, 7.5%, 1.3%, relative to the median of the two cautiously optimistic scenarios. regarding forecast accuracy, sir-type models generally do not perform very well. as mentioned earlier, giordano, blanchini, bruno, et al. (2020) gave three forecast scenarios for italy's covid-19 total infection case estimates while the medium case of 0.25% of total population infected is the closest to the actual observation. the actual infection case on 4/30 was 0.34% of total population infected, so the closest forecast was off by about 36% at the end of april. in zheng, wu, yao, et al. (2020) , the tmm forecast for italy's total infected cases on 4/30 was 192,593, while the actual was 203,591, with an 6% error. regarding the peak of daily new cases, the tmm forecast was 6,681 on 3/23, while the actual peak occurred on 3/22, with 6,557 cases, or a 2% error. the forecast and back-testing are provided in appendix i.we performed similar parameter sensitivity practice for the tmm used for the hubei forecast in wu et al. (2020b) . two major parameters are the ncc change rate, and medical release rate, where ncc change rate takes values of -10%, -5%, and -1%, and medical release rate takes values of -17% and -10.5%.as can be seen from the following table, while the major parameter ncc_change_rate changes from -10% to -1% (a ten-fold difference), and the umo discharge rate change from 17% to 10.5%, the max/min ratio is merely 1.5. this suggests the tmm approach is more robust than sir-type models. next, we take a more detailed look by considering the daily dynamics through the end of february. on february 12 th , three days after we published our forecast , the hubei province health commission changed the diagnosis criteria, and allowed those patients who do not have definitive pcr test results but have clinical symptoms (mainly ct scan results) to be counted as confirmed covid-19 cases. this changed criterion increased the daily incremental cases by more than 14,000, resulting in the spike shown in figure 3 .the spike led us to consider a drastic revision of our model's future forecasts to adjust for the changed criterion. however, after carefully examining the implication of the new criteria, we decided not to change our forecast, as we concluded the change would not have too much impact on the forecast results for cumulative cases in the long term, because it just confirmed suspected cases earlier, most of which would eventually turn into confirmed cases. as long as our forecasts for new close contacts are not heavily affected, the model should be robust to handle this surge in incremental covid-19 cases. indeed, figure 4 confirms that the incremental close contacts did not change dramatically as a result of the spike in new confirmed cases. as a result, the cumulative cases are back in the range of the two s2 scenarios by the end of february, as shown in figure 5 . also, the critical case numbers are not heavily impacted by the spike, as there is an intermediate state of severe cases between critical cases and new cases; thus, the spike in new cases is not immediately reflected in the critical case numbers, so figure 6 shows the model forecasts up to february 22 are good, after which the results of the arrival of medical assistance teams led to a dramatic decrease. on the other hand, the severe cases forecasts are clearly impacted by the surge, since there is no middle state between the severe state and new cases, and that resulted in moderate underprediction for the much of the month, as shown in figure 7 .the arrival of armies of medical assistance teams throughout the hubei province in february clearly had a beneficial effect on reducing mortality rates and conversely increasing cure rates in hubei province, shown in figures 8 and 9 , respectively, where the model forecasts gradually and consistently diverge for both of these cumulative counts (cured and deceased) throughout the month. this is discussed further in the next section. as a result, the numbers of cumulative cases are back in the range of s2 scenarios at the end of february. also, the number of critical cases is not heavily impacted by the surge, as there is an intermediate state of severe cases between critical cases and new cases, so the surge in new cases is not immediately reflected in the number of critical cases, and our model performed very well before february 22, as seen in figure 6 .the severe cases forecast is impacted by the surge, since there is no middle state between the severe state and new case, and that resulted in moderate underprediction for the about 10 days, as seen in figure 7 .the death toll forecast was also close to actual, until late february, as indicated in figure 8 . the improvement in february was mainly driven by the efforts of medical assistance teams dispatched from other provinces to hubei, and will be described in more detail in section 5. the cure forecast probably has the biggest forecast error, seen in figure 9 . this is also due to dramatic improvements in medical resources and care, closely related to the previous explanation for the decrease in death rate, so this will also be described in section 5. as illustrated earlier, the tmm approach can forecast all states in the covid-19 pandemic, including the intermediate states (medical observation, mild cases, severe cases, critical cases), and the terminal states (discharge from medical observation, cure, death). the model does not include asymptomatic cases. the inclusion of asymptomatic cases can be readily handled by adding one more intermediate state, although good data are not available for the asymptomatic population. also, the major purpose of the model is to predict the active cases, i.e., patients who are receiving treatment in medical facilities, and the patient distribution of severe/critical cases to better manage medical resources. thus, adding an additional asymptomatic state not only unnecessarily complicates the model, but also compromises its robustness.in another paper , we drew from experience in hubei and other provinces of china during the early stages of the covid-19 outbreak and improved our model to incorporate different levels of preventive policy effectiveness and made forecasts for italy, south korea, iran. later, we applied the model to forecast the covid-19 progression in other countries, including spain, france, germany, and united states. most of these models performed reasonably well, and the forecasts are included in appendices i & ii. we also estimate the preventive policy effectiveness parameter in appendix iii.in the very early stages of the covid-19 outbreak, the daily fatality rate of severe (including critical) cases was extremely high, around 8%. on chinese new year's eve, january 24 th , the first medical assistance team was dispatched from shanghai to wuhan to help the local medical staff. on february 10 th , the tmm forecast was adopted by the first shanghai medical assistance team (led by dr. zheng, one of this paper's authors) in wuhan's jinyintan hospital, the first designated hospital to take covid-19 patients in the world. the forecast has been used in preparing medical staff, icu beds, ventilators, and other critical care medical resources by central and provincial health commissions and local centers of disease control. for example, on february 14 th , we published an article 16 indicating that under the cautiously optimal scenario, medical staff needed for taking care of severe and critical patients could reach 40,000-45,000. soon after this forecast, more medical assistance teams were dispatched from all over china to wuhan and other hubei province cities, reaching more than 42,000 medical staff by the beginning of march. on february 15th, we forecasted the "back-to-normal" date most likely to be mid-april 17 , but due to the extraordinary efforts of these medical assistance teams, the lock-down in wuhan was lifted on april 8th (and dr. zheng was able to return to shanghai after fighting covid-19 for 67 days in the epicenter of wuhan).during january/february 2020, two hospitals with 1,900 beds were built within two weeks to accept severe and critical patients. as time went on, medical staff became more experienced treating covid-19. all these measures helped to reduce the daily severe case fatality rate to a very low level of 0.5%, an almost 94% drop from the very early stages, illustrated in figure 10 . the model forecasts in figure 8 use the higher fatality rate observed on 2/8, resulting in higher death toll forecasts.moreover, starting from 2/5, 16 fangcang shelter hospitals were put into use, accepting more than 12,000 non-severe patients in wuhan. these shelter hospitals were converted from stadiums, shopping malls, convention centers, etc. this measure moved the treatment window earlier and placed patients with mild symptoms in these makeshift hospitals to receive proper medical treatment rather than self-quarantining at home, where there would be significantly heightened risk of family transmission and community transmission. the daily cure rate of non-severe cases increased dramatically from the level of 1% in late january to close to 10% in late february, illustrated in figure 11 . the model forecasts in figure 9 use the much lower cure rate observed on 2/8, resulting in the significantly lower cure forecasts. finally, as a result of all these timely measures, the peak of actual active cases was moved earlier to february 16, instead of the date originally estimated as between 3/1-3/7, as illustrated in figure 12 . we introduced a new discrete-time markov chain (dtmc) transition matrix model (tmm) for modeling epidemic outbreaks that directly incorporates stochastic behavior. parameter estimation for the model is straightforward, so we applied the model using covid-19 data from hubei province, for which it provided reasonably accurate forecasts, with sensitivity analysis illustrating its robustness properties in terms of far less sensitivity to parameter misspecification than traditional epidemiological compartmental models. as a result, the model has been adopted by the first shanghai assistance medical team in wuhan's jinyintan hospital, the first designated hospital to take covid-19 patients in the world, and the forecasts have been used for preparing and allocating medical staff, icu beds, ventilators, and other critical care medical resources and for supporting medical management decisions.the proposed approach can forecast all the states in the covid-19 pandemic, including the intermediate states (medical observation, mild cases, severe cases, critical cases), and the terminal states (discharged from medical observation, cured, deceased). as mentioned earlier in the model formulation, the model applied here to covid-19 does not include asymptomatic cases, which can be readily handled by adding one more intermediate state, but was purposely excluded since the data for the asymptomatic population is not available. also, the major purpose of the model is to predict active cases, i.e., patients who are receiving treatment in medical facilities, and the patient distribution of severe/critical cases to better manage medical resources.similar to the finance academic community where the literature on asset pricing is dominated by stochastic partial differential equation models for which stylized models are used to generated closed-form solution and big-picture insights, the prevalent modeling paradigm in the academic epidemiological research literature also values stylized models, in this case based on systems of deterministic ordinary differential equations. the first author has spent over two decades in the finance industry and implemented many models for investment decisions, and believes that the model proposed here follows the same vein of industry relying on more practically implementable models. the proposed approach is a preliminary attempt to advocate models that are tailored to the available data and anticipated usage of the model in decision making, whether it be strategic policy, supply chain planning, or hospital operations. thus, the focus is on flexibility, ease of implementation, and robustness rather than theoretical elegance.in terms of ongoing work, zheng et al. (2020) draws upon the experience from hubei and other provinces in china during the early stages of the covid-19 outbreak to improve the tmm model by incorporating different levels of preventive policy efficiency. this led to forecasts for italy, south korea, and iran, which were posted online 18 on march 9. the forecasts for italy were channeled to an italian cabinet member on the same day, indicating a very dire situation with forecast of more than 190,000 likely cases by april end with weak intervention efforts. the italian government implemented a national "lock-down" policy on the next day.the best covid-19 forecast model probably does not exist, but some models are more useful than others, depending on the types of decision being supported. traditional epidemiology models, like the sir-type models rely heavily on estimated parameters such as r0 and could have very wide forecast ranges over a relatively short period, due to high sensitivity and wide confidence intervals of key parameters. they are useful for reference purposes but may have limited ability in supporting real-time decision making. tmm models are mainly driven by empirical probabilities, and do not require complicated estimation procedures. in our case study, they are shown to be more robust, flexible, and accurate, once the clinical experts are involved in the modeling process. they know more about fighting covid-19 in the frontline. their experience is of immeasurable value not only in saving lives directly, but also for building models that can help save lives through efficient allocation of medical resources.in the eyes of a hammer, everything is a nail. but it's not true, so don't go with the "standard" models in the academic literature if they don't fit the use. fit your best model to the data, not the other way around.due to the recent climate of financial instability, the discussion of evaluation methodologies for high-speed rail (hsr) projects is now a key issue for transport planners, both in countries without hsr and in those with long experience in hsr operation. the transport project evaluation methodologies and public sector investment assessment in the literature review follow two main frameworks: broad cba (cost benefit analysis) and multi-criteria analysis (mca). both methodologies must consider all the economic activities that are reinforced by hsr, among other variables.cba methodologies are most frequently used in the literature for estimating hsr profitability (coto-millan et al., 2007; de rus and nombela, 2007; betancor and llobet, 2015) , although in the last ten years mca has become more widespread as a method for evaluating transport projects, and offers the possibility of including indirect and long-term hsr impacts (guirao and campa, 2015) . macharis and bernardin (2015) reported that -after a more general category-passenger transport (such as hsr rail) and notably mobility management are the public administrations' most common types of transport project decisions handled by mca. within the cba methodologies, de rus and nombela (2007) were the first to calculate the required minimum level of demand at which investment in hsr could be considered profitable from a social perspective. they used real costs of construction, maintenance and rolling stock for european hsr lines currently in operation, in addition to potential time savings, standard time values and predicted growth in demand. although this approach has been generally accepted by the scientific community, the wider economic benefits of high speed are clearly hard to gauge, as they are swamped by manynot inconsiderableexternal factors such as territorial impacts. territorial impacts may lead directly to social and economic benefits, and despite the problems of estimating and analysis, some attempts have been made to study them, especially in the case of spain (gutierrez, 2001; ureña et al., 2009; ortega et al., 2012) .in this context, the tourism impact of hsr implementation has recently emerged as an important issue in the scientific literature, as it represents a possible benefit variable to support new investment in hsr lines. however tourism is a complex phenomenon (sinclair and stabler, 1997; caccomo and solonandrasana, 2001) , as it is a form of complementary demand for which the main components are transport, food, and accommodation (morley, 1992) , making it very difficult to separate the effects of transport on tourism from other territorial effects.the literature review described in section 2 shows how tourism has affected hsr demand. little research has been done so far, even in europe, to estimate empirically the opposite effect: how tourism indicators are affected by new hsr lines. many authors agree that the expansion of hsr networks and services brings new opportunities to cities, metropolitan areas, coastal and mountain regions, and other types of tourist destinations in europe. it also reinforces the expectations of local tourism stakeholders by improving the attractiveness of places for visitors, although no systematic patterns have been observed. most of the published studies describe specific hsr experiences (case studies) and some observed hsr effects on tourism, but do not lead to a general conclusion.china is one of the scenarios that has focused the highest number of methodologies to assess the impact of hsr on tourism (wang et al., 2012; chen and haynes, 2012; chen and haynes, 2015) . today, china has the world's longest hsr network (with over 19,000 km of track in service in january 2016), more than the rest of the world's high-speed rail tracks combined. when the chinese government began construction of hsr in 2004, the main objective was to promote economic growth through four north-south and four west-east hsr trunk lines. since the completion of a few sectional mainline projects, the impact of hsr on tourism demand has increasingly come under the spotlight, given its political significance for regional economic growth.using a multivariate panel analysis, chen and haynes were the first to investigate the impact of a high-speed rail system on the tourism industry, selecting only the numbers of incoming foreign tourists and tourism revenue as the dependent variables. the results of this research confirmed that the fledgling high-speed rail services significantly boosted tourism in china between 1999 and 2010, and that provinces with high-speed rail services were likely to have approximately 20% more foreign arrivals and 25% higher tourism revenues than provinces without these systems. concurrently with chen and haynes's first empirical works on hsr impacts on china's tourism industry, the research of wang et al. (2012) demonstrated that the chinese hsr system affected tourism demand by redistributing tourism centres and transforming the tourist market. however, this research methodology was not empirical so did not contribute to understanding the impact of hsr on tourism; chen and haynes were thus the first to address this issue in the literature.the most logical first step in the search for a new and systematic tool to evaluate the integral impact of hsr on the tourism industry would therefore appear to be to establish the suitability of applying the chinese experience to other european case studies. spain, with over 20 years of hsr experience, and operating the longest hsr network in europe(3100 km), is a good scenario for the analysis and application of this panel data model, as tourism is one of the country's key industries, accounting for 10.9% of its gross domestic product (gdp) for the year 2014 (ine, 2016a) .this paper contributes to the limited existing literature by analysing the empirical impact of a hsr network on tourism indicators. the added value of this research lies in the fact that it is the first assessment of the multivariate panel data model tested in the chinese scenario when applied to a european country: spain. the paper is divided into the following sections: section 2 contains a review of the literature on tourism and hsr. section 3 gives an explanatory description of the tourism sector in china and spain. section 4 includes the model equations, the application to the spanish case and a discussion of the results obtained compared to china. section 5 presents a study of the city of toledo (spain) at the local level to analyse in greater detail the "circular and cumulative causation" between hsr and the evolution of tourism indicators. finally, the main conclusions are summarised in section 6.the link between tourism and transportation infrastructure has been widely analysed in the literature (chew, 1987; martin and witt, 1988; abeyratne, 1993; seetanah, 2007, 2008) . there is a general consensus that an increase in accessibility to the tourism destination usually leads to an increase in tourism demand (della corte et al., 2013) , and is a critical factor in the overall number of tourists a destination receives. once the tourist has arrived at the destination, local transportation is also an important issue as it facilitates tourist mobility, although it has received less attention.there is practically no literature on empirical methodologies to assess the effects of new hsr lines on tourism. high-speed rail (hsr) is a relatively new mode of transportation in the contemporary transportation technology revolution, and has been promoted in various countries around the world (albalate and bel, 2012) . in contrast, the extensive literature on the link between air transportation and tourism (dobruszkes and mondou, 2013) has produced evidence of the significant effect of low-cost airlines on tourist outcomes (rey et al., 2011) . most of the published studies in the literature on the tourism effects of hsr describe specific hsr experiences (study cases) and some observed hsr effects on tourism, but do not point to a systemic methodology or a general conclusion (guirao and soler, 2008; bazin et al., 2011) . in hsr commuting relations it is important to take account of the fact that the possibility of returning within the same day can reduce the average length of the visitors' stay. this type of hsr service is quite common in some european countries such as france and spain (see ureña et al., 2009) , and may affect the interpretation of the main statistical tourism outputs (tourism revenues, number of overstays, etc.). for example, bazin et al. (2011) studied the impact of hsr on urban and business tourism in french cities connected to paris such as lyon, just 2 h away from paris by tgv (train à grande vitesse), and discovered that the daily expenditure of business tourists may be up to four times greater than that of leisure travellers. bazin et al. (2011) pointed out that business tourism can be a key strategic orientation for cities and large urban areas, but the possibility of returning within the same day affects the average length of the tourists' stay. guirao and soler (2008) used a survey approach to examine the impact of tourism in toledo on traffic from the new madrid-toledo line. commuters and tourists were the main users of the line and tourism accounted for over 30% of weekday hsr ridership.apart from these isolated case studies applied to hsr, we can distinguish three types of tools that are generally used to study the impact of transportation on the tourism industry: the choice destination approach, economic geography models, and econometric models to estimate tourism demand. the choice destination approach is based on rugg's model. rugg (1973) was the first to introduce a time constraint, the modification of the budget due to the transportation cost between alternative destinations, and the modification of the time constraint resulting from including the time cost between alternative destinations. assuming that tourists usually have a fixed holiday budget, prideaux (2000) developed a model to demonstrate the dynamic relationship between holiday expenditure categories and the tourists' point of origin. the first approach to study the effects of hsr on tourist destination choice was developed by delaplace et al. (2014) in paris and rome. the data collected from a survey of tourists in both cities were used for a quantitative analysis using regression models. the results showed that hsr influenced destination choice in different ways in the two cities, with tourism in paris being more dependent on hsr. this interesting contribution was continued by pagliara et al. (2014 pagliara et al. ( , 2015 using madrid as a case study, and also based on a revealed preference survey. the preliminary results showed that the spanish hsr system appeared to have a significant effect on tourists' decision to visit other cities connected to madrid, but the choice of madrid as a tourist destination (as in rome) was not influenced by the presence of hsr. although these results are quite illustrative, the notion that destination choice may be influenced by hsr does not prove that the construction of a new line will automatically increase total tourism demand or tourist sector revenues at the destination (accommodation, restaurants, museums and so on).economic geography models, like the core-periphery model introduced by krugman (1991) , have also played an important role. krugman (1991) showed that a change in transport cost induces a change in the intensity of spatial competition, which in turn influences the location of firms. masson and petiot (2009) used krugman's core-periphery model to explore the influence of the southern european high-speed railway line (hsr) between perpignan (france) and barcelona (spain) on both tourism activity and economic development. using krugman's theory (through a theoretical rather than an empirical discussion), they argued that hsr can facilitate the development of tourism activities, and particularly business and urban tourism. crampon (1966) first introduced the gravitational model into tourism research, and the only application of this approach to a hsr scenario dates from 2012: the projected effects (not validated) of chinese hsr on tourism were examined by applying the iso-tourist line from a time-space replacement concept (wang et al., 2012) . they forecasted the effects of the hsr network on three aspects: the redistribution and transformation of the tourist market, market competition on a larger scale, and the reallocation of the urban tourism centre. however, the results obtained by wang et al. were not empirical, and it is therefore important to quantify the increase in tourism demand in order to assess the influence of the new infrastructure.in addition to economic geography models and the choice destination approach, the existing literature on tourism demand is dominated by econometric models that tend to follow a single-equation time-series approach (lim, 1997; song and li, 2008; song and wong, 2003) . the only approach of this type applied to hsr corridors was developed by chen and haynes (2012) . through a multivariate panel analysis, they investigated the impact of chinese high-speed rail systems on the tourism industry, selecting only the numbers of incoming foreign tourists and tourism revenue as the dependent variables. chen and haynes classified their independent variables into three groups: "policy variables" (all related to rail infrastructure and ridership), "origin variables" (related to the economic relation between foreign countries of origin and destinations) and "destination variables" (local site features or special events at the destination). although the model does not consider domestic tourism (this data was not publicly available in china at the provincial level), the results of the research confirmed that policy variables have major significance in the model. the study concluded that during the period between 1999 and 2010, chinese provinces with high-speed rail services were likely to have approximately 20% more foreign arrivals and 25% higher tourism revenues than provinces without these systems. the authors empirically demonstrated that the presence of hsr services in each province boosted tourism in china more significantly than other local variables such as the number of world heritage sites or museums. in 2015, a variation of this original model was developed by chen and haynes over the period 1997-2012, but using a panel of 21 source countries for tourism in china instead of provincial data. other explanatory variables such as network density or number of stations were added in the equations and produced similar results, particularly for the network density variable.although this type of model is fairly dependent on the availability of a solid database, and despite the fact that the chinese context is quite different from the european one, the results obtained and the consistency of the model structure used by haynes and chen have encouraged the authors of this paper to extrapolate the methodology to the spanish case study. the chinese scenario is among the most sustained attempts to systematize the study of hsr impact on tourism (see also wang et al., 2012) and in the literature, the transfer of this methodology to the european scenario could be an important step towards obtaining extrapolated results.section 3 below examines the main figures representing the structure of tourism in china and spain in order to understand and discuss the results of applying the model to the spanish case study in section 4.spain is one of the most popular tourist destinations worldwide, occupying fourth place in 2014 in the world ranking of tourist arrivals, behind france, the us and china (unwto, 2015) . while spain has traditionally been a tourist country, international tourism arrivals in china started to grow after the open door policy was implemented in 1979. from 1980 to 2014, china's inbound tourist arrivals and tourism revenues grew at an average annual rate of 9.6 and 11% respectively (calculated with data from the national tourism administration of china nta, 2002 . currently ranking as the world's third most popular tourist destination, china is expected to attract 130 million tourists annually by 2020, taking it to number one (unwto, 2015) .the physical environment positively influences the choice of spain for tourism. the country has 108 days per year of temperatures above 25°c, and 2451 h of sunshineequivalent to 6.7 h of sun a day. it boasts 8000 km of coastline, and the highest number of blue flag beaches in the world. this is why leisure and holidays (84%) are the main motivations for the majority of arrivals. moreover, 24% of spanish territory is classified as a protected area (third in the european ranking) and it has a total of 45 world heritage monuments and sites, the third highest in the world.unlike spain, where "sun and beach" holidays are the main motivation for the majority of arrivals, tourist resources in china fall into two main groups: natural sites, and historical and cultural sites. china has 50 world heritage sites to date; of these 35 are cultural sites, 11 are natural sites, and 4 are cultural and natural (mixed) sites, ranking second in the world after italy (51 world heritage sites). most are located in coastal regions, which are also the hub of chinese economic power. china's mounting economic growth since 1978 has caused increasing disparity between the coastal and inland areas in almost all the major economic indicators (pedroni and yao, 2006) . in spite of the concentration of tourist resources in the coastal areas, the country's vast extension (9,597,000 km 2 versus 505,000 km 2 of spain) means the distances between them are higher than in spain, and aviation and hsr lines are the main transportation infrastructures on which foreign tourism is based.china's vast extension also means that seasonal weather conditions vary widely from region to region (with temperatures as low as −40°c in the north and as high as 40°c in the south), with major climate shifts limiting tourism during certain months of the year. another issue influencing tourism demand is the high level of air pollution in china's major urban and industrialised areas, which may aggravate visitors' bronchial, sinus or asthmatic conditions. there is scientific evidence (beckena et al., 2016) of the damage to destinations and risk perception that urban air pollution is causing to china's inbound tourism.the origin countries of foreign tourism in both spain and china are predominantly the neighbouring states. in case of spain, united kingdom (19.40%), germany (16.87%), france (11.16%) and italy (5.4%) accounted for more than 42% of tourist arrivals in 2014 (ine, 2016b) . eu residents provide 71% of international arrivals, in addition to a notable contingent of us (4.80%) and russian (2.98%) tourists. spain also receives tourists with a high degree of loyalty to the destination, measured as the number of times international tourists have visited the country on previous occasions: in 2012 the official frontur report from the instituto turístico español (ite, 2013a) showed that 80.2% of visitors claimed to have visited spain before.in 2014, 26.3608 million foreigners visited china, of whom the largest groupa total of 16.3313 millionwere asian (61.95%) (national bureau of statistics of china, 2015), most from south korea (25.6%). the second largest share was from europe, which contributed 5.5143 million visitors, accounting for 20.90% of the total. while the numbers of asian visitors is currently growing, the european market, headed by russia, has been declining since 2013. in third position was the us market, with a total of 2.7603 million visitors (10.5%). most visitors came to china for sightseeing or leisure activities, while the second largest group comprised those attending conferences and business meetings, accounting for 20.69%.domestic tourism also reveals differences between spain and china. in 2014, spain registered a balanced split between non-resident (51%) and resident (49%) tourists, while domestic tourism in china represented over 90% of total visitors (national bureau of statistics of china, 2016). there are also significant differences in the evolution of these figures: in spain, the balance of non-resident and resident tourists has remained stable, with a slight increase in the number of foreign visitors. the number of domestic tourists in china was 3611 million in 2014, with a 200% increase in the period 2004-2014 (1102 million in 2004) due to the country's vast population and rising standard of living, particularly in the last 30 years. it should be noted that in most official national databases the number of foreign and domestic tourists is linked only to hotel stays (overnights), meaning that the total domestic visitors in both cases (china and spain) has been undervalued, as there is no information on the number of tourists staying in apartments or second homes.in terms of the territorial distribution of hsr ( fig. 1 ) and its relation with the main local tourist destinations, spain's network is structurally radial, with the centre located in madrid. it has been extended mainly towards the more populated eastern and southern cities (barcelona, valencia, malaga, seville), most of which are located in the coastal area with high tourist attractiveness. china's network is concentrated mainly in the coastal area (where all the major economic indicators are higher), with four north-south lines, two of which are fully operative (beijing-harbin; beijing-shanghai) and the rest still in only partial operation (beijing-guangzhou-shenzhen-hong kong; hangzhou-fuzhou-shenzhen). these four lines cover most of the tourist destinations (beijing, hong kong and shanghai) or can be used as transport links to other remote destinations. there are also two east-west lines which are still only partially operated (qingdao-taiyuan; shanghai-wuhan-chengdu).the key issue in the interurban transport system when comparing china to spain concerns road infrastructure and conventional trains. although china has invested heavily in transport infrastructure in the last twenty years, spain had more than double the density of high-capacity roads (0.030 km/km 2 ) than china (0.012 km/km 2 ) in 2015. if hsr is considered together with conventional interurban rail lines, this figure is even slightly higher (0.031 versus 0.012). this partly explains why the impact of hsr on the current transport system could be even higher in china than in spain. accessibility to the main tourist destinations in spain before hsr started operation in 1992 was already guaranteed at a medium-high quality level. at the urban level, europe has a longstanding tradition of using and operating public transport, and spanish public transit is of significantly higher quality than its chinese counterpart, particularly in medium and small sized cities. while transport and tourism infrastructure in spain is balanced between inland and coastal provinces, many inland destinations in china have natural resources that could potentially represent a regional competitive advantage were they endowed with the necessary infrastructure conditions, but have had difficulty in drawing both domestic and international visitors away from the popular coastal gateways (jackson, 2006) .although the chinese tourism sector is currently experiencing one of its highest ever levels of growth, public strategies to improve quality levels in the tourism offer are new and being implemented at great speed. spain, in its traditional role as a "beach holiday" country, has developed innovative tourism policies by promoting inland areas of the country and diversifying into other spheres such as rural and urban tourism, gastronomy, shopping and health tourism (oecd, 2016). there is even a spanish rural tourism promotion plan for 2014, which is already producing results, and a shopping tourism plan focused on asian markets. a new health tourism cluster has also been created, and is promoted internationally through the combined efforts of several ministries and the private sector. other areas of diversification include golf tourism, ecotourism and religious tourism.spain can therefore be said to have a greater density of tourist destinations per km 2 , in addition to a wider diversification of tourism activities than china. this latter point is interesting from a territorial point of view, as hsr rail is not a permeable transport infrastructure (like roads), and the "city to city" link conditions the type of tourism itinerary. the density of transport infrastructure is also higher in spain, thereby increasing the accessibility to tourist destinations and supporting the hsr system by using hsr stations as useful intermodal nodes.the following section describes the application of a multivariate panel data analysis to spain at the provincial level to explain the evolution of several tourism indicators, using hsr among other destination variables. the results are compared to those obtained in the chinese case study using the same methodology, and the final analysis is supported by the tourism data provided in this section.spain, with more than 20 years of hsr experience and 3100 km of track in service, offers a good opportunity to apply the chen and haynes model (2012), even though the direct application of this methodology to the spanish case poses several difficulties, mainly concerning the adaptation of the statistical database to the variables used in the chinese case study. the proposed model is based on a multivariate panel analysis at the provincial level. spain is administratively divided into 17 regions and 50 provinces, and all the provinces were considered (except those located outside the iberian peninsula), in the period from 1999 to 2015. as the first hsr line started operation in 1992 (madrid-seville branch) and was the only one (table 1) for over ten years, this period covers most of the spanish hsr experience. fig. 1 differences between the spanish and chinese hsr networks, and shows the extension of both countries.the criteria used to select the tourism output (the dependent variable) in china focused on the availability of the related database: number of foreign tourist arrivals (taf) and tourism revenue (tr). two different modelsusing the same structure but a different tourism outputwere tested in order to quantify the impact of hsr lines on tourism in china. it should be noted that data (at the provincial level) for domestic tourism demand was not publicly available so was not considered in the research. table 2 shows the independent variables (and their main descriptive statistics) used by chen and haynes in their model. they are classified into "policy variables", "origin variables" and "destination variables". the policy variables are all related to rail transportation features such as:• passenger rail ridership (rider), measured in 10,000 people per year, introduced to capture the impact of the generic passenger railway system, including both normal and high speed trains. • length of railway (rlen), introduced as an alternative to reflect the impact of railway investment, as no actual investment data is available at the provincial level. • a hsr dummy variable (hsr) equal to one for the year and province that has a hsr service, and zero otherwise. this variable is perhaps the most relevant data to measure hsr effects, as there were no itemised statistics available per line and province.origin and destination variables are always present in demand transport models together with impedance variables (travel time or distance). as origin variables the authors use only the annual nominal exchange rate (exc) from the us dollar to the rmb (renminbi), the chinese legal tender. a long list of destination variables is given in table 2 , which can be perfectly extrapolated to case studies in other countries (hotels, number of world heritage sites, museums, and others). although this model does not consider trip features such as travel time or distance, it does take into account impedance variables such as the number of accidental pollution leaks (pollution) or the dummy variable associated to the outbreak of sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) which originated in china in 2003. two special event dummy variables (bjolympic, shexpo) were also introduced to monitor the influence of the 2008 beijing olympic games and the 2010 shanghai expo respectively.in accordance with this approach, tourism output (the dependent variable) in spain focused on similar tourism demand variables, bearing in mind that the spanish national institute of statistics (ine) uses the term "number of tourists" rather than "tourist arrivals" to quantify the tourists visiting each province, and calculates the figures from the data for overnight stays provided by hotels. unlike china, data on domestic tourism demand is publicly available in spain at the provincial level, so the tourism output variables selected in the spanish case study were: foreign tourists, domestic tourists and revenues from foreign tourism. in table 3 these variables are referred to as: tanr (number of non-resident tourists), tar (number of resident tourist) and tr (tourism revenue from non-resident tourists in spain). three different models using the same structure but different tourism outputs were tested in order to quantify the impact of hsr lines on spanish tourism.the following policy variables (all related to rail transportation features) were used in the spanish case study: rlen quantifies the national rail length (including the conventional rail network), rider is the total rail ridership (including conventional rail traffic) and hsr (dummy variable) is the hsr presence at the provincial level. it was more difficult to design the origin variables. as only foreign tourism was considered in the chinese study, the authors used the annual nominal exchange rate (exc) from the us dollar to the rmb (renminbi). according to statistics from ine (ine, 2016b), in 2014 more than 71% of foreign tourism in spain came from the european union. our exchange variable is therefore defined as the difference between the provincial and european (eurozone) gdp, referring to 1999 currency to avoid the effect of inflation. the origin of domestic tourism is more difficult to determine, and no origin variable related to gdp was used. table 3 shows the rest of the independent variables (and their main descriptive statistics) added to the spanish models. apart from the local economic variable used in the chinese case studythe gross provincial product per capita (gpppc) -, significant efforts were made to collect the same multidimensional features of local tourism used in the original model: number of world heritage sites (whs), starred restaurants (resta), museums (museum) and public libraries (lib). art galleries are included in the museum database. in the spanish case, 4-star hotels are the most popular with both domestic and foreign visitors (ine, 2016b) , so the hotel variable (hotel) included the number of 4-and 5star hotels (unlike the chinese case study). in the time period considered (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) , no special impedance variables were taken into account, such as accidental pollution leaks or the outbreak of sars in china. it was decided to overlook these variables as no comparable cases have occurred in spain, and owing to the high degree of loyalty of visitors to spain (spanish institute of tourism, 2012). instead, three special dummy variables relating to major international cultural and sporting events were introduced as attracting indicators: the forum 2004 in barcelona (forum), the america's cup in valencia in 2007 (amcup), and the international exhibition in zaragoza in 2008 (expoz). these events have been recognised for their relevance in the research work of renau (2010) in spain. there is another additional variable in the model (called year), not linked to origin, destination or policy features, which groups the sequence of observations and measures time trends.before designing the equations for the spanish case study, the preliminary multicollinearity data analysis found high correlations between the explanatory variables rider and rlen. as in chen and haynes' research, this led the authors to present two separate models per output variable. eqs. 1 and 2 show the general structure of the multivariate analysis using panel data. subindices i and t denote destination provinces and time period respectively, while y represents the dependent variables (number of domestic tourists, number of foreign tourists and total foreign tourist revenue). a fixed effects model (fe) was developed for the unobserved individual effect in a panel model, consisting of a statistical model that represents the observed quantities in terms of explanatory variables that are treated as if the quantities were non-random. table 4 shows the determinants of the number of foreign tourists in spain compared with the results of chen and haynes (2012) . model 1 considers rail ridership as a policy variable, while model 2 uses network length. this multivariate analysis methodology is repeated again in table 5 to study the determinants of foreign tourism revenue in spain (model 3 with ridership, model 4 with length). table 6 shows the results for the output "number of domestic tourists" obtained from two multivariate analysis applied to the spanish panel data, one using the independent variable rlen and the other using rider.in the case of foreign tourism (models 1, 2, 3 and 4), the first finding in the spanish study concerns local site characteristics such as the number of 5-star hotels, starred restaurants, world heritage sites and museums. these variables were not statistically significant in china in any of the models designed, while in spain some indicators such as the hotel variable are statistically significant at the 1% level. the hotel variable coefficients in the four models range between 0.941 and 0.591. other local site characteristics such as museums and libraries show high levels of significance, although their coefficients are much lower than for the hotel variables. these results are consistent with the spanish offer at the destination: not only "beach and sun" attractions, but a greater diversification of areas such as rural and urban tourism, gastronomy, shopping, museums, health tourism, eco-tourism and others, all concentrated in the same physical location or within an easily accessible radius of influence using the transport system. our table 4 determinants of the number of foreign tourists in spain. comparison with chen and haynes' results (2012 explanation is that in spain the "destination" variables benefit from reinforcement and favourable complementarity, in addition to the fact that the country has a higher density of tourist destinations per km 2 compared to china. the reason the hotel coefficient is higher in spain than in china is probably due to the convenience for tourists of being able to choose between a range of different four-and five-star hotel chains at the destination, and to the way these hotels are linked to a range of other tourist attractions. the insignificant results for the event variables are similar for the chinese and the spanish experience. special events such as the 2008 beijing olympic games and the 2010 shanghai expo, and the number of pollution incidents are not statistically significant even at the 1% level. however, the dummy year of 2003 in chinarepresenting that year's sars epidemicis highly statistically significant. this is to be expected since sars had a fairly strong negative effect on foreign tourist arrivals. no deterrent event variable was introduced in the spanish model, and the results for the special events are consistent with the chinese ones.among all the explanatory variables, it is not surprising to find that the gross provincial product per capita (gpppc) variable has a significant impact on the number of foreign tourists in both china and spain. in china, the elasticities are 0.459 and 0.495, which can be interpreted as a 1% increase in the gpppc, associated to an increase of around 0.46 to 0.5% in foreign tourist arrivals. in spain, the level of significance of the variable is even higher (1%) for foreign tourism output, and the coefficients are higher, which supports the idea that visitors appreciate not only the presence of "sun and beach" at the destination but also the socioeconomic environment. in contrast, the gross provincial product per capita is not significant for the spanish revenue output models, which may mean that tourist expenditure in spain is not dependent on the price levels in the province (in richer provinces hotels and restaurants tend to be more expensive).another key determinant is the exchange rate (exc), which represents the price level of tourism in comparison with the countries of origin. in both china and spain the positive sign of this coefficient indicates that when the price levels in the destination are lower than in the origin countries, the number of visitors increases. this coefficient was higher in the chinese than in the spanish case study, indicating that tourism in spain is less sensitive to price levels. another argument that supports this idea is that most tourists in spain come from other eu nations (71% in 2014), and the differences in these price levels are less pronounced. the low sensitivity to price levels is reinforced by the fact that spain tends to welcome tourists with a high degree of loyalty to the destination. in the revenue models (in both china and spain), the exchange rate is less significant as a variable than the gross provincial product per capita (gpppc), and is unimportant in terms of significance.while ridership and length are not significant among railway variables, the dummy indicator hsr plays an important role in the chinese and spanish foreign tourism models, especially in the case of tourism revenues. the hsr variable is statistically significant at the 1% significance level in the chinese and spanish revenue models (table 5) , but only 5% significant in the demand models (number of foreign tourists) ( table 4 ). these results are the key findings of this paper, and indicate that spanish provinces with hsr receive more foreign tourists and more revenues than provinces without this service. nevertheless, the hsr coefficients for spain are much lower than for china, showing that the effect of hsr is much higher in china than in spain. the highest coefficient in the revenue models in china is around 0.25, implying that figures in parentheses are standard deviation. ***,**,* denote coefficients significant at the 1%, 5% and 10% statistical level respectively. provinces with hsr services were likely to have approximately 25% more tourism revenues than provinces without. in spain, the highest coefficient (see models 3 and 4 in table 4 ) is 0.017, indicating that provinces with hsr services were likely to have 1.7% more tourism revenues. the highest hsr coefficient in china in foreign tourism demand models (models 1 and 2, table 4 ) is around 0.201, suggesting that provinces with hsr services were likely to have 20.1% more tourists, while this percentage is only 1.3% in spain. these results can be explained by the fact that, as mentioned in section 3, distances between tourist destinations are greater in china than in spain, and the transport alternative to hsr is a lower density network (high-capacity roads and conventional trains). accessibility to the main tourist destinations in spain before hsr started operation in 1992 was already guaranteed at a mediumhigh quality level, and the impact of hsr on tourism indicators is thus less important.in the case of domestic tourists (models 5 and 6) and local site features -as in the case of foreign tourists-, the only significant variables are the number of hotels and the number of libraries (this latter with a low coefficient). neither the variable whs or museum is statistically significant, highlighting the importance of spanish coastal destinations for this type of tourism. in support of this argument, data from the familitur report (ite, 2013b) revealed that the three major destinations for domestic tourism were andalusia, catalonia and the region of valencia, accounting for almost 50% of visitor share. these three regions have a considerable extension of coastline, and the temperatures are excellent for "sun and beach" tourism. the only significant event variable is expozaragoza in 2008, with a high significance (1%). nevertheless, as in the foreign tourism models, the value of the coefficient (between 0.003 and 0.005) reveals its low real impact on the domestic tourist sector. the economic explanatory variable gpppc has the highest significances (lower than 1% in both rider and rlen models), and high coefficients (0.214 and 0.215 respectively). this finding underlines the considerable importance of tourism for the spanish provincial economy and its significant and positive role for regional economic growth, as noted by previous studies (cortés-jiménes, 2008) .in relation to policy variables, neither ridership nor the length and existence of hsr are significant, (not even at 10% significance). according to the familitur report (ite, 2013b), in 2012 the private car represented over 84% of the modal split in domestic tourist trips, indicating that the improvement in the speed and comfort of the rail network is not sufficient on its own to modify the mobility patterns of spanish families. this may be explained by the higher costs perceived by travellers in comparison with the private car when more than one person is travelling (which is very common in family tourism patterns).in conclusion, the results show that hsr in spain has positively affected foreign tourism outputs (especially revenues), although its impact is not as important as in china. there is no clear evidence of its effect on domestic tourism. hsr impacts on tourism in a country like china, where the alternative interurban transport network is less developed than in europe, are of a higher magnitude and easier to detect with an econometric model.further research is required on the use of hsr variables, which need to describe not only the existence of lines at the provincial level, but also the connectivity and territorial distribution of the hsr network, and the service conditions offered by the operating companies (fares, timetables and frequency). for example, in spain and france, some hsr lines are used by commuters, and in some cases tourism is an important trip purpose. none of these commuter visitors stay in hotels, and therefore do not appear as tourists in the official statistics. in conclusion, the model would benefit from a greater level of data disaggregation and a better understanding of the territorial distribution of hsr lines through new explanatory variables relating hsr operating conditions, and including new tourism outputs based on overstays in hotels and number of visitors to the main tourism attractions, or disaggregated revenues per sector (restaurants, museums and others).apart from the abovementioned drawbacks of the methodology applied to both china and spain, there is another issue arising from this research. after applying the model to the spanish case, it still remains to be clarified whether hsr development and tourism have a simultaneous effect and whether this system is really endogenous. although a "circular and cumulative causation" between hsr demand and tourism demand is always expected in these territorial systems, it is essential to separate any crossover effects, or at least identify which has the greater impact (hsr on tourism indicators, or tourism on hsr demand). in the next section a simple empirical analysis of endogeneity is applied to a specific spanish destination (toledo), in order to demonstrate by example that this separation can be achieved and derived from empirical data.in order to test endogeneity between hsr demand and tourism indicators, we selected toledo, a mid-sized tourist city in central spain with almost 78,000 inhabitants, as a case study. toledo is located 70 km south of madrid and has been linked to madrid by a hsr line since november 2005. it was declared a world heritage site by the unesco in 1986 for its extensive cultural and monumental heritage, and the historical coexistence of christian, muslim and jewish cultures. before construction work started on the new line, rail traffic in the previous conventional line was not insignificant (over 800,000 passengers in 2002), and rose to over 1,300,000 passengers in this decade, as shown in fig. 2 . the madrid-toledo hsr line is successful in terms of traffic, not only due to the hsr link to madrid and its attractiveness to tourists, but also because of the type of service provided by the operating company. since 2005, toledo has enjoyed avant services with over ten daily hsr shuttles (30 min' travel time), and is also favoured by the availability of monthly tickets which are economically highly advantageous compared to ordinary one-way tickets. if the schedules are compatible with work timetables, this frequency enables their use for commuting, with the result that over 60% of users of the madrid-toledo hsr line have been found to be commuters.the first indicator we quantified was the evolution of the number of tourists in toledo, drawing on tourism data provided by the spanish national statistical institute (ine), covering 50 provinces and a limited number of tourist points within a time span of 15 years (1998) (1999) (2000) (2001) (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) ). data at the provincial level were used to calibrate the multivariate regression model in section 3, but more detailed data are available as toledo is considered a tourist point by the ine. in both database sources, the "number of tourists" indicator is calculated by the ine using only the results of the survey of hotel occupancy, so this analysis must take into account that visitors to these cities who do not spend at least one night at the destination are still not registered as "tourists". in the case of toledo the number of tourists comprises two thirds of the visitors at the provincial level, and disaggregation between resident and non-resident tourists in spain has only been available from 2005 in the tourist point ine database.in addition to the evolution of the number of tourists in toledo, we studied other indicators such as the number of museum visitors (htickets sold) and its evolution before and after the implementation of the new hsr line. as the church of santo tométhe home of the famous painting "the burial of the count of orgaz"is one of the most visited museums in the city, we recorded the data for tickets sold per year. fig. 2a also shows the number of tourists and overnight stays in toledo (before and after the inauguration of hsr services in 2005) together with the evolution of rail passengers and the main museum visitors. an average of 26% of tourists are non-resident in spain.there was a sharp rise in the number of travellers after the opening of the hsr line. bearing in mind that commuters account for 60% of hsr traffic, the increase in both the number of tourists and number of visitors to the santo tomé museum is much more limited and appears to be more a result of other factors, revealing no clear evidence of the influence of hsr on these tourism variables. fig. 2b shows the evolution of the number of resident and non-resident tourists in the province of toledo for 2000-2013 (the period 2000-2005 is not covered at this disaggregation level by the ine's urban database of tourist points). there is no appreciable influence of hsr on residents, while a slight positive influence can be observed on non-residents. this is consistent with the results of the model applied to spain in section 4: foreign tourism in spain is more positively affected by hsr than domestic tourism, although the spanish financial crisis (which started in 2005) may have influenced this fact. the fall in all the variables since 2008, with a greater impact on the number of visitors to the santo tomé museum than on the number of travellers or the number of visitors, can be explained by the spanish financial and socioeconomic climate after 2005.this data context highlights the difficulties of assessing the influence of hsr on tourism indicators, but reveals that its influence may even be negligible for some types of tourism. in the case of toledo, the road infrastructure between madrid and toledo is perfectly covered by both a free dual carriageway (a-42) and a toll motorway (ap-41), while regular bus services offer frequencies of 30 min and travel times of 60 min (hsr travel time is 30 min with a frequency of 60 min). there are multiple alternatives to hsr.in order to find more empirical evidence on "circular and cumulative causation", we also analysed the evolution of the number of restaurant licenses in the city of toledo from 2000 (530 licenses) to 2013 (800 licenses), which revealed that the annual growth rate was fairly continuous regardless of the opening of the hsr line. additionally, it is difficult to assess in the short term whether hsr contributes to improving the image of a tourist city. apart from the madrid-seville line, most spanish hsr lines have been in operation for under ten years, which is too soon to analyse or model this kind of indirect effect. toledo was an important spanish tourism destination before 2005, despite its lack of hsr. in any case, the improvement of the image of a tourist city in the long run will be seen in the increase in most of the tourism outputs and revenues.after studying the local case of toledo, we can state that within this "cause-effect" relation the effect of tourism on hsr demand may be much more important than the effect of hsr infrastructure on tourism indicators. evidently, tourism will always be an object of trip generation, but when a tourism destination already has a high rate of transport accessibility, a new mode does not add a large number of new tourists but produces a new transport modal split in the access to destination. this example shows how this cause-effect relation may be totally unbalanced towards the benefits of hsr demand. in other destinations, this fact will depend on the alternative transport modes for accessing the tourist destination and the type of tourism affected -resident or nonresident-as they clearly behave in a different way. lastly, local strategies to promote tourism are also important. toledo is clearly a cultural destination, but gastronomy, and rural and ecotourism have also been publicly promoted at the provincial level in recent years. hsr is only one of the possible "gateways to the destination", but depending on the country and the province concerned, this can either be the optimal gateway, or simply a complement to other existing ones.the literature review shows how tourism has affected hsr demand, although little research has been done to date to empirically estimate the opposite effect of hsr on tourism indicators. chen and haynes were the first to study this impact through a multivariate panel analysis, obtaining positive results and showing that in the period between 1999 and 2010, fledgling high-speed rail services significantly boosted tourism in china. the analysis considered only foreign rather than domestic tourism due to the lack of data available at the provincial level.the most effective first step for obtaining a systematic tool to evaluate the integral impact of hsr on the tourism industry is to conduct a detailed study of the applicability of the chinese experience. with spain and china coming top of the rankings for the most visited tourist countries (along with france and the us) and the longest hsr networks in operation, spain can be considered the most suitable country for validating this tool. the tourism structure in both china and spain was studied in order to define the main differences and gain a greater understanding of the modelling results, and the following key issues were identified: tourism motivations, levels of transport accessibility to tourism destinations, weather limitations, evolution of domestic tourism and public strategies to promote tourism. the authors have made considerable efforts to adapt the spanish database to the variables defined in the chinese analysis, introducing new variables when necessary and eliminating any that are not applicable to the spanish scenario. six different models were designed using the following dependent variables: number of foreign visitors, number of domestic visitors and foreign revenue. for each dependent variable, two equations were defined (one using ridership and other railway length).the rail variables (the key issue in this research) show that while ridership and length are not really significant, the hsr dummy variable plays a clear positive role in the increase in both the number of foreign tourist arrivals and revenues, and is highly significant with a positive sign. nevertheless, the coefficients obtained for spain are surprisingly low compared to china, and reveal that spanish provinces with hsr receive about 1.3% more tourists and 1.7% more revenues (20.1% and 25.0% respectively for china). these differences are explained by the greater distances between tourist destinations in china, combined with the fact that the transport alternative to hsr is a lower density network (high-capacity roads and conventional trains). accessibility to the main tourist destinations in spain before hsr started operation in 1992 was already guaranteed at a medium-high quality level, and hsr impact on tourism indicators is thus less important.in the case of domestic tourism, neither ridership nor the length and existence of hsr are significant, (not even at 10% significance). it can therefore be concluded that the improvement in the speed and comfort of the journey implied by hsr is not sufficient on its own to modify the mobility patterns of spanish residents (in 2012 the private car represented over 84% of the modal split in domestic tourist trips), and that the higher costs perceived by travellers in comparison with the private car is crucial in determining domestic mobility patterns.another interesting finding deriving from the modelling is the differing significance of the destination variables (number of hotels, museums and libraries) that positively influence foreign tourism in spain but not in china, suggesting that the reinforcement and favourable complementarity of the "destination" variables are especially good public strategies to promote tourism. combined with a higher density of tourist destinations per km 2 and greater accessibility to them, this defines a different scenario for spain, in which hsr plays a secondary role.notwithstanding the limitations of the tourism databases (focused mainly on hotel occupancy), further research is required on the use of hsr variables, which should describein addition to the existence of lines at the provincial levelthe connectivity and territorial distribution of the hsr network, and the service conditions offered by the operating companies (fares, timetables and frequency). the model's ability to analyse "circular and cumulative causation" between hsr and tourism has also been discussed as a drawback of the methodology used in this research. although a cause-effect analysis would require a longer-term database series than available at present (over 20 years of hsr operation), this approach could be a first step towards improving the modelling. in order to clarify this issue, the authors have completed their research with a local case study (toledo, spain) with more disaggregated data to demonstrate how the effect of hsr on tourism indicators is ultimately less important than the impact of tourism on hsr demand.for some countries and cities, tourism can represent a real priority and a source of income, and the validated methodology presented in this paper will ultimately provide authorities and policymakers with useful tools to estimate the real contribution to tourism development of a new or existing hsr line, without requiring the use of an a priori unfounded hypothesis.da wird ein testverfahren, das nach daten der orf-website (vom 11.05.2020) bei denen von 316.508 getesteten, davon praktisch 100 % risikopatienten, lediglich 15.804 (4,99 %) positiv waren, als goldstandard mit jedenfalls nicht bekannter externer validierung, etwa durch antikörpertests oder eben auch klinisch, hingenommen. man kennt offiziell weder sensitivität noch spezifität, und wie hoch die positiven oder negativen vorhersagewerte wirklich wären, kann man sich bei einer prävalenz der corona-infektion von etwa 0,18 % (fast eine orphan disease) wirklich ausrechnen.noch dazu, wo man aus einzelfallbeobachtungen weiß, dass wechselnde testergebnisse gar nicht so selten vorkommen, und dass das fenster für den positiven nachweis ein relativ kurzes ist. ganz rezent stellt dazu eine publikation in den annals of internal medicine fest, dass die wahrscheinlichkeit eines falsch-negativen resultates des pcr-testes am expositionstag 100 %, zu symptomenbeginn – ungefähr vier tage später – 38 %, und drei tage nach symptombeginn 20 % beträgt, danach würde sie wieder ansteigen. „vorsicht ist geboten bei der interpretation von rt-pcr tests für die sars-cov-2-infektion – besonders in der frühen infektionsphase, wenn man diese ergebnisse als basis für vorsichtsmaßnahmen zur infektionsvorbeugung heranzieht. wenn der klinische verdacht hoch ist, kann die infektion durch den negativen rt-pcr test alleine nicht ausgeschlossen werden“, schließen die autoren [1].die anzahl der positiven testergebnisse in österreich bedeutete im umkehrschluss ja auch, dass bei entsprechender symptomkonstellation eine 95 %-wahrscheinlichkeit auf das nicht-vorliegen einer corona-infektion besteht.einem anderen ergebnis, nämlich der seropositivität von nur fünf prozent der bevölkerung in infektions-hotspots wird dagegen keinerlei aufmerksamkeit geschenkt. denn das würde schlicht und herb bedeuten, dass die kontagiosität dieses virus eine relativ überschaubare ist.und warum dieser verzicht auf evidenz? erstens gibt es nicht wirklich viel gesichertes über die coronavirus-infektion, zum anderen, es kommt angst ins spiel beziehungsweise wird sie ins spiel gebracht. und diese angst lässt eine nüchterne betrachtung, aus welchen gründen immer, nicht recht zu.angst lässt eine nüchterne betrachtung nicht zuallerdings ist nicht nur ein zytokinsturm mit covid-19 verbunden, sondern vor allem auch ein „publikationssturm“. die eingabe „covid-19“ als suchbegriff in pubmed ergibt am 15.05.2020 vormittags 12.505 ergebnisse. ob all diese oeuvres den üblichen qualitätskriterien genügen beziehungsweise wirklich wissensvermehrend sind, muss wohl in frage gestellt werden. selbstverständlich wird nicht nur erst die zukunft zeigen, welche maßnahmen sinnvoll, gerechtfertigt und angemessen waren, aber es wird wohl akzeptiert werden müssen, dass das ausschließliche verlassen auf evidenz, richtlinien und ähnliches, unter verzicht auf erfahrung, nicht alle bereiche der medizin abdecken kann.rheumatologen kamen einerseits die virushypothese für entzündlich-rheumatische erkrankungen, andererseits auch zahlreiche therapieansätze für die covid-19-erkrankung, mit dem zytokinsturm in ihrer schwersten ausprägung, sehr bekannt vor. manchmal musste man dazu auch schon etwas älter sein, denn wer kennt heute noch aranofin, das orale goldpräparat, selbst das hat man in der therapie der coronavirusinfektion versucht.älter sind auch viele rheumapatienten und die älteren sind eine sogenannte risikogruppe, die alle vorgeben schützen zu wollen. es scheint aber, dass niemand die seniorinnen und senioren gefragt hat, ob sie überhaupt in dieser form geschützt werden wollen beziehungsweise welche auswirkungen isolation auf das befinden der menschen hat.in dieser ausgabe berichtet johann hitzelhammer, wien/gloggnitz, über einen patienten mit einer selten entzündlichen gelenkerkrankung, die auch mit einer heftigen entzündlichen aktivität bis hin zum makrophagenaktivierungssyndrom (ein zytokisturm) einhergehen kann; in der praxis stellt der adulte m. still eine wesentliche, wenn auch seltene, differenzialdiagnose dar, bei der das daran denken die halbe miete für den erfolg ist.niemand hat die senioren gefragt, ob sie überhaupt in dieser form geschützt werden wollenund auch der zweite beitrag hat seinen bezug zu covid-19, nämlich den eines betroffenen organs, der lunge nämlich, die im falle der systemischen sklerose (prävalenz 0,05 % – also eine orphan disease) leider häufig nicht nur die lebensqualität, sondern auch die lebenserwartung bestimmt. in zeiten von infektionen erscheint das management von autoimmunerkrankungen wichtiger denn je, um die infektanfälligkeit der betroffenen zu minimieren.auch mit dieser ausgabe hoffen wir wieder ihr interesse zu wecken und dem ziel von rheuma plus nahe zu kommen, eine fruchtbringende, offene und redliche diskussion in gang zu bringen, aus der wir alle nutzen ziehen können. wie immer an dieser stelle möchten wir sie herzlich dazu einladen, uns ihre meinung zu den beiträgen dieser ausgabe, wie auch zu allen rheumatologischen themen, die sie für relevant oder für diskussionswert halten, zu schicken. sie können in jedem fall auf einen fairen review mit entsprechendem feedback vertrauen. für kritik, hinweise, zustimmung wie auch für jeden anderen beitrag bedanke ich mich schon im voraus.herzlichst,ihr burkhard leebwe have been hearing repeatedly from across the world about the mental health burden faced by frontline healthcare workers as they work to treat patients affected by covid-19. media representations have described frontline healthcare workers "on their knees" in response to the crisis, leading to forewarning of an ensuing mental health epidemic amongst the healthcare workforce (ghebreyesus, 2020; holmes et al., 2020) .covid-19 has placed extreme demands on healthcare workers. they have been facing genuine threats to their own physical safety and indirectly to that of their families. they have had to manage higher numbers of patients with high mortality rates in a high-pressure environment. they have faced challenges in delivering care with strict infection control measures in place and not always with adequate personal protective equipment (ppe). many have been redeployed into new roles or newly purposed wards so have been working in unfamiliar settings and without established social support from colleagues.healthcare workers are, for the most part, psychologically resilient professionals (brooks et al., 2020) ; trained and experienced in dealing with illness and death. however, the mental health and psychological wellbeing of this group prior to the current covid-19 pandemic was already being identified as a major healthcare issue, evidenced by the growing incidence of stress, burnout, depression, drug and alcohol dependence and suicide across all groups of health professionals, in many countries (carrieri et al., 2018) . high stress roles coupled with the unique demands of the current covid-19 crisis have undoubtedly placed frontline healthcare workers at additional risk for mental health problems, with early reports from around the world indicating elevated rates of depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd) and suicidality (gunnell et al., 2020; lai et al., 2020; rossi et al., 2020) .in response to many military metaphors of healthcare workers "waging war on the front line" against covid-19 there have been growing calls to mobilise mental health support for healthcare workers. however, there is currently a lack of evidence about what interventions are most helpful for staff working in such high risk occupational roles, with what evidence there is about effectiveness being mixed, and often demonstrating that well intentioned interventions, (i.e. debriefing) can actually increase the likelihood of developing mental health problems such as ptsd (rose et al., 2002 ; national institute for health and care excellence, 2018).emerging literature from around the world has also demonstrated that staff may not prioritise psychological interventions in the peak phase of the crisis and may even be reluctant to engage with services offered to them (chen et al., 2020) . so, what is it like to work on the frontline and what support do frontline healthcare workers want during a pandemic such as covid-19?we set out to answer this question by providing a rapid review and meta-synthesis of qualitative literature describing healthcare workers' experiences of working on the frontline and their views about psychosocial support, during covid-19 or comparable pandemics, such as sars, mers or ebola.we adhered to prisma (moher et al., 2009) guidance throughout this review.we identified eligible papers through searches on medline, psychinfo and pubmed. final searches took place on may 5, 2020. key search terms were related to the population (i.e. healthcare workers), the intervention (i.e. psychosocial, psychological or emotional and experiences, support, intervention or help) and a number of disease specific key terms (i.e. covid-19, sars, mers, h1n1, ebola). (see appendix for our full list of search terms). we hand searched reference lists of included papers and grey literature to identify other potentially relevant studies.we included papers which reported original, published, qualitative research describing frontline healthcare workers' experiences of working during a pandemic, and/or views of psychosocial support offered to them. this included mixed-methods studies where data on the qualitative component of the study was available. we excluded studies where less than 50% of the participants were frontline healthcare workers and we could not extract data for healthcare workers alone. due to the rapidity of this review, only papers published in english were included, although retrieved papers covered a global context. we removed duplicate articles then titles and abstracts of retrieved papers were screened for relevance by two independent reviewers. the full texts of remaining articles were then read by the two independent reviewers. we resolved any discrepancies about papers to be included at any stage through discussion between the two reviewers and the first author. data from the selected papers was extracted onto a pre-designed data extraction template by the two reviewers (see table 1 ). we included all papers in the qualitative meta-synthesis.we assessed the quality of the studies included in the meta-synthesis using the critical appraisal skills programme (casp; 2017) qualitative research checklist (see table 2 ). the quality appraisal was carried out by two independent reviewers and discrepancies were resolved through discussion. the casp checklists are designed to be used as educational pedagogic tools and therefore are not intended to derive a quantitative rating for quality. in this review, we have followed casp guidance and the methods described by lachal et al. (2017) to describe whether studies met, partially met, or did not meet the casp criteria. this information is provided to enable the reader to judge study quality for themselves (see appendix). of note, these ratings reflect what is included in the available report of the study and may not necessarily reflect detail that was attended to in the research process but not necessarily written up in the presented paper.we did not exclude any studies from the meta-synthesis based on their quality. this is a new and emerging topic of concern and we did not want to exclude smaller scale studies from less well-established settings given the insight they could potentially offer to this review question.we followed guidance provided by lachal et al. (2017) on synthesising qualitative literature in psychiatry. we extracted data from the results sections of papers (or general text in the case of published commentaries or reflective accounts) where information was given about healthcare workers' experiences and/or views of any form of psychosocial support provided during their work in response to a pandemic. this data was exported into nvivo pro version 12 and analysed thematically (braun & clarke, 2006) .in keeping with traditional thematic analysis, we sought initial immersion in the data by reading and re-reading all the papers. we developed an initial coding frame from ten of the most immediately relevant and current papers. the coding frame was further developed and refined through coding of the full 40 papers, looking for shared themes, but also nuances and exceptions within the themes. adhering to the principles of inductive methodology, we sought to derive our themes from the data, in this case the themes and examples given in the original papers, but then to synthesise these findings and develop an overarching set of themes and sub-themes which captured the experiences and views of frontline healthcare workers across the studies.reflexivity is important in all qualitative research and enables the reader to consider the validity of any qualitative analysis by better understanding the composition and position of the research team who have produced it. this research team is made up of a diverse group, representing different clinical specialities, career stages and cultural backgrounds. jb is a consultant clinical psychologist and associate clinical professor, specialising in trauma, ptsd and the mental health and wellbeing of high-risk occupational groups. jb is also a specialist qualitative researcher with extensive experience of conducting qualitative research, systematic reviews and meta-syntheses. bcfc and vg are both msc students in clinical mental health. both have received extensive training on conducting systematic reviews. tg is a senior lecturer specialising in ptsd and responses to mass traumatic events. mb is a ucl excellence principal clinical research fellow and honorary consultant psychiatrist at the traumatic stress clinic, a specialist service for post-traumatic stress disorder in london, and university college london hospitals nhs foundation trust. as such we brought a mix of different perspectives and experience to this topic.a total of 896 records were initially returned. 34 articles were identified through other sources (hand searching of reference lists). after de-duplication, the titles and abstracts of 700 articles were screened by the two reviewers. of these, 604 were agreed to not be relevant, resulting in 96 studies which were read in full by the two reviewers. at this stage, 56 studies were excluded as either the wrong study design (n=56) or not having relevant outcomes (n=11). this resulted in 40 papers which we included in the review and meta-synthesis (see figure 1 ).characteristics of the 40 studies included in the meta-synthesis are shown in table 1 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 23, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 23, 2020. .out of the 40 studies included in the meta-synthesis, 17 studies were based on participants in asia, 12 in africa, six in north america, three in australasia and two in europe. fourteen studies looked at experiences related to sars, 14 to ebola, four to unspecified influenza pandemics, three to mers, two at h1n1, two at covid-19, one at avian flu and one at swine flu. most participants were described as healthcare workers, nurses or medical staff. all studies were published between 1999 and 2020. in most studies data was collected through individual interviews or focus groups, although one study was a personal reflective account and one paper a commentary citing interviews which had been conducted. a variety of analytic methods were used including thematic analysis, content analysis, framework analysis and phenomenological analysis, although many papers did not state the specific method used to analyse their data.the quality of studies varied, although most were of moderate quality. the results of the quality assessment of included studies using casp (2017) the themes emerging from the meta-synthesis are shown in table 3. table 3 . overarching themes from meta-synthesis . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 23, 2020. .themes related to physical health, safety and security pervaded nearly all 40 papers.the predominant concern across most staff groups was becoming infected with the virus themselves. gershon et al. (2016) writing about healthcare volunteers' experiences of treating ebola in emergency treatment units (etus) in west africa describe:thoughts of getting infected were the uppermost concern for most, especially during the beginning of the deployment when they were still becoming acclimated to the etu and whenever there was a breach in infection control protocol and practice. for some, fear was constant. one participant recalled constantly thinking, "don't let me get ebola, don't let me get ebola."fears of contamination were exacerbated by experiences of inadequate ppe which was a recurrent theme across many papers, transcending different countries and pandemics. shih et al. (2007) explored nurses' experiences of treating sars in taiwan in the early 2000s and noted:in this beginning stage, the factors contributing to the nurses' fear about fatal infection by sars were based on a lack of defensive protection against the disease.thirteen years later, yin & zeng (2020) document nurses' experiences of treating covid-19 in china and quote one of their participants:"i hope that personal protective equipment is available every day so that i don't have to worry as much about myself or my colleagues getting infected."a few studies provided exceptions where frontline workers reported less concern over their own immediate health, but nevertheless still expressed significant concerns for others. workers were preoccupied about their families becoming ill and were particularly concerned that they themselves might transmit the illness to their loved ones. for example, talking about nurses' experiences of sars in singapore, koh et al. (2012) reported that:some participants were not concerned about themselves, rather they were concerned that they would, because of their exposure to infected patients, colleagues or visitors to the organization, inadvertently infect their family.many made sacrifices and sought to protect their loved ones by staying away from them. for example, yin and zeng (2020) quote a nurse in china in the early stages of covid-19:"i stay at a hotel every day and am afraid of getting my family sick. i'm afraid to go home and haven't seen my mom and dad for a long time."fellow healthcare workers falling ill with the virus was a significant cause for preoccupation and distress amongst participants.all of the participants described being particularly vulnerable when caring for patients who were healthcare workers, whether doctors, nurses or support staff who had contracted the disease at work. that the patients were colleagues in a similar situation in life gave a more personally emotive dimension of the experience (erland et al., 2017) .healthcare workers were also impacted by practical and environmental issues in the settings in which they worked. whilst, for the most part, healthcare workers' fears were allayed by adequate ppe, it was also noted in several papers how the ppe caused discomfort and impacted on communication.the equipment was described as cumbersome and hot, and staff reported finding it difficult to communicate with others who were wearing the ppe. basic clinical procedures were deemed impossible by participants while wearing the recommended ppe (broom et al., 2017) .some studies commented on the pay off between staff safety and patient care. for example, moore et al. (2005) describing the treatment of sars in canada quote one participant:"what we've been told is...that [in] triage, you change your goggles, gloves, mask and gown between every patient and its 100% not feasible. it can't be done. patients would be dying waiting at the triage desk."many studies also commented on the settings in which healthcare workers treated those affected by the pandemic being unfit for purpose and lacking in essential resources. talking about nurses' experiences of the ebola crisis in west africa, gershon et al. (2016) state:by any measure and at multiple levels, the early humanitarian response to the ebola epidemic was extraordinarily challenging. health care facilities and systems, already severely under-resourced in the affected areas, were strained to the limit.this was not unique to developing countries with similar challenges reported in canada (moore et al., 2005) and australia (broom et al., 2017) .healthcare workers commonly reported elevated workloads, which impacted on their psychosocial wellbeing. they cited increased hours and weekend shifts, additional time taken to manage ppe and increased paperwork as frequent sources of stress. this was compounded by staff shortages (due to inadequate staffing or staff absences because of ill health or caring responsibilities) resulting in requirements for staff to work overtime. this led to the workers feeling fatigued and risking mistakes. a nurse from toronto in the study by moore et al. (2005) described her experiences:"i work 12-hour shifts in emergency, rarely got a break, we were not permitted to have fluids at the desk. none. none in the care area. so we were going for five or six hours with nothing to drink. we were so exhausted. so at the end of your 12 hour shift by 6 or 7 hours you're so exhausted that you're crazy. that is now leading to sloppy practice."however, because of staff shortages, some participants were noted to describe feeling guilty for taking time off to rest (gershon et al., 2016; rubin et al., 2016) . even when able to take a break, this was not always possible. several studies described staff being unable to leave the hospital or hotel environment, feeling isolated outside of work or having little access to other activities (rubin et al., 2016; im et al., 2018) .financial consequences of working, or not working, during the pandemic were also discussed. for some, sickness entitlements were considerably less than usual salaries and some staff were not paid at all if unable to work. this led to significant financial hardship and a motivation for some to work even when unwell. some were offered a 'risk allowance' for the work that they undertook, which was a source of motivation for some, although professional duty of care usually outweighed financial incentives for most. nevertheless, when financial remuneration was offered but delayed or not provided, workers felt "abandoned" and "betrayed." such betrayals of trust exacerbated pre-existing disaffection amongst healthcare workers."the sars epidemic changed my view of nursing in ontario. i finally realized that nurses were undervalued, underappreciated and undercompensated for the risks they take on daily to provide adequate healthcare to their clients." (bergeron et al., 2006) participants in many of the studies talked about experiencing stigma as a result of working on the pandemic. this was greatest in the earlier phases of the outbreaks or in contexts where less was understood about transmission of the virus.in addition to their own fear of becoming infected with ebola, the midwives also had to deal with the public fear of the contagious disease. ebola was an unknown disease in sierra leone prior to the outbreak, and lack of knowledge resulted in rumours and misunderstandings among the general population (erland et al., 2017) .this stigma extended to the families of healthcare workers with some reporting their children being discriminated against (kim, 2018) . other studies pointed to the hypocrisy that some healthcare workers . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.21.20136705 doi: medrxiv preprint experienced when they were publicly commended for their work but privately discriminated against (im et al., 2018) .one of the greatest sources of tension was the competing obligation healthcare workers felt between providing good patient care and protecting their own physical safety. strict infection control procedures meant that staff were not always able to intervene in the way they wanted, resulting in them feeling like they fell short of their usual standards of care."the biggest conflict within me, was the lack of ability…to put your hand on a shoulder…or hold their hand" (lamb et al., 2018) .further constraints due to lacking resources exacerbated healthcare workers distress and led to a sense of futility. comments such as "i couldn't do anything to help" (smith et al., 2017) and "we could not do enough" (liu & liehr, 2009 ) pervaded many narratives. several studies discussed the undignified manner of patient deaths and healthcare workers' lack of ability to provide access to adequate pain medication or give them any measure of comfort as a great source of distress.staff shortages and the associated lack of support meant workers were left to make difficult, often life and death, decisions on their own, which were noted to cause serious ethical dilemmas. inequalities and decisions about who should get access to resources; beds, medication and vaccines also caused staff significant upset. the impact of these dilemmas appeared to continue after the crisis had passed.participants reported feelings of grief, mourning, sadness, depression, remorse, and regret upon their return. as one participant said, "oh, we could have done much, much more." (gershon et al., 2016) nevertheless, for the most part, workers felt inherently motivated to undertake this work and held a strong conviction that not doing so would be unethical. the idea of not treating patients affected by the virus was seen as "cowardly" (lam & hung, 2013) and "morally unacceptable" (ives et al., 2009 ) and staff who avoided this work were viewed with scepticism.concurrent to the pressures noted above, many healthcare workers described aspects of the work as enjoyable and rewarding and appeared to derive job satisfaction from work that they felt was "important" and "meaningful" (bensimon et al., 2007) .these sentiments seemed more pronounced when workers saw patients improve and leave the ward, and over time as the number of infections and deaths declined. the gratitude of others; patients, their families and wider society was noted to increase their sense of fulfilment.even in some of the most challenging moments, many healthcare workers found meaning in their work, for example, erland and dahl (2017) describe midwives caring from pregnant women dying from ebola in sierra leone who "found it meaningful to be there and care for the women in their last moment of life."overcoming such immense challenges tested the participants and imbued some with a sense of greater professional confidence and competency. several studies described staff gaining new knowledge and skills which they felt would equip them in their future work, especially if they ever worked in a pandemic situation again. some also reported personal growth and developing confidence in their own resilience.nevertheless, deriving meaning and taking pride in their achievements did not render healthcare workers immune from the longer lasting impact of the work. sources of support were discussed in many of the papers, although healthcare workers' experiences demonstrated that many potential sources of support could also be additional sources of stress.families and friends were important sources of support but could place pressure on the healthcare workers. some tried to dissuade them from working on the pandemic, leading the workers, in some cases, to withhold from their families what they were doing.for the most part, healthcare workers appreciated the opportunity to stay in touch with friends and family, usually over the phone. this was reported to bring them comfort as well as allay the worries of their loved ones. however, this could still place an emotional burden on the workers: "sometimes, i was too tired to talk over the phone but i still wanted to switch on the mobile because i was concerned about my family's condition…i found i could not control my temper during that period. after two sentences of talk with my family, i felt short of breath and became very frustrated. i understood that my family would like to listen to my voice, but i just could not talk." (mok et al., 2005) .the competing demands of managing work and family life during a pandemic was also a source of stress. as described by bergeron et al. (2006) during sars in canada:reintegrating into normal family life after their work on the pandemic was over was also problematic for some. several studies described workers missing colleagues and struggling to re-engage with previous work.your heart is just not into it." (gershon et al., 2016) .for the most part, working with colleagues during the pandemic was noted to provide an important source of mutual support, opportunities to learn from each other and facilitate camaraderie.buddying systems, whereby more experienced staff supported newer staff, seemed appreciated, as were opportunities for informal group reflection. this seemed to enable staff groups to normalise difficult responses and provide appropriate reassurance. as described, in lamb's (2018) study of ebola:participants described how they would simply sit down together at the end of a shift, share a cup of tea and discuss the events of the day: "quite a few of them [juniors] had never seen a dead body before, certainly never dealt with dying patients. .. but we would just sort of just sit down and chat about it and about how they were feeling…it was ok to feel upset, it's just a perfectly normal reaction." some healthcare workers also spoke about the value of social media platforms for keeping in touch with colleagues, such as whatsapp groups. some did nevertheless lament the loss of previous opportunities to socialise with colleagues face to face and outside of work (yin & zeng, 2020).colleague and peer relationships could also be the source of some stress. unfair distribution of work and the refusal of some colleagues to treat patients affected by the virus caused notable tensions.''there was real division created amongst staff. we'd all be working in the icu and there was a long list of people who said they're not going in because of so and so…and this created resentment, hostility because there were a core group of us who went in there more often than we would have had to otherwise had all of us been sharing that responsibility. we carried a burden that wasn't equally shared." (bergeron et al., 2006) . this was exacerbated by inequities in pay and conditions for what healthcare professionals perceived to be equivalent work with the same risks.healthcare workers valued support from their organisations but gave examples of not feeling adequately supported. some workers reported feeling coerced into working with infected patients or in inappropriate . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 23, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 conditions. participants across the studies felt that their organisations had an institutional duty to provide staff with sufficient protection to work safely. workers reported feeling supported by their organisations when there was clear alignment and shared decision making between senior managers and frontline healthcare workers but less supported when staff safety was not a clear priority. workers also valued their organisations supporting them to take time off from their roles.workers' perceptions of their organisation's preparedness varied with workers in several studies reporting a lack of established protocols. staff in some studies commented on hoping that their organisations would learn from these experiences and be better prepared in the future.workers wanted their hard work and sacrifices to be recognised by their organisations, although the degree to which they expected to be additionally rewarded varied. nevertheless, they expected a degree of support in return for the sacrifices they made that not all felt was met. for example, guimard et al. (1999) commenting on a focus group discussion amongst nurses write:it was revealed during discussions that most of the nurses who volunteered to care for ebola patients were very disappointed about the recognition they received for their actions. most of them felt abandoned by the managers of the hospital and felt they received insufficient financial and psychologic support during the epidemic.the media's portrayal of the pandemic had both positive and negative impacts. some studies described the role of the media in perpetuating stigma. al knawy et al. (2019) writing about mers in saudi arabia commented:many healthcare workers felt that catastrophic portrayals of the pandemic on the news compounded families concerns. such representations were also argued to be partly responsible for discouraging people to attend hospitals for other health concerns, to the detriment of public health and with financial repercussions for hospital departments.the media, however, was often a source of information which healthcare workers found helpful, especially when they felt they were not party to information from their organisations. the media was also noted to be helpful in advocating for healthcare workers and mobilising resources, such as exerting pressure to provide more ppe.the support of the wider public was considered vital and where the public did not comply with related directives this caused the healthcare workers anxiety and frustration. bergeron et al. (2006) quoted one nurse from their study of sars in canada:"my experience in the workplace regarding lack of compliance from clients in quarantine orders also makes me angry and afraid. i feel that even after all the work of all health care professionals, this issue may be impossible to be contained without support of the public."healthcare workers also sought recognition and validation from the public.they wanted the public to know what they had been through and how they had put their own lives at risk to help protect others (gershon et al., 2016) .a pervasive narrative amongst the healthcare workers across all the pandemics was that of uncertainty, which precipitated and perpetuated fear and anxiety. knowledge was key in decreasing uncertainty and many participants sought information, clarity and consensus with the purpose of achieving greater certainty.communication was vital to the healthcare workers, however, not always experienced as helpful. many reported . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.21.20136705 doi: medrxiv preprint inconsistent and ineffective messaging and a lack consensus between sources of information. ives et al. (2009) for example, report a lack of communication in their study of healthcare workers in the uk:the majority of participants said they had been given neither information about pandemic influenza, nor been made aware of what would be expected of them during such a crisis, and this gave many the impression that their employing trust did not care about them or take their needs seriously.equally prevalent were comments about there being too much information. rapidly changing and inconsistent information "increased frustration and uncertainty" . this resulted in "confusion and lack of trust in the information received" and subsequently "dismissal of the information as clinicians were unable to assimilate the information in the limited time they had" (broom et al., 2017) .communication was valued when it was centralised and co-ordinated and came from reliable authorities. participants also valued leaders who were available and visible during the crisis.how information was shared was also an important point, with healthcare workers pointing out that many staff did not have the time or access to be repeatedly checking emails. clearly visible posters and information cascaded through team leaders at shift handovers were cited as helpful.healthcare workers also believed that communication is a two-way process and that their feedback and knowledge should be recognised and acted upon. they felt they should be consulted and involved in decision making and that their learning from doing this work on the frontline was vital for responding to the current as well as future pandemics.healthcare workers' experiences of training were variable. for many, training imparted important information, allayed anxiety and facilitated greater confidence. participants in the studies valued training in infection control procedures and safe use of ppe as well as more general training about the virus.participants in several studies, however, felt that they had not received adequate training. as one healthcare worker in gershon et al.'s (2016) study of ebola in west africa described:"they (the sponsoring agency) handed me a viral haemorrhagic fever guide. i read it on the plane, showed up, but i had no real idea of what i was doing." even though some participants described feeling unprepared, there was a sense in some studies of limited or superficial engagement with training. training seemed better received when it was deemed as relevant, realistic and timely. practical simulations increased workers' confidence. workers also highlighted the importance of learning through experience and commented on competence and confidence increasing over time.the psychological impact on healthcare workers was acknowledged in many papers, however, few studies reported on workers' experiences of any formal psychological interventions. the idea that mental health support would be available seemed to be important and helped to alleviate workers' anxiety. for example, yin and zeng (2020) quoted one nurse in the early phase of the covid-19 outbreak in china:when psychological support services were mentioned, they seemed to be of most value when available on site, were flexible and informal, and were offered individually or in small group which fitted around the workers' shifts. workshops on coping and emotional support were also described positively in some studies. some participants appreciated the availability of helplines, although others described these as too impersonal.even when formal support was available, some staff were ambivalent about engaging. chen et al. (2020) in their commentary on medical staff in china in the early stages covid-19 described:the implementation of psychological intervention services encountered obstacles, as medical staff were reluctant to participate in the group or individual psychology interventions provided to them. moreover, individual nurses showed excitability, irritability, unwillingness to rest, and signs of psychological distress, but refused any psychological help and stated that they did not have any problems.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 23, 2020. .after the peak of the pandemic, the emotional impact of the work appeared to be acknowledged more. workers in several papers were noted to report difficulties sleeping, experiencing invasive memories and ongoing hyperarousal as well as struggling to adjust to being back at home and their normal work. few described access to any kind of formal follow up, although when this was offered, this appeared to be appreciated. even amongst those who described coping well and who did not want to engage with formal services, informal follow ups and check ins from their organisations and colleagues were valued.after deployment, they stressed the need for mental health and psychosocial support, and they requested deeper knowledge about coping strategies. the respondents reported being focused on their duties and safety during deployment, and only allowing emotional reactions afterwards. (von strauss et al., 2017) .in this review we sought to better understand healthcare workers' experiences of working on the frontline and their views about support during covid-19 and comparable pandemics. we found 40 qualitative papers which met our inclusion criteria, and which covered a number of different pandemics over the past 20 years. metasynthesis revealed eight key themes which transcended temporal and geographical boundaries. participants across all the studies were deeply concerned about their own and/or others' physical safety. this was greatest in the early phases of pandemics and exacerbated by inadequate ppe, insufficient resources, and inconsistent information. workers struggled with high workloads and long shifts and desired adequate rest and recovery. many experienced stigma. healthcare workers' relationships with families, colleagues, organisations, the media and the wider public were complicated and nuanced and could be experienced concomitantly as sources of support but also sources of stress.the results of this review show that the current experiences of frontline healthcare workers are not without precedent. the themes identified in this review from previous pandemics are remarkably resonant with what we are hearing about the impact of covid-19 on healthcare workers across the world at the current time. this points to a potential mental health impact on staff that is comparable to that experienced in previous pandemics.a recently published review and meta-analysis of the mental health impact of working on pandemics including sars, mers, ebola and covid-19 (kisely et al., 2020) suggested that healthcare workers exposed to virusrelated work are 1.7 times more likely to develop psychological distress and ptsd compared to non-exposed workers. our review sheds light on potential risk factors and their mechanisms of effect including fear associated with threat to life, uncertainty due to inconsistent or rapidly changing information, and threat to integrity due to discrimination.this review also shows that accessing social support, a previously well-established protective factor against mental health difficulties such as ptsd (brewin et al., 2000) , was complex. workers often self-isolated to protect their loved ones, did not disclose details of their work to them, struggled to manage the competing demands of work and family life and felt like the people in their usual support systems could not relate to what they had been through. this compromised healthcare workers use of social support, which may potentially have a longer-term adverse impact on their mental wellbeing.the ethical, moral and professional dilemmas that healthcare workers faced also increases their risk of 'moral injury'. moral injury has been defined as the psychological distress caused by actions, or inactions, which violate an individual's moral code, or a sense of betrayal by others, and has been highlighted as a potentially significant concern for healthcare workers during covid-19 (greenberg & tracy, 2000) . the healthcare workers in this review were often unable to deliver the level of care they felt professional and morally obliged to provide and many felt betrayed by their colleagues, organisations and society. moral injury is not in itself a mental health disorder but is a risk factor for further mental health problems and may be particularly pernicious in the context of a pandemic.the results of this review also highlight potential protective factors. healthcare workers valued clear, consistent, and compassionate communication. they engaged well with training when it was practical and specific. the felt valued by their organisations when they prioritised their safety and supported them with manageable workloads and time out from work. the wanted to be consulted and included in decision-making. staff appreciated peer support and tended to seek emotional guidance from their colleagues. this draws attention to potential opportunities to further develop peer support systems and increase mental health awareness in the workplace. however, colleagues could also be a source of tension, so peer support interventions in this workforce warrant careful evaluation. we also need to carefully consider how peer-based interventions may work in such a crisis so as not to place an additional burden on the healthcare workers providing them when, by definition, they are going through the same stressors.this review also demonstrates that psychological growth was possible. most healthcare workers were inherently motivated to undertake this work due to a sense of professional duty. many derived meaning and satisfaction from their work and reported learning and professional development. they also frequently reported strong team cohesiveness and camaraderie. as suggested by gerada (2020) in a recent editorial comment, "some good must come out of covid-19" and there is potential for greater recognition and appreciation of healthcare work.public attitudes and the media had both positive and negative impacts on the healthcare workers in these studies but have the potential to provide support and validation of their work. nonetheless, gestures of solidarity, such as applause for healthcare workers which have been taking place around the world during covid-19, have the potential to feel meaningless and hypocritical if support for healthcare workers from the public and government is not sustained after the pandemic.one potential difference between previews pandemics and covid-19 is that there is now greater acknowledgement of the mental health impact on healthcare workers and increasing recognition of the need to support their wellbeing (billings et al, 2020) . however, there is a yet little evidence about what is effective and what healthcare workers themselves want. the studies included in this review focused little on formal psychological interventions. it is therefore difficult to establish whether this was not of primary importance to the healthcare workers, whether they were not aware of sources of mental health support, or whether these interventions were simply not available to them. when mental health support was mentioned, participants tended to speak of it as desirable. however, some studies suggested a reluctance to engage. this is perhaps indicative of potentially enduring stigma amongst healthcare workers, exacerbated by militaristic metaphors and heroic narratives in the media, which make it harder for them to admit when they are struggling. this is an additional area that warrants exploration in order to better understand workers' ambivalence and to ensure that they feel able to engage with appropriate mental health support when needed.the results of this review also suggest that healthcare workers' mental health needs change over time. in the early stages of the crises the workers prioritised more basic human needs, such as physical safety and rest. at the peak, workers seemed to focus on the work at hand and rely on colleagues for support. after the crisis had passed, there seemed to be greater recognition of the impact of working on the pandemic on mental health and an associated recognition of need for more support. at the current time, whilst attention is being paid to the impact on frontline healthcare workers' mental health, there is a paucity of research into psychosocial interventions specifically for frontline healthcare workers and what works for whom and when.we also know that the healthcare workforce was experiencing high levels of distress and disaffection prior to covid-19 so we need to consider what should be set up as standard support for healthcare workers in the longer term. this will be particularly important if there are further waves of covid-19, but also in the face of other, inevitable, future healthcare crises. we need to ensure that we maintain a psychologically healthy workforce, not just for the wellbeing of the workers, but also for the sustainability of healthcare services globally.the findings of this review highlight a number of important implications which are relevant globally.provision of adequate safety equipment is a priority to enable safe and effective working but also to mitigate negative mental health outcomes. workloads need to be manageable, and sufficient periods of rest and recovery mandated to mitigate fatigue and burnout. training should be relevant, practical, and timely. learning on the job is valued alongside formal training. communication needs to be clear and consistent and decision making shared. leaders should be accessible and visible.mechanisms to facilitate staff peer support should be put in place, including ringfenced time and mental health awareness training. competing demands between work and family life should be acknowledged and staff supported in maintaining family roles as much as possible. staff should be supported in taking time off from work. anxiety, guilt, and moral injury may be mitigated by reducing lone working, encouraging buddying systems, facilitating ethical forums which allow workers to discuss difficult decisions and focusing on the meaningfulness of the work. mental health follow-up will be imperative for the early detection and treatment of emerging mental health problems and to ensure staff feel supported by their organisations. ongoing peer support is likely to be important.this review should be considered within the context of its strengths and limitations. this paper offers a rapid review of an important body of literature for the purposes of providing urgent feedback and guidance for those planning the support of frontline healthcare workers during the current covid-19 crisis. we conducted our search across three databases and used two independent reviewers for searching, screening, data extraction and quality appraisal. we conducted a meta-synthesis for the reader to highlight overarching themes in relation to healthcare workers' experiences of working on the frontline during a pandemic and their views about support.there are a number of limitations inherent in the papers included. this review has highlighted a dearth of research exploring healthcare workers own views, needs and preferences. what research there is has focused predominantly on doctors and nurses with little or no identified research on other key frontline healthcare groups including physiotherapists, pharmacists, receptionists, porters or cleaners. most of the studies were of only moderate-quality, therefore caution must be observed when considering the transferability of the findings.there are also some limitations of the current review. due to the rapidity required we did not pre-register a study protocol on prospero. we also only searched a limited number of databases; therefore, some papers may have been missed, which may have provided more detail or contradicted the findings summarised here. while research from across the world was included in this review, we were only able to include studies published in english. this review may therefore be subject to some publication bias. ongoing attention is warranted as papers reporting on this phenomenon may yet be published.this pandemic is not unprecedented. we have an opportunity to learn from the lessons of previous pandemics and provide better support for frontline healthcare workers. more high-quality qualitative research is urgently needed in order to better understand the experiences, needs and preferences of the healthcare workforce, particularly those frontline healthcare workers whose voices have not yet been adequately represented. we need to develop clinical guidance specific to supporting this workforce. this guidance should be developed in consultation and collaboration with the healthcare workers themselves. interventions to prevent and treat mental health distress in healthcare workers need to be developed and their timing, effectiveness and acceptability carefully evaluated. we have an opportunity to mitigate the negative mental health impact of covid-19 and support the longer-term wellbeing of the healthcare workforce across the world.this research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-forprofit sectors.jb conceived of the idea for this review, conducted the meta-synthesis, wrote the draft of the manuscript and incorporated contributions from all the other authors. bcfc and vg completed the literature searches, screening, data extraction and quality appraisal under supervision of jb. tg and mb provided peer consultation on the design of the review. all contributed to validity checks on the meta-synthesis of the data. all authors commented on drafts of the paper and approved the final manuscript.we declare no competing interests.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 yin, x., & zeng, l. (2020). a study on the psychological needs of nurses caring for patients with coronavirus disease 2019 from the perspective of the existence, relatedness, and growth theory. international journal of nursing sciences.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 the ongoing covid-19 outbreak has become a global crisis, not just because of rising infection and death rates but also because of the behavioral changes it necessitates. even those who are not directly affected by the disease have seen their lives disrupted through mandated social distancing measures. these sudden changes can impact an individual's mental wellbeing: reduced social connections is linked to depression 5 , while physical restrictions of quarantine can also have negative psychological effects 6 . in addition to the outbreak's clinical and economic impact, we also need to understand these mental wellness and behavioral changes in order to combat the disease.both wellbeing and behavior can be measured digitally, such as through online surveys 7 , or location and survey data collected by phone sensors 8, 9 . there has already been work examining the spread of covid-19 in china using mobility data from the social media platform tencent 10 as well as work measuring mental health-related effects of the outbreak through crosssectional web surveys 11, 12 . however, only ecological momentary assessments (emas) allow us to understand how the situation affects the way we feel in the moment. in this article we explore how people are changing their behavior in the first weeks of the pandemic, and the nature of the associated changes in wellbeing and psychological distress as measured with emas.we use data on 127 u.s. adult participants (table 1) from an ongoing longitudinal study, where they completed baseline assessments of their mental wellbeing and installed a personal sensing application on their phones. this application administers emas asking questions about their mood ("how is your mood?"), stress ("are you stressed?"), rated on 9-point likert scales in the morning, afternoon and evening as participants go about their daily lives, allowing us to track day-to-day changes in wellbeing. the phq-8 9 is administered at 3-week intervals to measure all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098228 doi: medrxiv preprint depressive symptom severity. the app also records detected gps locations, and asks questions about the locations participants have visited ("what kind of place is this?"). from gps data, we measure how much time participants spent at work and at home, as well as their general movement levels as the outbreak unfolds. we then use these location measures with ema data to compare our participant's behavior and mental wellbeing in study weeks before and after the national state of emergency declaration (3/13) 13 social distancing guidelines (3/16) 14 .we want to understand shifts in behavior and wellbeing that coincide with mandated social distancing and other quarantine measures. we saw sharp decreases in time spent at work (cohen's d=0.33, 95% ci [-5.26, -2.12], p<0.001) as well as increases in time spent at home (cohen's d=0.38, 95% ci [7.07, 13 .83], p<0.001) that coincided with governmental mandates of all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098228 doi: medrxiv preprint social distancing ( figure 1 , table 2 ). the corresponding increases in stress (cohen's d=0. 15 for ema-administered phq, we find that the changes within individuals across the two study periods were not significant (cohen's d=0.11, 95% ci [-0.11, 1.29], p=0.1). however, we see that individuals who have been directly impacted by the crisis through job loss show worsening of depressive symptoms. seven individuals reported job loss during the post-social distancing study week, and all seven also reported an increase in their depression severity (median increase of 3 points); the probability of that happening by chance is 1/128 (table 3) .these results are consistent with other findings 15 that show the direct impact of the virus on mental wellbeing through income instability is severe.we did not see evidence of significant worsening in depression at a population level in the first weeks following the national declaration of emergency and social distancing guidelines.we did see significant increases in mood and stress; however these were small. at a population level, the stress and mood impact of the outbreak is comparable to every day being a weekday.our results suggest a significant increase in depressive symptom severity for those affected by job loss. though our findings are not consistent with the kind of massive mental health crisis at a population level that some in the media speculate them to be, our data do suggest that the mental health consequences are likely concentrated in groups that have been substantially affected by the pandemic, such as those who have lost employment. there are undoubtedly other groups that all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098228 doi: medrxiv preprint 5 experience strong influences, and further investigation into these at-risk groups is needed to understand the nature of any psychological impact so that mental health services can be appropriately allocated for the crisis.it is important to note the sampling limitations of our study. our participants are recruited from a research panel and are not wholly representative of national demographics. in particular, our sample over-represents females and individuals with previously diagnosed depression (table   1 ). we also note that our analysis is based on completed emas for each individual and does not account for missed surveys. the survey response rate dropped in the week post declaration of emergency compared to previous weeks (75% response rate to 65% response rate), so it is possible that the participants most affected by the crisis are self-censoring 16 . furthermore, as we only look at short-term effects of the coronavirus crisis, these findings may change as time goes on. we will continue monitoring the longer-term response to the crisis and will report on trends as they emerge. although it remains to be seen how individuals respond as the coronavirus crisis progresses, these findings suggest that at the population level and on a short time scale, the covid-19 pandemic has increased stress levels widely, but has not had a uniform impact on mental health. rather, it is likely concentrated in at-risk groups such as those who have lost employment.participants across the united states were invited to participate in our study through focus pointe global, a national research panel, in an enrollment period beginning february 4, 2020 and ending february 10, 2020. we included participants who were at least 18 years old, owned an android phone, and who did not report any prior diagnosis of severe mental illness all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098228 doi: medrxiv preprint 6 (e.g. bipolar disorder, psychotic disorder). participant demographic characteristics can be found in table 1 . all study protocols were approved by northwestern university's institutional review board.participation in the 16 week study which began february 11, 2020 included completing online surveys administered via redcap 17,18 at baseline and at check-ins occurring once every three weeks. participants also installed passive data kit (pdk) 12 , a library and mobile app for collecting cell phone sensor data, on their phones. sensor data collected include real-time gps coordinates as well as ema surveys administered three times a day for seven consecutive "check-in" days that occur every three weeks.when participants were in a check-in week, they were prompted via phone notification at their preferred times of day. the stress ("are you stressed?") and mood ("how is your mood?")emas were administered at all three daily check-ins with a nine-point likert scale. the evening survey also presented a map and prompted participants to label particular stationary locations they were detected to have visited throughout the day ("what kind of place is this?). at the beginning and end of the check-in week, an additional set of ema questions were sent to the participants which correspond to the phq-8 depression inventory.the raw gps data collected by pdk was sampled at roughly 15 second intervals and was transformed into higher-level features of semantic location duration for our study. we assigned a label of "home" or "work" for every gps reading if it was within 500 meters of the participantlabelled home or work locations. these labelled location readings were then aggregated to produce daily estimates of time spent in both location categories.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098228 doi: medrxiv preprintwe ran paired, two-tailed student t-tests of within-individual sensor data in the two most recent check-in weeks of our study: 3/3/20-3/9/20, and 3/24/20-3/30/20. these dates straddle the most prominent government-mandated disruptions with the national declaration of emergency (3/13) and the white house recommendation limiting gatherings (3/16) . daily measurements of semantic location, emas, and phq were averaged within each week of analysis. weekend and weekday averages for individuals were calculated over all weeks of our study up through 3/9/20, to align with the last ema period before coronavirus-related disruptions. the paired values for every individual who had at least one reading in both study periods were used for our t-test, which was 120 participants for location sensors, 127 participants for emas, and 113 participants for phq-8 surveys. complete hypothesis testing information can be found in table 2 . summary statistics on phq-8 surveys among participants who recently experienced job loss can be found in table 3 .the data are not publicly available due to them containing information that could compromise research participant privacy and consent, but derived and de-identified self-report data will be made available through the nimh data archive at the conclusion of the study.the source code for data preparation and analysis is available upon request to the corresponding author tl. the unprocessed source data are not publicly available because of the restrictions noted above. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. table 3 : changes in phq-8 survey scores from study week 3/3-3/9 to study week 3/24-3/30.phq-8 scores range from 0 to 24, with higher values indicating more severe depressive symptoms.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098228 doi: medrxiv preprintó society of fetal medicine 2020the international society of ultrasound in obstetrics and gynecology (isuog) has recently published guidance on the use of personal protective equipment (ppe) and other methods to reduce the hazard of sars-cov-2 infection for clinicians and sonographers undertaking ultrasound examinations [1, 2] . the documents, however, clearly state that guidance in relation to ppe differs from country to country and region to region and that local guidance should be followed when this is available. this document attempts to fill that space in the context of heterogeneity and varied education level, economic status and cultural beliefs and practices in india.as in the isuog document, it is emphasized at the outset that many of the measures suggested in this document are based on limited research and evidence. this advice is drawn from various sources available from china [3, 4] , hong kong [5] , singapore [6] , uk [7, 8] , canada [9] , continental europe [10] [11] [12] [13] the usa [14, 15] and the who [16] . it is a list of recommended practices that are so far believed to be the most effective methods for reducing the transmission of sars-cov-2 between patients and healthcare providers.1. respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, loud conversation and direct contact are responsible for the spread of sars-cov-2. this happens when body fluids touch another person's eyes, nose or mouth, or an incision, laceration, or abrasion). the disease caused by the virus has been named covid19. 2. evidence suggests that healthcare workers must use appropriate ppe, even if they remain further than 1 m away from a symptomatic patient [17] . 3. it is very much possible that carriers may be asymptomatic. it would be prudent, therefore, to presume that every patient and attendant is a potential source of infection. 4. precautions need to extend way beyond the lockdown period and cannot stop even if the incidence curve of covid19 flattens or falls. 5. precautions, tact, knowledge and security measures will be put to test as soon as the lockdown is lifted. there will be a massive patient overload and being prepared is the only answer in this situation. 6. this document is a guidance note and not a compulsory protocol. every institution/clinic can have a modified protocol to enhance protection. 7. an institution/clinic can opt to remain closed for services as long as the regional law does not enforce the essential services maintenance act.this document includes the following: the ultrasound examination has multiple aspects that can increase transmission from the patient to the healthcare worker and vice versa [1, 17] including:• small examination rooms • absent or restricted natural ventilation • closed vent and central (single cooling source, multiple outlet) air conditioning without hepa filtration • insufficient distancing between patient and examiner • long examination times • transvaginal and invasive procedures • coughing, sneezing, loud conversation, anxious deep breathing and sighing by the patient and attendant • repeated handling of transducers, machine desktops, keyboards, touch screens, trackballs and recording devices.considering the inevitable reduction in resources and capacity, which limits the number of scan appointments available, based on isuog guidelines it is recommended that appointments should be triaged to one of the three categories as shown in fig. 1 .the following indications may be considered:1. dating scans between 6 and 10 weeks should be postponed and dating should be done at the early morphology 11-13 weeks 6 days scan window. 2. patients with bleeding per vaginum or pain need appointment prioritization. bleeding score can be assessed based on pictorial graphs; soakage of 3 pads in an hour would designate as a score of 3.3. the anomalies scan at 18-20 weeks may be delayed by a few weeks. even under pandemic circumstances, it is likely that a patient will be able to obtain permission from a district court along with a medical board opinion for delayed termination in case of a major/lethal anomaly 4. second trimester scans should be given priority over first trimester scans 5. ''routine'' growth and doppler scans should be postponed to a 36 weeks assessment. if the pandemic recedes, these can be rescheduled earlier 6. ''decision making'' growth and doppler scans between 28 and 41 weeks should be considered on priority. information from this scan dictates time, place and mode of delivery and this decision may be critical to save lives of mothers and fetuses. 7. the 36 weeks growth and doppler scan is a useful triaging tool for early delivery decisions and may need to be carried out although figo recommends clinical assessment and delivery during a pandemic. 8. the above-mentioned prioritization will need to be modified depending on extension of lockdown.this aspect is critical for the safety of patients, physicians and clinic staff. adherence to these suggestions will ensure social distancing. advance scheduling is necessary and walk in patients are to be discouraged. this should be carried out on the phone by experienced staff. the gap between appointments will vary from institution to institution and should be based on.1. staff numbers 2. availability of waiting spaces 3. availability of scanning rooms 4. type of scan 5. turn around time from arrival of patient to exit.this should ideally be carried out on the phone at the time of scheduling an appointment or else when the patient arrives at the clinic. for hospital walk-ins the latter option becomes even more important and must be followed at the time of patient arrival. recording the temperature is an ideal screen but cumbersome and impractical: handheld non-contact forehead thermometers are in short supply and patients are using paracetamol and not always being truthful. a history of travel, occupation, contact and cluster (tocc) is recommended [1] . experienced staff should be deputed to handle this and a formal form may be used (appendix 2).1. travel should include a detailed itinerary, transit locations and date of return 2. occupation should be asked as a direct question 3. a history of exposure to a test positive case should be directly asked for 4. a history of living in a known positive cluster or visiting such a cluster should be noted 5. a properly filled declaration and written informed consent document should be obtained from the patient (appendix 2).patients can then be triaged into one of the three categories [1] as shown in fig. 2 .based on this categorization, the ppe should be utilized as shown in table 1 .patients identified to be at risk for sars-cov-2 infection should delay their ultrasound assessment by 14 days. if urgent scan is required, they should be referred to the designated centres for the needy.informed written consent should be taken from the woman, explicitly stating that she understands that there is a risk of her getting infected by visiting any place during this pandemic and that she also knows that the ultrasound scan needs to be done at this stage (appendix 2).the following recommendations apply to sanitation [1, 13, [18] [19] [20] and logistics. the who [16, 21] and ministry of health and family welfare, government of india recommendations [18] are particularly useful in this regard.1. physical barriers, such as glass or plastic windows panels, should be used to reduce exposure to the covid19 virus. this approach can be implemented in areas where patients will first present: triage areas, the registration desk at the clinic or the emergency department. 2. guards at the gate should wear surgical masks and maintain hand hygiene. conversation should be carried out from a distance of at least 1 m [21] . 3. alternate seats can be strapped down the middle with string or tape to ensure distance seating. 4. waiting in a vehicle is safer than waiting in a clinic. 5. every ultrasound environment is different [1] . it is unlikely that ultrasound clinics have too many choices in ventilation/air conditioning. it is recommended that single unit air conditioning should be run in an ''open to outside air'' mode (vent open). clinics will have to decide individually how best to facilitate maximum air change in routine practice. aerosol generating procedures (agp) are rare in daily ultrasound practice and should be handled by standard operating procedures by various guidelines [1, 2] . however such agps should not be attempted in an ultrasound clinic but in designated centers. 6. all indoor areas such as entrance lobbies, corridors and staircases, escalators, elevators, security guard sinks and toilet soap dispensers should be cleaned with 1% sodium hypochlorite or a phenolic detergent three to four times a day. taps and metallic surfaces should be cleaned with a sanitiser containing 60-70% alcohol. 14. outdoor areas have less risk than indoor areas because of air currents and exposure to sunlight. cleaning and disinfection efforts should be targeted to frequently touched surfaces such as tables and bench handles. 15. patient examination tables must be covered with sheets (and pillow covers if necessary) that must be changed after each patient. linen may be disposable as per individual choice. routine machine-washing with a regular detergent is adequate for non-disposable sheets and pillow covers. mattresses and table edges must be sanitised using a sanitiser containing 60-70% alcohol if abundantly available or a 1% sodium hypochlorite solution.sars-cov-2, the causative agent of covid-19 can be present on surfaces for several days. surfaces that come into contact with the patient (cable and transducer) as well as surfaces that are touched by the clinician (keyboard, touchscreen, trackball, handlebars, etc.) should be disinfected after each examination. high-level disinfection (hld) is not required when using ultrasound probes on intact skin. there is no evidence that hld offers benefit for disinfection from sars-cov-2.the following steps should be followed. adequate staff must be available to accelerate preparation of reports. lockdown conditions do not permit courier services and repeated travel. reports and images may be communicated by email/website access.pandemic conditions are traditionally accompanied by shortages. all attempts should be made to ensure adequate stock.chronologically older (greater than 60 years) staff or those with cardiac disease, pulmonary disorders etc. should be allocated work in areas where they have limited patient contact or may avoid working at all.staff may be rostered to shorter working hours and work in rotation.staff must be trained in and given appropriate personal protective equipment and encouraged frequent hand washing. hands should be washed with regular soap and water for at least 20 s.the staff must be trained for phone scheduling, first point of contact interviews, documentation of demographic details and patient history, obtaining informed consent, hand washing, social distancing and donning and doffing ppe.the basic principles [8] in a situation of pandemic are: i,…………………………………………., hereby declare that the above information declared by me is correct. i understand that any false declaration can put my health caregivers at serious risk for disease. i agree to follow all precautionary measures advised by the team of dr…………………………….. and his/her organisation.i have come for a medically necessary ultrasound scan as evident from my prescription and am aware that there is a covid19 pandemic. there is a risk of me getting this virus by visiting any place during this pandemic but that the gastrointestinal (gi) microbiota is a complex collection of microorganisms (i.e., bacteria, archaea, fungi, protozoa, and viruses). recent molecular phylogenetic studies, typically based on comparative 16s rrna gene analysis, have revealed that the gi tract of mammals harbors several hundred to thousand bacte-rial phylotypes (frank et al., 2007; suchodolski et al., 2009; handl et al., 2011) . it is estimated that the intestine of mammals contains approximately 10 10 to 10 14 microorganisms, about 10 times more than the number of cells composing the host body. this mutually interacting system composed of the host cells and the resident microbes is called the intestinal microbiome. gut microbes play a crucial role in host health. they act as a defending barrier against invading pathogens, aid in digestion and energy harvest from the diet, provide nutritional support for enterocytes, and stimulate the development of the immune system. molecular approaches have improved our understanding about the composition, the dynamics, and the functionality of the intestinal ecosystem in dogs and cats (ritchie et al., 2008; desai et al., 2009; swanson et al., 2010) . the composition of the intestinal microbiota can be influ-enced to some extent by exogenous factors, such as diet (simpson et al., 2002; barry et al., 2010; middelbos et al., 2010) . however, the microbiota is resilient to most environmental influences, returning rapidly to its pretreatment state. antibiotic administration leads to more profound alterations in the intestinal microbiome, with some bacterial groups remaining depressed for several weeks to months (dethlefsen et al., 2008; suchodolski et al., 2009; grønvold et al., 2010) . during the last few years, convincing evidence has emerged implicating alterations in the composition of the intestinal microbiota to chronic enteropathies not only in humans, but also in dogs and cats (german et al., 2003; inness et al., 2007; janeczko et al., 2008; craven et al., 2010a; suchodolski et al., 2010) . in addition, extraintestinal disorders (e.g., atopy in infants) have been, due to the interactions of intestinal microbiota with the host immune system, associated with gi dysbiosis (penders et al., 2007) . these findings emphasize the importance of maintaining a balanced intestinal ecosystem. this article will summarize recent work characterizing the intestinal microbiome of healthy cats and dogs, and alterations in the composition of the intestinal microbiota and innate immune system that have been identified in dogs and cats with chronic enteropathies.traditional cultivation techniques have commonly been used to characterize the composition of the canine and feline intestinal microbiota (benno et al., 1992; johnston et al., 1993; mentula et al., 2005) . bacterial culture is useful for the detection of specific intestinal pathogens (e.g., salmonella spp.), allowing for antibiotic susceptibility testing and genotyping of cultured isolates. however, it is now well established that culturedependent methods are not well suited for in-depth characterization of complex environments, such as the mammalian gi tract. limitations of cultivation methods include our inability to culture and correctly classify the vast majority of intestinal microbes (greetham et al., 2002) . molecular tools have now become the standard approach in microbial ecology ( figure 1 ) and are now increasingly used for characterization of the intestinal microbiome of dogs and cats (suchodolski et al., 2005; desai et al., 2009; lubbs et al., 2009; vester et al., 2009) . these molecular methods have been reviewed in detail elsewhere (tannock, 2005) .because of anatomical and physiological differences, each intestinal compartment harbors a unique microbial ecosystem (suchodolski et al., 2005) . microorganisms reside in specialized niches and provide specialized functions by utilizing host nutrients and, in return, provide metabolites for host uptake (table 1) . each dog and cat harbors a very unique and individual microbial profile (suchodolski et al., 2004; ritchie et al., 2010) . the major individual differences occur on a bacterial species and strain level, with typically only minor overlap of bacterial species between individual animals. a recent study has shown that 84% of cats evaluated harbored bifidobacterium spp. (ritchie et al., 2010) . however, only a minor percentage of cats harbored the same species of bifidobacteria. differences in bacterial composition between dogs and cats have been suggested (johnston et al., 1993; johnston, 1999) . new molecular studies indicate that such differences manifest themselves on a bacterial species and strain level, as most mammals share similar bacterial phyla and genera (ley et al., 2008) .differences exist also in composition and in total bacterial numbers in the different compartments of the gi tract (table 2) . total bacterial counts and species richness increase along the gi tract and vary also between the intestinal lumen and the mucosa (mentula et al., 2005) . the stomach harbors between 10 1 and 10 6 cfu/g of bacteria. bacterial counts in the duodenum and jejunum are typically small (10 5 cfu/ml of content), but can reach up to 10 9 cfu/ml in some dogs and cats (johnston, 1999) . this is considerably greater than found in the duodenum of humans, where total bacterial counts >10 5 cfu/g have been associated with the clinical syndrome small intestinal bacterial overgrowth. cats appear to have greater counts of anaerobic bacteria in their small intestine compared with dogs (johnston et al., 1993) . the distal small intestine (i.e., ileum) contains a more diverse microbiota and greater bacterial numbers (10 7 cfu/ml). bacterial counts in the colon range between 10 9 and 10 11 cfu/g of content (benno et al., 1992; mentula et al., 2005) . bacteroides, clostridium, lactobacillus, bifidobacterium spp., and enterobacteriaceae are the predominant bacterial groups that have been cultured from the canine and feline intestine (table 2) .molecular tools have greatly expanded our knowledge about the phylogenetic diversity within the canine and feline gut. recent studies have revealed several hundred bacterial phylotypes in the canine intestinal tract (suchodolski et al., 2009; swanson et al., 2010) . the phyla firmicutes, bacteroidetes, proteobacteria, fusobacteria, and actinobacteria constitute more than 99% of all gut microbiota in dogs and cats. the remaining bacterial groups are represented by the phyla spirochaetes, tenericutes, verrucomicrobia, cyanobacteria, chloroflexi, and a few unclassified bacterial lineages. generally, aerobic bacteria or facultative anaerobic bacteria occur in greater abundance in the small intestine, whereas anaerobes predominate in the large intestine. in the stomach, mucosa-adherent helicobacter spp. predominate, followed by lactobacillus and streptococcus spp., and clostridia spp. whereas the vast majority of cats and dogs harbor various helicobacter spp. in their stomach, helicobacter pylori, the clinically most important helicobacter species in humans, has not been isolated from pet dogs or cats (rossi et al., 2008) . the proximal small intestine harbors approximately 10 different bacterial phyla, with clostridia, lactobacillales, and proteobacteria being most abundant (suchodolski et al., 2009) . proteobacteria and spirochaetes are more abundant in the proximal gi tract and typically represent <1% of obtained sequences in the large intestine of healthy animals. firmicutes, bacteroides, and fusobacteria appear to be the predominant bacterial groups in the large intestine. however, the reported abundance of these bacterial groups differs between studies. for example, percentages of firmicutes range between 25 and 95% of obtained sequencing tags ritchie et al., 2010; swanson et al., 2010; handl et al., 2011) . it is likely that these discrepancies may be due to differences in dna extraction methods and pcr protocols between studies. actinobacteria were identified as highly abundant in fecal samples using comparative chaperonin 60 gene sequence analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization (inness et al., 2007; desai et al., 2009; jia et al., 2010) . this is not surprising, because it has been shown that 16s rrna gene approaches with universal bacterial primers typically underestimate actinobacteria (ritchie et al., 2010) . bi- fidobacteria, members of the actinobacteria appear to be less abundant in cats and dogs compared with humans (inness et al., 2007; jia et al., 2010) . the firmicutes are a heterogeneous bacterial phylum, comprising several distinct phylogenetically clostridium clusters. these clusters differ in abundance along the intestinal tract. clusters xiva and iv encompass many important short-chain fatty acids (scfa) producing bacteria (e.g., ruminococcus spp., faecalibacterium spp., dorea spp., and turicibacter spp.) and predominate in the ileum and colon. cluster xi and cluster i (clostridium perfringens-group) are the second most abundant group in the small and large intestine of dogs and cats (ritchie et al., 2008; suchodolski et al., 2008a) .several studies have described the metabolic products generated by the canine and feline intestinal microbiota, including vfa, lactate, ammonia, and other end products (sunvold et al., 1995; sparkes et al., 1998; thompson et al., 1998) . of significance for gi health is the ability of intestinal microbes to ferment dietary products into scfa (topping and clifton, 2001) . of those, acetate, propionate, and butyrate are most abundant, constituting approximately 60, 25, and 10%, respectively, of vfa in the canine and feline fecal samples (sunvold et al., 1995; barry et al., 2010) . minor components of the vfa are branched-chain fatty acids, including isobutyric acid, butyric acid, and isoval-eric acid, which are formed during protein degradation (macfarlane and macfarlane, 2003; barry et al., 2010) .although marked differences in the phylogenetic composition of the intestinal microbiota have been observed between individual animals of the same animal species, the metabolic end products are typically quite similar between individuals. recent metagenomics studies have revealed that despite phylogenetic differences, individuals share a wide array of microbial genes, indicating that the human intestine harbors a core microbiome (turnbaugh et al., 2009) . furthermore, it is suggested that a functional redundancy exists in the gi tract. several members of the community are able to perform similar functions, and if one microbial group is displaced because of perturbations (e.g., antibiotic therapy), other members of the community are capable of maintaining a stable ecosystem function (dethlefsen et al., 2008; suchodolski et al., 2009 ). the core microbiome has not been well defined in dogs and cats.the mammalian gi tract harbors complex communities of fungi, archaea, protozoa, and viruses. recent molecular studies have provided more in-depth analysis about the diversity of these microorganisms in healthy animals, but their interactions, their influences on the host, and their role in gi disease remain unclear. cul- davis et al., 1977; benno et al., 1992; johnston et al., 1993; mentula et al., 2005 . tivation studies have reported yeasts and molds in the intestine of approximately 25% healthy beagle dogs (davis et al., 1977; mentula et al., 2005) . molecular tools have revealed fungi in the small intestine of 76% of the dogs evaluated (suchodolski et al., 2008b) . a recent metagenomic approach estimated the abundance of fungi in canine fecal samples as <0.1% of total microbiota . archaea are single-celled microorganisms and are evolutionary distinct from bacteria and eukaryotes. archaea are commensals in the intestine of ruminants and have recently been described in the human and canine intestine, with methanobacteriales most commonly reported, representing approximately 1% of total microbioal sequencing tags .reported viruses in the gi tract of dogs and cats are limited to a few families, such as rotavirus, coronavirus, and parvovirus (kempf et al., 2010) . new metagenomic studies revealed a highly diverse viral community in the canine intestine, composed of several hundred doublestranded dna viruses, with the vast majority classified as bacteriophages . future studies will need to evaluate the prevalence and abundance of single-stranded dna and rna viruses in the canine and feline gi tract.a balanced intestinal ecosystem primes and stimulates the immune system, aids in the defense against invading intestinal pathogens, and provides nutritional benefits to the host. although animals can be raised under germ-free conditions, several morphological and immunological differences between germ-free and conventionally raised animals indicate that commensal microbes contribute significantly to the development and maintenance of gut structure. for example, germ-free rodents have an altered epithelial architecture (e.g., thinner lamina propria, reduced number of peyer's patches, and lymphoid follicles) and have a reduced turnover time of epithelial cells (hooper et al., 2001) . dogs raised germ-free show similar growth rates as conventionally raised dogs, but they demonstrate an underdeveloped lymphoid system and have decreased immunoglobulin concentrations (cohn and heneghan, 1991) . however, germ-free dogs are capable of mounting an adequate immune response to antigenic stimulation. wound healing and blood-clotting mechanisms in germ-free-raised dogs are similar as in conventionally raised animals (cohn and heneghan, 1991) . the intestine of germ-free dogs is characterized by thinner villi and a reduction in both the lamina propria and mucosal surface area (thompson and trexler, 1971) . interestingly, surgically induced strangulation obstruction of the small intestine and surgically induced bile peritonitis did not lead to death in germ-free-raised dogs, whereas conventionally raised dogs showed 100% mortality, emphasizing the role of intestinal bacteria for the severity of the disease (cohn and heneghan, 1991) .the resident microbiota is an integral part of the intestinal barrier, which protects the host from invading pathogens, a mechanism termed colonization resistance. the proposed mechanisms include the competition for oxygen, nutrients, mucosal adhesion sites, and the creation of a physiologically restrictive environment for nonresident bacterial species (e.g., secretion of antimicrobials, alterations in gut ph, production of hydrogen sulfide; kanauchi et al., 2005) . therefore, young dogs and cats with colonization resistance not yet fully established are typically more susceptible to invading pathogens (e.g., campylobacter jejuni). the sterile gi tract of newborn puppies and kittens is colonized within hours after birth by bacteria present in the birth canal and surrounding environment. after 24 h, aerobic and anaerobic counts exceed 10 8 cfu/g of intestinal content (buddington, 2003) . aerobic and anaerobic bacteria are at similar numbers in the first weeks after birth, but the proportions of anaerobes are greater during adulthood (buddington, 2003) . the presence of intestinal bacteria in early life is necessary to establish oral tolerance to commensal bacteria and food antigens, to prevent onset of an inappropriate immune response, which may lead to chronic gi inflammation (bauer et al., 2006) . microbes interact and stimulate the immune host system, as has been shown by administration of specific bacterial strains as probiotics in dogs and cats. for example, administration of lactobacillus acidophilus dsm13241 increased granulocyte phagocytic activity (marshall-jones et al., 2006) . growing puppies that received enterococcus faecium sf68 for 20 wk showed increased plasma iga concentrations compared with the control group (benyacoub et al., 2003) .the majority of colonic bacteria are anaerobes and their main functions are to produce energy from food and to help in the competitive exclusion of potentially pathogenic bacteria. the slower flow of ingesta and the increased time and availability of nutrients favors the microbial diversity in the colon. bacteria within the ecosystem have developed cooperative strategies to transform the complexity of nutrients for their own benefit as well as that of the host. colonic bacteria provide digestive enzymes that allow the utilization of complex carbohydrates. microbes metabolize sloughed epithelial cells, endogenous mucus, and nondigested substrates that have passed through the small intestine. the latter are predominantly complex carbohydrates, including starch and dietary fiber, such as cellulose, pectin, and fructans (topping and clifton, 2001) . the fermentation of these substrates results in the production of scfa (e.g., acetate, propionate, and butyrate) that provide the energy for bacterial metabolism but also for epithelial cell growth (sunvold et al., 1995) . up to 7% of the metabolic energy of dogs, and to a lesser extent in cats, is produced by microbial fermentation in the colon (herschel et al., 1981; brosey et al., 2000) . the fecal concentrations of microbial metabolic prod-ucts can be modified through dietary modulation, such as varying protein or fiber content (e.g., through prebiotic supplementation) in the diet (huurinainen, 2009; barry et al., 2010) .normal intestinal motility is a major defense mechanism against attachment of pathogenic bacteria in the small intestine, and subnormal intestinal motility has been associated with small intestinal dysbiosis. physiological concentrations of scfa stimulated intestinal motility in the canine ileum, emphasizing the importance of microbial fermentation products on host health (kamath et al., 1987) . in vitro studies in dogs and cats revealed that physiological concentrations of scfa stimulate contraction of longitudinal, but not circular smooth muscles in the canine and feline colon, indicating that scfa may also contribute to in vivo colonic motility (mcmanus et al., 2002; rondeau et al., 2003) . however, no effects of scfa on canine colonic motility were observed in in vivo studies (flourie et al., 1989) .it is obvious that the close relationship between the intestinal microbiota and host cells will have a significant impact on gi health. gastrointestinal disease may develop due to colonization with transient pathogens, due to an overgrowth by opportunistic resident bacterial groups, or due to an altered cross-talk between the intestinal innate immune system and the commensal microbiota. invasion with specific pathogens may profoundly disturb the intestinal epithelium by altering the structure of the gi mucosa. enteric pathogens can penetrate into the submucosa and peyer's patches, or produce exo-or enterotoxins that alter enterocyte function. enterotoxins produced by pathogenic bacteria (e.g., enterotoxigenic clostridium perfringens, and toxigenic clostridium difficile) can stimulate mucosal fluid secretions, whereas villus effacement and loss of surface area will diminish mucosal absorptive capacity, resulting in diarrhea (marks and kather, 2003) . a dysfunction of the mucosal barrier can lead to an increase in intestinal permeability and clinically significant bacterial translocation. intestinal pathogens that have been associated with acute or chronic diarrhea in dogs and cats include enterotoxigenic c. perfringens, toxigenic c. difficile, salmonella, escherichia coli (i.e., enteropathogenic, enterotoxigenic, enterohemorrhagic, and enteroinvasive), and specific campylobacter spp. (i.e., campylobacter jejuni; olson and sandstedt, 1987; marks et al., 2002; sancak et al., 2004) .several gi diseases of dogs and cats are associated with nonspecific alterations in the intestinal microbiota. small intestinal dysbiosis is a common disorder that is suspected to be caused by an intestinal dysbiosis. this disorder commonly has been referred to as small intestinal bacterial overgrowth or antibiotic-responsive diarrhea, as it has been previously suggested that affected dogs harbor increased bacterial counts (i.e., >10 5 cfu/ml) in their duodenum (batt et al., 1983) . patients respond favorably to antibiotics (e.g., tylosin), but diarrhea usually returns shortly after cessation of therapy . recent studies found no correlation between increased duodenal bacterial counts and disease status of dogs (german et al., 2003) . failure of host control mechanisms that regulate bacterial counts in the small intestine may lead to more general changes in bacterial populations, causing a dysbiosis in the small intestine. these regulatory mechanisms include intestinal motility and antimicrobial substances in pancreatic and biliary secretions. therefore, spontaneous changes in gi motility or procedures that alter the architecture of the intestine (e.g., surgical creation of intestinal loops and resection of the ileocolic valve) can predispose animals to intestinal dysbiosis (thompson et al., 1998) . in exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, the defective pancreas is not capable of secreting antimicrobial peptides, and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is often associated with an increase or compositional changes in small intestinal microbiota (williams et al., 1987; simpson et al., 1990) . these changes may lead to various mechanisms that negatively affect the function of the gi tract. examples are the dehydroxylation of fatty acids leading to impaired fat absorption, alterations in the intestinal barrier with increased intestinal permeability, the destruction of brush border enzymes and epithelial carrier proteins, and competition for substrates leading to nutrient and vitamin malabsorption (e.g., vitamin b 12 ; rutgers et al., 1993 rutgers et al., , 1996 melgarejo et al., 2000) .there is emerging evidence implicating commensal intestinal microbiota in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease (ibd) in humans, dogs, and cats (janeczko et al., 2008; suchodolski et al., 2010) . the currently proposed pathogenic mechanism behind ibd involves an abnormal interaction between commensal intestinal microbiota and the intestinal immune system in genetically predisposed individuals (packey and sartor, 2009) . for example, genome-wide association studies in humans with crohn's disease have revealed at least 33 susceptibility genes, and many of these genes are associated with a defective bacterial killing of the innate immune system (e.g., nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing protein 2, also known as caspase activation and recruitment domain 15; packey and sartor, 2009 ). the microbiota is implicated in human ibd because inflammation is present in gut compartments with the greatest bacterial counts. studies in engineered animal models with susceptibility for inflammation indicate that ibd develops only if bacteria are present (packey and sartor, 2009) . the cause-effect relationship between microbial alterations and inflammation is not well determined. it is suspected that intestinal inflammation causes a dysbiosis toward gramnegative bacteria (i.e., proteobacteria), and a depletion of commensal bacterial groups may lead to a reduced capability of the intestinal microbiome to downregulate an aberrant intestinal immune response, leading to a perturbation of intestinal inflammation (sokol et al., 2008) . new hypotheses indicate that campylobacter jejuni and salmonella gastroenteritis trigger changes in mucosal architecture and in the innate immune system, which diminish the colonization resistance of resident microbes (stecher and hardt, 2008) . in human ibd, decreases in the phyla firmicutes and bacteroidetes, and increases in proteobacteria are commonly observed. furthermore, reductions in the diversity of clostridium clusters xiva and iv (i.e., ruminococcaceae, faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and c. coccoides subgroups) in ibd patients indicate that these bacterial groups, important producers of scfa, play an important role in maintenance of gi health (sokol et al., 2008; packey and sartor, 2009 ). recent molecular studies performed in dogs and cats have also revealed differences in the intestinal microbiome between healthy animals and ibd patients (table 3). dogs and cats with idiopathic small intestinal ibd were significantly enriched in enterobacteriaceae compared with controls (janeczko et al., 2008; xenoulis et al., 2008) . two other studies revealed an increase in proteobacteria (i.e., pseudomonas spp.) in the duodenum of ibd dogs . similar to humans, ibd dogs showed a reduction in the proportions of bacteroidales and clostridiales (e.g., genus faecalibacterium, ruminococcus, and dorea within the clostridium clusters iv and xiva; jergens et al., 2010) . reduced bacterial species richness was identified in the small intestine of ibd dogs (xenoulis et al., 2008; craven et al., 2009) . compositional changes have also been observed in the large intestine of dogs and cats with chronic enteropathies. fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis revealed greater microscopic counts of total bacteria, bifidobacterium spp. and bacteroides spp., in healthy cats, whereas cats with ibd had greater microscopic counts of desulfovibrio spp., potential producers of toxic sulfides (inness et al., 2007) .similar to humans, studies have indicated that feline and canine ibd are likely associated with an immune dysregulation, as differential cytokine expressions have been identified in dogs and cats with chronic enteropathies (nguyen van et al., 2006; janeczko et al., 2008; luckschander et al., 2010) . several studies have evaluated expression of toll-like receptors (tlr) in dogs with chronic enteropathies. toll-like receptors are crucial members of the innate immune system. they are located on cell surfaces, recognize microbe-associated molecular patterns, and activate immune responses. mucosal expression of tlr-2, tlr-4, and tlr-9 was increased in various dog breeds with ibd (burgener et al., 2008; mcmahon et al., 2010) . german shepherd dogs are predisposed to chronic enteropathies, and a recent study has revealed an increased tlr-2 and a decreased tlr-5 expression when compared with healthy greyhound dogs . furthermore, the microbiota of affected german shepherd dogs differed from the control dogs, and was enriched in streptococcus and abiotrophia spp., indicating a potential interplay between resident microbiota and the innate immune system .granulomatous colitis of boxer dogs, sometimes also referred to as histiocytic ulcerative colitis of boxer dogs, has recently been associated with the presence of adherent and invasive escherichia coli (aiec; simpson et al., 2006) . these aiec isolates share similarities to aiec isolates obtained from ileal tissues of humans with crohn's disease. the inflammation responds well to antimicrobial treatment, and improvement of clinical signs correlates with the intracellular clearance of bacteria (craven et al., 2010b) . because this disease occurs almost exclusively in boxer dogs, a genetic susceptibility has been hypothesized. a recent genome-wide analysis of affected and unaffected boxer dogs has identified snp in the gene encoding neutrophil cytosolic factor 2, a subunit of the nadph complex in phagocytes (craven et al., 2010b) . the defect in the nadph complex may result in an inability to eliminate intracellular pathogens, predisposing the host to chronic infections.the use of molecular tools has vastly improved our understanding of the complexity and the diversity of the intestinal microbiome of dogs and cats. these methods have allowed us to monitor and to understand microbial dynamics in response to various environmental influences (e.g., dietary changes, antibiotic treatment) and to identify bacterial groups that appear to play a key role in maintaining homeostasis and balance of the intestinal ecosystem (e.g., members of the clostridium clusters xiva and iv). these bacterial groups are often depleted in intestinal inflammation. furthermore, recent studies have revealed differential immune responses in dogs and cats with chronic enteropathies and have also identified underlying genetic defects in the host innate immunity. together, these findings clearly implicate an interaction of the innate immune system and commensal intestinal microbiota in the pathogenesis of canine and feline enteropathies.recently, the distributed stream processing systems (dspss) [1] [2] [3] [4] offer a powerful means to extract the valuable information from the data streams in time. we usually use the directed acyclic graph (dag) [5] to model the data stream processing application (dspa) in dspss. in the dag, each vertex represents a kind of operations, named as the operator, and each edge represents a data stream between two operators. at the run time, the dsps initiates a certain number of operator instances for each operator and deploy them on the runtime environment.considering the constant fluctuating data stream, we adopt the elastic scaling in the dspss, which adjusts the number of the operators dynamically, to satisfy the qos requirements. there have been many researches on the elastic scaling.zacheilas et al. [6] adjusts the number of operators based on the state transition graph. hidalgo et al. [7] evaluates the processing power of the operator through the benchmarking, and adjusts the number of the operator instances based on the threshold and the workload prediction. wei et al. [8] only adjusts the cpu frequency of the virtual machines as the workload fluctuates to reduce the energy cost. marangozova-martin et al. [9] presents the method to allocate three levels of resources to the operator instances including virtual machines, processes and threads. the above methods allocate the same amount of resources to the instances of the same operator, but they ignore the correlation between the operator performance and resource provision. actually, the unreasonable resources provision for the operator instance will cause some severe problems. for example, over-provision will result in a waste of resources. besides, the under-provision means that the dspss will create a lot of instances to achieve high processing performance, which results in the huge overhead of the scheduling and the state transition.in this paper, we present a quantitative elastic scaling framework, named qescalor, to allocate the resources for the operator instances quantitatively based on the actual performance requirements. this framework firstly builds the operator performance and resource provision model (oprpm), then it generates the low-cost elastic scaling plan based on the oprpm. the contributions of this paper are as follows:-we use the qescalor, which first considers the correlation between the operator performance and resource provision, to enhance the performance of the resource provision. -we propose an online algorithm, named dsa. it learns the correlation samples of the operator performance and resource provision based on the gradient strategy and re-sampling mechanism. besides, we use the random forest regression model (rfr) [10] to build the oprpm to get the suitable resource provision options for the operator performance requirement. -we present a quantitative and cost-based elastic scaling algorithm, qcesa.it refers to the prediction of the workload [11] and the operator performance [12] to generate the low-cost scaling plan based on the oprpm to achieve the resource-efficient elastic scaling to improve the performance. -we implement the qescalor as a key part of our datadock [11] . the experiment results show that our qescalor can enhance the performance with the lower scaling cost on the real-world datasets.we organize the rest of our paper as follows. section 2 describes the design of qescalor. section 3 shows the experimental results of our framework. finally, sect. 4 concludes our paper.in this subsection, we describe our framework qescalor in detail in fig. 1 , which contains three modules: the online operator performance sampler (oopser), the operator performance and resource provision modeler (oprpmer) and the quantitative elasticity controller (qecer). as is shown in fig. 1 , the qescalor is an important module in the datadock. in our previous work [11] , we present our distributed stream processing system, datadock, mainly aiming at processing the heterogeneous data in real-time. we use the oopser to learn the correlation samples of the operator performance and resource provision online. then we use these samples as the input of the oprpmer to build the operator performance and resource provision model (oprpm). at last, we use the qecer to adjust the scaling plan according to the workload prediction of the bgelasor [11] , the operator performance prediction of the omopredictor [12] and the oprpm.as is shown in fig. 1 , we take the dspa including the new operator o 1 as an example to describe the work process of the qescalor. the process contains three main stages.-correlation samples online learning. when we use the qecer to execute the dspa including the new operator o 1 at time t 0 , it registers the o 1 on the oopser. the qecer starts enough instances of the o 1 with the default resources provision based on the cost-based elastic-scaling algorithm [11] and a single sampling instance with the rp a depended on the oopser. then the oopser interacts with the stream distributor (sd) to allocate the workload between the normal instances and the sampling instance. the oopser continues to collect the operator performance and resource utilization metrics until the current sampling process convergences at time t i . the above sampling process will continue several rounds based on the gradient strategy until the operator performance no longer increases with the growth of resources. for example, the oopser learns the correlation samples of resource group rp a, rp b and rp c from time t 0 to t k . -operator performance and resource provision modeling. during the sampling process, we use the oopser to invoke the oprpmer to build the oprpm using the rfr, when it completes the learning process of one kind of source provision. -quantitative elastic scaling. we run the qecer periodically. it takes the workload prediction of the bgelasor and the operator performance prediction of the omopredictor as the input and makes the quantitative scaling decision based on the oprpm. as is shown in fig. 1 , from time t 0 to t j , the oprpmer has learned the oprpm of resource provision rp a and rp b. to process the workload from t j to t k , the qecer allocates two normal instances with the resource provision rp a and one instance with the resource provision rp b. and from t k to t l , the qecer allocates three instances with the resource provision rp a, rp b and rp c respectively.we adopt the oopser to collect the correlation samples of the operator performance and resource provision to build the oprpm. we focus on the two types of resources: the cpu and the memory. we do not consider the network bandwidth in our work, because the network bandwidth is more sufficient and cheaper than the cpu and the memory in the data center. therefore, we only consider the correlation samples learning of two types of operators [12] : the computeintensive operator (coperator) and the compute-intensive operator mixed with the memory i/o (cmoperator). we propose the dynamic-sampling-algorithm (dsa) to collect the correlation samples online. we show it in algorithm 1. the sampling process consists of three steps: firstly, we create the sampling operator instance with specific resource provision. secondly, we do not stress test on the sampling operator instance until the performance of the operator instance converges. thirdly, we continuously collect the correlation samples during the test. since we spend some time in stress testing, it will take a long time to complete the sampling. in order to speed upsampling, we dynamically adjust the sampling step according to the gradient of the performance change of the sampling operator instance. meanwhile, we use the re-sampling method to add sampling points when the operator performance fluctuates to improve accuracy.we are processing the online workload while sampling with the normal running of the dspas. we dynamically allocate the workload between the normal instances and the single sampling instance. it can reduce the time and resource overhead obviously compared with running the sampling alone.when we complete the sampling, we get the correlation sample set we use the oprpmer to build the model of the operator performance and the resource provision, with which we can predict the operator performance based on the given resource provision.the correlation between operator performance and resource provision is commonly complex and nonlinear. the linear regression model can not capture the latent features of the correlation well, resulting in bad prediction. besides, in our scenario, the correlation samples set cs o is commonly small. using the single nonlinear regression model, like the svr [13] , leads to overfitting easily. the ensemble learning model can improve the robustness of prediction by integrating many weak classifiers, which is more suitable for small sample learning. we adopt the random forest regression (rfr) model in the oprpmer to capture the nonlinear correlation between the operator performance and the resource provision. according to the experiments, compared to the boosting models, such as the adaboost [14] , gbdt [15] and xgboost [16] , the rfr model performs better. because the bootstrap strategy adopted by rfr model can avoid overfitting effectively when the sample set is small.we take the correlation sample set cs o learned by the oopser as the input to build the model in the oprpmer. when invoked by the qecer, the oprp-mer takes r = (cpu, mem) as input to get the operator performance prediction p o corresponding to the r.in this section, we build the qecer, which can ensure the end-to-end latency with the minimum elastic-scaling cost. it contains two parts: the cost model and quantitative & cost-based elastic scaling algorithm (qcesa).we build a cost model to evaluate the total cost of all elasticscaling actions for an operator from the current epoch s to the future epoch f. the total cost w o (ins), the startup times c u o·t (ins) and the shutdown times c d o·t (ins) are defined as: where p r o is the cost of system resources used by the single instance with resource r for the operator o. |ins t o·r | is the instance number of operator o with resource r at time t. in addition, p erf o·r denotes the performance of each operator and r∈res |ins t o·r |p erf o·r denotes the total performance of operator o at time t. w orkload t is the workload at epoch t. in order to satisfy the end-to-end latency, we ensure that the performance of each operator is not less than the workload. in other word, r∈res |ins t o·r |p erf o·r ≥ w orkload t at any time. and p u o is the startup-cost of a single o instance. p d o is the shutdown-cost of a single o instance. qcesa. to solve this expression min(w o ), we propose the quantitative and cost-based elastic scaling algorithm (qcesa). we show it in algorithm 2. the qcesa considers not only the cost of instance startup and shutdown, but also the correlation of operator performance and resource provision. we use the qcesa to balance these parts of the cost to guarantee a low cost.at first, we use the qcesa to compute the max workload workload max during t ∈ [t c , t f ]. then use it to calculate all candidates at all time t ∈ [t c , t f ]. each candidate is a combination of instances with different resource provision and instance number, of which the total performance p erf t cand·total ∈ [w orkload t , w orkload max ]. at last, we use dynamic programming to calculate the minimal cost.settings. our experiments run on kubernetes (k8s) cluster, which we use as the resource manager on the datadock, including eight servers. the version of k8s is 1.14.1. there are two types of servers in the k8s cluster: two gpu servers and six cpu servers. each gpu server comprises 36 cores intel xeon cpu e5-2697 v4 2.30 ghz, 256 gb memory, two nvidia geforce gtx 1060ti cards, and 500 gb disks. each cpu server comprises 36 cores intel xeon cpu e5-2697 v4 2.30 ghz, 256 gb memory, and 500 gb disks. we use the gpu servers to run the jobmanager, conducting the training and evaluation. we adopt the cpu servers to run the task manager, in which the operator instance runs. besides, we conduct the evaluation of the oprpmer with sklearn 0.22.1 running on python 3.7. table 1 , we show our datasets and the intermediate results of our model at different stages. firstly, we present the we use the real online workload processed by the datadock in a day as the original dataset (oriwl-1day). in oopser, we use two sampling algorithms which are fssa and dsa to sample oriwl-1day. f1, f2, f3, f4 and f5 denote different steps of fssa. a, b, c and d represent that the original dataset is processed by these operators. co1 denotes cpu operator and cmo1 denotes cpu-memory operator. in oprpmer, we use dsa-a/b/c/d as the train set and use f1-a/b/c/d as the test set. then we obtain the output of the random forest regression (rfr), dsa-rfr-a/b/c/d. in qecer, we should evaluate the system performance. from oprmer, we use dsa-rfr-a/b/c/d as the input. from omopredictor, we adopt op-pm-30 as the input, which represents the operator performance on datadock online for 30 days. for the input of the bgelasor, we use oriwl-60days-flowstat which represents the flow statistics for 60 days of data load on the datadock online. f1 in our algorithm, we guarantee the latency to reduce the total cost. thus, we evaluate the quantitative elasticity controller from two aspects: the total cost and the end-to-end latency guarantee. we use the cost-balance-algorithm (cba) [11] as the baseline algorithm. the cba considers the running cost and the operation cost. compared to the cba, the qcesa takes the operator resource provision into account. the performance of qcesa depends on the sampling of oopser and the predicted results of oprpmer. for the oopser, we compare our method, dsa, with the fixed-step-sampling-algorithm (fssa) to demonstrate that dsa is more accurate in the sampling stage to enhance scheduling accuracy and reduce the cost. for evaluating the oprpmer, we compare the random forest regression model (rfr) with the following methods: adaboost, gbdt and xgboost, to demonstrate that rfr is more suitable for the current application scenarios. it can get more accurate prediction results and affect the overall performance of scheduling.total cost. in this part, we take the cmo1 as an example to compare by using the total cost of elastic scaling. we use the workload prediction to generate the scaling plan for the cmo1 and calculate the total cost. moreover, to evaluate the effectiveness of the qcesa, we use four different resource provisions to test the cba respectively. the four resource provision granularities are as follows: 1) r 1 = (cpu = 0.6 * core, mem = 33.2 mb), 2) r 2 = (cpu = 1.2 * core, mem = 33.3 mb), 3) r 3 = (1.8 * core, mem = 33.5 mb), 4) r 4 = (cpu = 2.4 * core, mem = 33.8 mb). in fig. 2 , we can find that most of the time, the total cost of the qcesa is less than that of the cba. besides, as the system runs, the performance of the qcesa is becoming much higher than the cba.end-to-end latency guarantee. in this part, we focus on the end-to-end latency guarantee. we still take the cmo1 as an example to run on the datadock and monitor the end-to-end latency.in fig. 3 , we can see that both the qcesa and the cba can guarantee that the performance of the operator is no less than the workload. and the end-to-end latency always stays stable and satisfies the requirement of the qos. the reason is that both algorithms start the instances before the workload rises. thus they can process the workload timely.to measure the impact of sampling, we compare the dsa with the fixed-step-sampling-algorithm (fssa) in oopser. we run the fssa and the dsa separately to collect the correlation samples of the four operators. for each operator, we run the dsa with the sampling step set to 1 and use the sampling result as the baseline. besides, we also run the fssa with the sampling step set to 2, 3, 4 and 5 as the contrast evaluation. after we get all correlation samples of four operators with the fssa and the dsa, we use the oprpmer to build the oprpms. then, we predict the operator performance based on the minimum sampling step using the oprpms. we use the root mean square errors (rmse), the mean absolute errors (mae) and the sampling number (sn) to evaluate the effectiveness of the dsa.where x i is the operator performance of baseline, andx i is the predicted operator performance. as is shown in table 2 , we can observe that the performance of the fssa is not stable. when the step of the fssa is 2, the co1 and the cmo1 get the best performance. but when the step of the fssa is 3, the co2 and the cmo2 get the best performance. and the dsa performs well for all the four operators. its performance is close to or even reaches the best performance. moreover, the dsa has fewer sampling numbers when reaching the same performance. it benefits from the dynamical sampling strategy.we show the sampling result of the co1 and the cmo2 in fig. 4 . we can see where the performance fluctuates obviously, the sampling step is close to the minimum sampling step. instead, when the performance changes smoothly, the dsa only uses a few sampling points to capture the main characteristics of performance changes. to enhance the total performance, we should select the better prediction method for the oprpmer. so we compare the random forest regression model with the following methods: adaboost, gbdt and xgboost, to demonstrate the effectiveness of the rfr model in this scenario. we use the rmse and the mae to evaluate the performances of each model. there are several hyper-parameters in these approaches, we use the grid search and 10-folds cross-validation to select the key hyper-parameters. besides, we normalize all the input to the range [0,1] using the min-max scaler. we repeat the experiment 10 times for each model to reduce the random experimental error and take the average of the whole test results as the final result.as for the rfr, we set bootstrap = t rue, criterion = mse , max featur− es = auto , min samples leaf = 1, min samples split = 2, n estimators = 100. as for the svr, we set kernel = rbf , gamma = scale , c = 1.0. as for the adaboost, we set base estimator = n one, learning rate = 1.0, loss = linear , n estimators = 50. as for the gbdt, we set n estimators = 100, crit− erion = f riedman mse , max features = n one, min samples leaf = 1. as for the xgboost, we set booster = gbtree , learning rate = 0.1, max depth = 3, n estimators = 100. table 3 shows that the effectiveness of the ensemble learning is significantly better than the svr. because in our scenario, the size of the correlation sample set is smaller, the advantage of the ensemble learning is more prominent.besides, there is not much difference between the adaboost, gbdt, and xgboost. however, compared to the above boosting models, the rfr performs better. because the rfr model adopts the bootstrap strategy, it can effectively prevent overfitting when the size of the sample set is small.in this paper, we present a quantitative elastic scaling framework, named qescalor, to allocate resources for the operator instances quantitatively based on the actual performance requirements. it contains three key modules: the oopser, the oprrmer and the qecer. firstly, we use the oopser to learn the correlation samples of the operator performance and resource provision online. then we use these samples as the input of the oprpmer to build the operator performance and resource provision model (oprpm) by using the random forest regression model. at last, we use the qecer to adjust the scaling plan according to the real workload fluctuation. the experimental results show that, compared with the state-of-the-art methods, the qescalor is better on the realworld datasets. and we can address the problem which ignores the correlation between the operator performance and resource provision.pigs have been extensively used in biomedical research due to anatomical and physiological similarities to humans. moreover, progress in gene editing platforms and construct delivery methods allow efficiently, targeted modifications of the porcine genome and significantly broadened the application of pig models in biopharming and biomedicine.target editing is possible through site-specific nucleases, of which the following are most commonly used: zinc finger nucleases (zfns), transcription activator-like effectors (tales), and nucleases from the crispr/cas (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/crispr associated) system. introducing modifications in a specific site of the genome is possible due to cellular processes of repairing double-strand breaks induced by site-specific nucleases. double-strand breaks may be repaired in two ways: by non-homologous end joining (nhej) or by homologous recombination (hr). repair provided by nhej may lead to the formation of indel (insertion/deletion) mutations in the table 1 . summary of the most important advantages and disadvantages of the methods for obtaining genetically modified animals.advantages increased efficiency of the transgene integration precise transformation and selection of modified cells used in cloning the number of damaged zygotes do not exceed 10% the obtained animals do not exhibit mosaicism modification is also revealed in germ cells-transgenic offspring disadvantages low process efficiency (2%-3% in pigs) very low efficiency the possibility of random integration of the transgene early fetal mortality high process invasiveness the possibility of genetic defectsgenetically modified animals as research models for human diseases are a very important tool in searching for and developing new methods of therapy. a suitable model organism should be characterized by rapid growth, a high number of offspring, easy and inexpensive breeding, ability to be easily manipulated, and having a sequenced genome. initially, only rodents were used as a model in biomedical research. experiments on mice contributed to understanding the genetic background of numerous diseases. however, not every genetic disease induced in mice has the same clinical manifestation as in humans. furthermore, the short life span, together with a higher metabolic rate, makes the analysis of some hereditary diseases challenging.currently, pigs are one of the most important large animal models for biomedical research. many human diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases, obesity, and diabetes, have their counterparts in this species. the use of model organisms makes it possible to analyze diseases that occur naturally in animals with specific mutations and those deliberately induced. introduced animal genome changes may reflect mutations occurring in people suffering from specific genetic disorders. moreover, accurate and efficient genome editing can be used in the treatment of monogenic diseases. a slightly different direction of research is the use of genetically modified animal models in toxicological studies for testing drugs. genetically modified pigs are used as model organisms in research into various diseases, including cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases, neoplasms, and diabetes.cystic fibrosis (cf) is an autosomal recessive disorder manifested by bronchopulmonary failure and pancreatic enzyme insufficiency. cf is caused by a mutation in the gene responsible for the synthesis of the cftr (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) chloride channel, altering the mucosal function in the respiratory epithelium, pancreatic ducts, intestines, and sweat glands. the most common cystic fibrosis-causing mutation is the deletion of a phenylalanine at amino acid position 508 (df508). cf lung disease is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in cf patients. porcine lungs share many anatomical and histological similarities with humans. it has been shown that pigs in which the cftr gene was inactivated develop all symptoms of the disease occurring in humans, such as meconium ileus, defective chloride transport, pancreatic destruction, and focal biliary cirrhosis. this makes them a very good model species for this disease [14] [15] [16] . cystic fibrosis is a monogenic disease, and the insertion of the functional cftr gene into cf patient cells should theoretically restore the cftr channel function. therefore, pigs have also been used in gene therapy. the treatment with viral vectors successfully improved anion transport and inhibited bacterial growth [17, 18] . currently, the research focuses on improving the cf gene therapy with the use of the crispr/cas9 system. these efforts are focused on increasing the delivery efficiency of crispr/cas9 elements to target locus and obtaining sustained expression of the cftr transgene [19, 20] . it was demonstrated that precise integration of the human cftr gene at a porcine safe harbor locus through crispr/cas9-induced hdr-mediated knock-in allowed the achievement of persistent in vitro expression of the transgene in transduced cells. these results can help design effective gene therapy to treat cf patients [20] .duchenne muscular dystrophy (dmd) is a progressive, monogenic, x-linked lethal disease characterized by degenerative changes in muscle fibers and the connective tissue. it involves the degeneration of subsequent muscles-skeletal, respiratory, and cardiac-and progressive muscular dystrophy. muscular dystrophy is caused by a frameshift mutation in the dmd gene, which encodes dystrophin, a protein in muscle cells that connects the cytoskeleton with the cell membrane. the dystrophin gene contains 79 exons, with exons 3-7 and 45-55 being the most susceptible to mutations. dmd gene mutations are usually large deletions or duplications of one or several exons, as well as point mutations, leading to a change in the reading frame, the appearance of a premature stop codon, and failure to produce a stable protein. muscular dystrophy is most often diagnosed in early childhood, and patients become wheelchair dependent by 12 years of age. untreated boys die of cardiorespiratory complications around their 20 years. the rapid progress in gene editing gives hope for effective targeted therapies for dmd. moreover, the use of an animal model can facilitate the development of personalized treatment approaches. pigs with a dmd gene mutation (exon 52 deletion) develop human disease symptoms, such as lack of dystrophin in skeletal muscles, increased serum creatine kinase levels, progressive muscle dystrophy, and impaired mobility [21] . however, these animals died prematurely (up to 3 months old at most) what precluded natural breeding. the histological evaluation of skeletal muscles and diaphragm confirmed the presence of excessive fiber size variation, hypercontracted fibers, and segmentally necrotic fibers, resembled that of human dmd patients [21] . moreover, proteome analysis of biceps femoris muscle was performed. an increased amount of muscle repair-related proteins and reduced amount of respiratory chain proteins was found in tissue from 3-month-old dmd pigs. this indicated severe disturbances in aerobic energy production and a decrease in functional muscle tissue [22] . as the deletion of exon 52 in the human dmd gene is a common cause of duchenne muscular dystrophy, pigs can make an accurate research model for gene therapy. another porcine dmd model is genetically modified miniature pigs with a mutation in exon 27 in the dmd gene obtained by the crispr/cas9 system. in addition, these animals have shown symptoms of skeletal and heart muscle degeneration, characteristic of human patients with duchenne muscular dystrophy. reduced thickness of smooth muscle in the stomach and intestine was also observed in the pigs studied. however, founder pigs died of unreported causes [23] . although mutations in exon 27 are not reported in human dmd patients, pigs with this deletion constitute another useful animal dmd model. recently, moretti et al. demonstrated the restoration of dystrophin by intramuscular injection of crispr/cas9 components with the use of adeno-associated viral vectors in a pig model. in this study, pigs with dmd carrying a deletion of dmd exon 52 (d52dmd), resulting in a complete loss of dystrophin expression, were used. the restoration of dystrophin expression was possible due to the excision of exon 51 and the restoration of the dmd reading frame. the internally truncated d51-52dmd sufficed to improve skeletal muscle function, prevent malignant arrhythmias as well as prolonging lifespan of dmd pigs [24] . in the future, this strategy may prove useful in the clinical treatment of patients with d52dmd.alzheimer's disease (ad) is an age-related, progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by memory dysfunction followed by cognitive decline and disorientation. ad accounts for 50%-80% of human dementia cases. familial forms of ad are caused by autosomal mutations in the genes encoding presenilin 1 (psen1) and presenilin 2 (psen2) and amyloid precursor protein (app). these mutations are associated with the accumulation of amyloid β (aβ) peptide in senile plaques and phosphorylated tau protein in neurofibrillary tangles (nfts), which leads to synaptic damage and neuronal dysfunction [25] . the first ad model with the use of transgenic pigs was generated in 2009 by kragh et al. they produced göttingen mini pigs that carried a randomly integrated construct containing the cdna of the human app gene with ad causing a dominant mutation known as the swedish mutation (appsw) and a human pdgfβ promoter fragment [26] . although the transgene was specifically expressed in brain tissue at a high level, no ad phenotype was observed in mutant pigs. the same group also obtained göttingen minipigs with the human psen1 gene carrying the ad-causing met146ile mutation (psen1 m146i) and driven by a cytomegalovirus (cmv)-enhanced human ubic promoter. pigs were generated with the use of a site-specific integration system-recombinase-mediated cassette exchange (rmce) [27] . the psen1 m146i protein was expressed and tolerated well in the porcine brain, but also in this case, no symptoms of the ad disease were noticed. therefore, this group generated double transgenic göttingen minipigs with both appsw and psen1 m146i mutations. such a solution allowed the increase in intraneuronal accumulation of aβ [28] . in turn, another group obtained ad transgenic pigs using a retroviral multi-cistronic vector containing three ad-related human genes: app, tau, and psen1, with a total of six well-characterized mutations under the control of a fusion promoter: cmve+ hpdgfβ promoter region. they confirmed that transgenes were expressed at high levels in brain tissue and demonstrated a two-fold increase in aβ levels in the brains of transgenic pigs compared to wild-type [29] .cancer is a genetic disease involving uncontrolled, abnormal cell growth in the blood or solid organs resulting from acquired or inherited mutations. pigs represent a useful animal for the development and validation of new medicines and procedures in human tumor models. there are many resemblances in cancer biology between pigs and humans. these animals can correctly mimic human tumors and show similar pharmacokinetic responses to humans. adam et al. demonstrated that autologous transplantation of primary porcine cells transformed with retroviral oncogenic vectors caused tumorigenesis akin to those found in humans [30] . in turn, schook et al. induced tumor formation in pigs by introducing random transgenes that encode cre-dependent kras (kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog) g12d and tp53 (tumor protein 53) r167h oncogenic mutations (orthologous to human tp53 r175h) [31] . moreover, saalfrank et al. reported that porcine mesenchymal stem cells (mscs) resemble human mscs requiring disturbance of p53, kras, and myc signaling pathways to become a fully transformed phenotype [32] . at present, pig models commonly used in cancer research include the tp53 knock-out model of osteosarcoma and apc (adenomatous polyposis coli) mutations model of familial adenomatous polyposis (fap). tp53 is a known tumor suppressor gene, and a germline mutation within this gene leads to li-fraumeni syndrome, a rare, autosomal dominant disorder that predisposes carriers to cancer development. the first model of li-fraumeni syndrome using genetically modified pigs has been described by leuchs et al. they generated pigs carrying a latent tp53 r167h mutation that can be activated by the cre-lox recombinase system [33] . after several years of observation, it was noted that both pigs with homozygous tp53 knock-out and pigs with heterozygous knock-out of tp53 showed osteosarcoma development. the heterozygous knock-out caused the development of spontaneous osteosarcoma in older animals, while homozygous tp53 knock-out resulted in multiple large osteosarcomas in 7 to 8-month-old pigs [32] . moreover, sieren and colleagues generated genetically modified yucatan minipigs that carried the tp53 r167h mutation. animals heterozygous for this mutant allele showed no tumorigenesis process, whereas homozygotes that reached sexual maturity developed lymphomas, osteogenic tumors, and renal tumors at varying rates. the tumor formations were validated by computed tomography, histopathological evaluation, and magnetic resonance imaging [34] . familial adenomatous polyposis is an inherited disorder characterized by the development of numerous adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum which greatly increases the risk of colorectal cancer. the mutations in the apc tumor-suppressor gene are responsible for fap and may result in a hereditary predisposition to colorectal cancer. flisikowska et al. generated gene-targeted cloned pigs with translational stop signals at codon 1311 in porcine apc (apc 1311), orthologous to common germline apc 1309 mutations in human fap. evaluation of one-year-old pigs carrying the apc 1311 mutation showed aberrant crypt foci and adenomatous polyps with low-to high-grade intraepithelial dysplasia, similar to tumor progression as in human fap [35] . the apc 1311 pig model resulting in the development of polyposis in the colon and rectum can be useful in the diagnosis and therapy of colorectal cancer.cardiovascular diseases (cvds) are the major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. cvd is a group of disorders of the heart and blood vessels that involve coronary heart disease (such as angina and myocardial infarction), deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, peripheral arterial disease, cerebrovascular disease, and rheumatic heart disease. the dominant cause of cvd is atherosclerosis, which is characterized by the narrowing of arteries due to the accumulation of lipid and plaque formation. the plaque buildup restricts blood flow, and plaque burst can entail blood clots. similarities in heart anatomy and physiology, vessel size, blood parameters, coronary artery system anatomy, and lipoprotein metabolism make pigs a suitable model for the human cardiovascular system. atherosclerosis starts with the buildup of serum low-density lipoprotein (ldl), and mutations in the ldl receptor (ldlr) gene may cause familial hypercholesterolemia (fh). a porcine fh model has been generated in yucatan miniature pigs through recombinant adeno-associated virus-mediated targeted disruptions of the endogenous ldlr gene. ldlr+/− heterozygous pigs exhibited mild hypercholesterolemia, while ldlr−/− homozygotes animals were born with severe hypercholesterolemia and developed atherosclerotic lesions in the coronary arteries. these phenotypes were accelerated by high fat and high cholesterol diets [36] . the utilization of ldlr-deficient yucatan minipigs in the preclinical evaluation of therapeutics was also demonstrated. ldlr+/− and ldlr−/− pigs were used to assess the ability of novel drug-bempedoic acid (bema)-to reduce cholesterol biosynthesis. long-term treatment with bema decreased ldl cholesterol and attenuated aortic and coronary atherosclerosis in this fa model [37] . moreover, a model of fa and atherosclerosis was created by using the yucatan miniature pigs with liver-specific expression of a human proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (pcsk9) carrying the gain-of-function mutation d374y. pcsk9 plays important functions in cholesterol homeostasis by reducing ldlr levels on the plasma membrane. gain-of-function mutations in this protein cause increased levels of plasma ldl cholesterol, which in turn may result in more susceptibility to coronary heart disease. pcsk9 d374y transgenic pigs exhibited decreased hepatic ldlr levels, severe hypercholesterolemia on high-fat, high-cholesterol diets, and atherosclerotic lesions [38] . it is also considered that hypertriglyceridemia is an independent risk factor for coronary heart disease, in which apolipoprotein (apo)ciii is associated with plasma triglyceride levels. the hypertriglyceridemic apociii transgenic miniature pig model was generated for the examination of the correlation between hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis. transgenic pigs expressing human apociii exhibited increased plasma triglyceride levels with their delayed clearance and reduced lipoprotein lipase activity compared to non-transgenic controls [39] .diabetes mellitus (dm) is a group of metabolic disorders characterized by hyperglycemia (elevated levels of blood sugar over a prolonged period), which results from deficiency or ineffectiveness of insulin. dm may lead over time to cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, damage to the nerves and eyes. there are two main types of diabetes mellitus, called type 1 and type 2. type 1 dm, also referred to as juvenile diabetes or insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, is caused by the pancreas's failure to produce enough insulin. the most common is type 2 diabetes, which is characterized by insulin resistance (reduced tissue sensitivity to insulin) that may be combined with relative insulin deficiency. the anatomical and physiological resemblance to the human pancreas and islets makes pigs excellent animals for metabolic diseases modeling. moreover, the structure of porcine and human insulin is also very similar (differs by only one amino acid). a transgenic pig model for type 2 dm was generated to evaluate the role of impaired glucose-dependent insulinotropic poly-peptide (gip). the main function of incretin hormones gip and glucagon-like peptide-1 (glp1) is stimulated insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells in a glucose-dependent manner. in type 2 dm, the insulinotropic action of gip is impaired, which may suggest its association with early disease pathogenesis. the transgenic pigs expressing a dominant negative gip receptor (giprdn) in pancreatic cells were produced by lentiviral vectors. a significant reduction in oral glucose tolerance due to delayed insulin secretion as well as in β-cell mass caused by diminished cell proliferation was observed in giprdn animals [40] . these observations resemble the characteristic features of human type 2 diabetes, which makes the porcine giprdn model useful for testing incretin-based therapeutic strategies. further analyses revealed characteristic changes in plasma concentrations of seven amino acids (phe, orn, val, xleu, his, arg, and tyr) and specific lipids (sphingomyelins, diacylglycerols, and ether phospholipids) in the plasma of 5-month-old giprdn transgenic pigs that correlate significantly with β-cell mass [41] . these metabolites represent possible biomarkers for the early stages of prediabetes. moreover, the porcine giprdn model has been used to test liraglutide, glp1 receptor agonist, which improve glycemic control in type 2 diabetic patients. ninety-day liraglutide treatment of adolescent transgenic pigs resulted in improved glycemic control and insulin sensitivity as well as reduction in body weight gain and food intake compared to placebo-treated animals. however, the use of liraglutide did not stimulate beta-cell proliferation in the endocrine pancreas [42] . another type of diabetes, type 3 dm, is maturity-onset diabetes of the young (mody3). mody3 is a noninsulin-dependent type of diabetes with an autosomal dominant inheritance and is caused by mutations in the human hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 α (hnf1α) gene. mutation in hnf1α gene leads to pancreatic β-cell dysfunction and impaired insulin secretion. a pig model for mody3 was generated by expressing a mutant human hnf1α gene (hnf1α p291fsinsc) using intracytoplasmic sperm injection-mediated gene transfer and somatic cell nuclear transfer. the transgenic piglets exhibited the pathophysiological characteristics of diabetes, including high glucose level and reduced insulin secretion from the small and irregularly formed langerhans islets [43] . furthermore, hnf1α p291fsinsc pigs revealed nodular lesions in the renal glomeruli, diabetic retinopathy, and cataract, complications similar to those in patients with dm [44] . mutations in the insulin (ins) gene may result in permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (pndm) in humans. a pndm large animal model was establish by generated pigs expressing a mutant porcine ins gene (ins c94y), orthologous to human ins c96y. transgenic animals showed signs of pndm, such as lower fasting insulin levels, decreased β-cell mass, reduced body weight, and cataract development. in addition, ins c94y pigs exhibited significant β-cell impairment, including the reduction in insulin secretory granules and dilation of the endoplasmic reticulum [45] . the porcine ins c94y model was further used to perform analysis of pathological changes in retinas and evaluation of the liver of transgenic pigs. the studies revealed several features of diabetic retinopathy, such as intraretinal microvascular abnormalities or central retinal edema [46] . moreover, the multi-omics analysis of the liver demonstrated higher activities in amino acid metabolism, oxidation of fatty acids, gluconeogenesis, and ketogenesis, characteristic of insulin-deficient diabetes mellitus [47] . the genetically modified pig models for human diseases described in this review are summarized in table 2 . human-derived proteins have long been used as therapeutics in the treatment of numerous diseases. however, their quantities are limited by the availability of human tissues. thanks to the development of biotechnology and genetic engineering, modified animals can be used as "bioreactors" to produce recombinant proteins for pharmaceutical use. by using adequate regulatory sequences, promoters, the expression of transgenes can be directed to selected cells and organs. the therapeutic proteins can be obtained from milk, blood, urine, seminal plasma, egg white, or salivary gland that can be collected, purified, and used at an industrial scale. moreover, it is possible to generate multi-transgenic animals that produce many biopharmaceuticals or vaccines in a single organism. the use of an animal platform allows for the relatively low-cost production of pharmacologically valuable preparations in high quantity and quality. the mammary gland is considered to be an excellent bioreactor system for pharmaceutical protein production. the advantage of milk is that it contains large amounts of foreign proteins that do not affect the animal's health during lactation as well as the ease of product collection and purification. while cows are the best species for obtaining large amounts of pharmaceuticals in milk, the cost and time necessary to carry out successful transgenesis make rabbits, sheep, goats, and pigs more popular species. although the pig is not a typical dairy animal, a lactating sow can give about 300 l of milk per year. velander et al. generated transgenic pigs that synthesized human protein c in the mammary gland. protein c plays an important role in human blood clotting, which makes it a potentially attractive drug. the collected milk contained 1 g/l of this protein [48] . other recombinant human proteins involved in the coagulation process, such as factor viii [49] , factor ix [50, 51] , von willebrand factor [52] , were also successfully obtained in the porcine mammary gland. furthermore, the line of transgenic pigs producing functional recombinant human erythropoietin in their milk was demonstrated. erythropoietin regulates red blood cell production (erythropoiesis) in the bone marrow by binding to a specific membrane receptor and has been used in the treatment of anemia. this bioreactor system generates active recombinant human erythropoietin at concentrations of approximately 877.9 ± 92.8 iu/1 ml [53] . in turn, lu et al. generated transgenic cloned pigs expressing large quantities of recombinant human lysozyme in milk. lysozyme is a natural broad-spectrum antimicrobial enzyme which constitutes part of the innate immune system. the authors demonstrated that the highest concentration of recombinant human lysozyme with in vitro bioactivity was 2759.6 ± 265.0 mg/l [54] . biopharmaceuticals can also be synthesized in pigs with the use of alternative systems, such as blood, urine, and semen. the blood of transgenic animals can be a source of human blood proteins, such as hemoglobin. swanson et al. and sharma et al. obtained transgenic pigs that produced recombinant human hemoglobin in their blood cells at a high level, with the ability to bind oxygen identical to that of human blood hemoglobin [55, 56] . there remains, however, the issue of obtaining large amounts of animal-generated therapeutics easily and inexpensively, without killing the animal. moreover, blood cannot store high levels of recombinant proteins for a long time, which are innately unstable, and bioactive proteins in the blood may affect the metabolism of the animals [57] . for this reason, research is being conducted into the production of recombinant proteins secreted into the urine or semen. the advantage of semen is that it is easily obtained and produced in high amounts in species such as pigs (boars can produce 200-300 ml of semen 2-3 times a week), while the advantage of urine is that proteins can be obtained from animals of both sexes throughout their lives. in addition, urine contains few proteins, which facilitates the purification of the protein product, and the urine-based systems pose a low risk to the animal's health. however, the limitation of protein production in the bladder is low yield [58] . the recombinant pharmaceutical proteins produced from transgenic pigs are listed in table 3 . genetically modified pigs can also be used as a source of cells, tissues, and organs for transplantation into human recipients. despite the growing knowledge and ability to perform transplants, the shortage of organs means that the number of patients awaiting a transplant is constantly increasing. xenotransplantation is any procedure involving the transplantation, implantation, or infusion of cells, tissues or animal donor organs, and also body fluids, cells, tissues, and human organs (or their fragments), which had ex vivo contact with animal cells, tissues, or organs into a human recipient. organ xenotransplantation would give us an unlimited and predictable source of organs and enable careful planning of the surgery and preoperative drug treatment of the donor. the animal that best meets the criteria for xenotransplantation is the domestic pig (sus scrofa domestica). pig and human organs show great anatomical and physiological similarities. however, the significant phylogenetic distance results in serious immunological problems after transplantation. despite major difficulties, the pig is currently the focus of all research aimed towards eliminating the problem of organ shortage for human transplantation in the future. thus, the challenge now is to overcome interspecies differences that cause xenograft rejection by the human immune system. the solution, therefore, is to modify pigs in such a way that their organs are not rejected as belonging to another species. advances in genetic engineering have brought scientists closer to obtaining modified animals that would be useful for pig to human transplants. a number of studies have reached the preclinical stage, using primates as model organisms.pig organs transplanted into human recipients are immediately rejected as a result of the so-called hyperacute immunological reaction. xenograft rejection is mainly caused by the gal antigen found on the donor's cell surface, which is synthesized by the ggta-1 enzyme. humans lack both the gal antigen and the ggta-1 enzyme, but have xenoreactive antibodies directed against the porcine gal antigen, which leads to the so-called enzymatic complement cascade in the recipient. the sequence of reactions results in a formation membrane attack complex, lysis, and destruction of the graft cells.the best possible solution to the problem of hyperacute rejection is to inactivate the gene encoding the ggta-1 enzyme responsible for the formation of the gal antigen. in 2001, the first heterozygous ggta1 knock-out pigs were produced [59] , and one year later, the first piglets with two knock-out alleles of the ggta1 gene were born [60] . a series of ggta1 knock-out pigs has also been generated by using zfns [61] , talens [62] , and the crispr/cas9 system [63] . moreover, other carbohydrate xenoantigens present on pig cells but absent in humans have been identified and include neu5gc antigen (n-glycolylneuraminic acid) catalyzed by cytidine monophosphate-n-acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase (cmah) and the sda antigen produced by beta-1,4-n-acetyl-galactosaminyltransferase 2 (β4galnt2). pigs with ggta1/cmah/β4galnt2 triple gene knock-out were generated using the crispr/cas9 system. cells from these genetically modified animals exhibited a reduced level of human igm and igg binding resulting in diminished porcine xenoantigenicity [64] . to prevent hyperacute rejection, it is possible to introduce human genes regulating the enzymatic complement cascade into the porcine genome. as the complement system may undergo spontaneous autoactivation and attack the body's own cells, defense mechanisms have developed in the course of evolution. they regulate complement activity through a family of structurally and functionally similar proteins blocking complement activation and preventing the formation of a membrane attack complex (mac). introduction of human genes encoding complement inhibitors, such as cd55 (daf, decay-accelerating factor), cd46 (mcp, membrane cofactor protein), cd59 (membrane inhibitor of reactive lysis), into the porcine genome may overcome xenogeneic hyperacute organ rejection [65] . it was demonstrated that the expression of human complement-regulatory proteins can prevent complement-mediated xenograft injury and prolong the survival time of the xenotransplant [66] [67] [68] . studies have shown that the absence of ggta1 and additional human cd55, cd59, or cd46 expression has greater survival rates than just ggta1 knock-out [69, 70] . many genetically modified pigs with human complement inhibitors and other modifications important for xenotransplantation were also generated [71] [72] [73] . the modifications of the porcine genome described above largely resolved the problem of hyperacute rejection. however, xenogenic transplant becomes subject to less severe rejection mechanisms resulting from coagulation dysregulation, natural killer (nk) cells-mediated cytotoxicity, macrophage-mediated cytotoxicity as well as t-cell response.the coagulative disorders result from incompatibilities between pig anticoagulants and human coagulation factors. overcoming coagulation dysregulation in xenotransplantation will require the introduction of human gene encoding coagulation-regulatory proteins into the porcine genome, for example, thrombomodulin (tbm), endothelial cell protein c receptor (epcr), tissue factor pathway inhibitor (tfpi), and ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolase 1 (cd39). thrombomodulin binds thrombin and functions as a cofactor for the activation of protein c, which is strongly anticoagulative. porcine tbm binds human thrombin less strongly and cannot effectively activate protein c. it was demonstrated that expressing human tbm (htbm) in porcine aortic endothelial cells (paecs) suppresses prothrombinase activity and delays clotting time [71] . the endothelial protein c receptor enhances the activation of protein c and decreases proinflammatory cytokine synthesis. in vitro studies revealed the correlation between human epcr (hepcr) expression in paecs and reduced human platelet aggregation [74] . a meta-analysis of multiple genetic modifications on pig lung xenotransplant showed that hepcr was one of the modifications that had a positive effect on xenograft survival prolongation in the ex vivo organ perfusion model with human blood [75] . further study demonstrated that kidneys from genetically-engineered pigs (carrying six modifications) functioned in baboons for 237 and 260 days. the authors suggested that prolonged survival time was associated, among others, with the expression of the human epcr gene [76] . tissue factor pathway inhibitor is the primary physiological regulator of the early stage of coagulation. tfpi binds to factor xa, and then xa/tfpi inhibits the procoagulant activity of the tissue factor (tf)/factor viia complex. it was demonstrated that the expression of human tfpi in paecs can inhibit tf activity, suggesting potential for controlling the tf-dependent pathway of blood coagulation in xenotransplantation [77] . more recently, multi-modified pigs carrying human tfpi transgene were produced [76, 78] . cd39 is an ectoenzyme that plays a key role in reducing platelet activation. cd39 converts adenosine triphosphate (atp) and adenosine diphosphate (adp) to adenosine monophosphate (amp), which in turn is further degraded by ecto-5 -nucleotidase (cd73) to antithrombotic adenosine. transgenic pigs with human cd39 (hcd39) gene were generated. the study showed that hcd39 expression protects against myocardial injury in a model of myocardial acute ischemia-reperfusion injury [79] .another approach to xenograft protection may be introducing a human gene that protects against the inflammatory response into the porcine genome. transgenic pigs expressing antiapoptotic and anti-inflammatory proteins, such as human heme oxygenase-1 (ho-1) and human tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced protein 3 (a20), were produced [80, 81] . porcine aortic endothelial cells derived from pigs carrying human a20 transgene were protected against tnf-α (tumor necrosis factor alpha)-mediated apoptosis and less susceptible to cell death induced by cd95 (fas) ligands [81] . similarly, overexpression of human ho-1 ensured prolonged porcine kidney survival in an ex vivo perfusion model with human blood and paecs protection from tnf-α-mediated apoptosis [80] . furthermore, pigs with a combined expression of human a20 and ho-1 on a ggta1 knock-out background were generated. that transgenic approach alleviated rejection and ischemia-reperfusion damage during ex vivo kidney perfusion [82] .the cellular immune response is another barrier to xenotransplantation. human nk cells can activate the endothelium and lyse porcine cells through direct nk cytotoxicity and by antibody-dependent cellular mechanisms. direct nk cytotoxicity is regulated by activating and inhibitory receptor-ligand interactions. to prevent nk-mediated lysis through the inhibitory cd94/nkg2a receptor, pigs with human leukocyte antigens-e (hla-e) were obtained [83, 84] . the study showed that the expression of hla-e in endothelial cells from transgenic pigs markedly reduces xenogeneic human nk responses. in addition, it was demonstrated that the introduction of the hla-e gene into the porcine genome may also protect pig cells from macrophage-mediated cytotoxicity [85] . more recently, ggta1 knock-out pigs with hcd46 and hla-e/human β2-microglobulin transgenes were produced. the study showed that multiple genetically modified porcine hearts were protected from complement activation and myocardial natural killer cell infiltration in an ex vivo perfusion model with human blood [86] . another approach to inhibit direct xenogeneic nk cytotoxicity is the elimination of porcine ul-16-binding protein 1 (ulbp1), which binds to nkg2d activating nk receptors. crispr technology was adapted to create genetically modified pigs with a disrupted ul16-binding protein 1 gene. in vitro studies confirmed that porcine aortic endothelial cells derived from ulbp1 knock-out pigs were less susceptible to nk-cells' cytotoxic effects [87] . macrophages also play an important role in xenograft rejection and can be activated by direct interactions between receptors present on their surface and donor endothelial antigens as well as by xenoreactive t lymphocytes. the binding cd47 antigen to macrophage surface signaling regulatory protein (sirp-α) delivers a signal to prevent phagocytosis. however, the interaction between porcine cd47 and human sirp-α does not supply the inhibitory effect on macrophages [88] . therefore, the introduction of human cd47 (hcd47) into the porcine genome can overcome macrophage-mediated responses in xenotransplantation. the overexpression of hcd47 in porcine endothelial cells suppressed the phagocytic and cytotoxic activity of macrophages, decreased inflammatory cytokine (tnf-α, il-6, il-1β) secretion and inhibited the infiltration of human t cells [89] . the pigs with ggta1 knock-out and hcd47 were obtained [90] . it was demonstrated that the expression of human cd47 markedly prolonged survival of donor porcine skin xenografts on baboons in the absence of immunosuppression [91] . another challenge in xenotransplantation is the prevention of t cell-mediated rejection. t cells can be induced directly by swine leukocyte antigen (sla) class i and class ii on porcine antigen-presenting cells (apcs) or by swine donor peptides presented on recipient apcs. the main co-stimulatory signals regulating t cell function include cd40-cd154 and cd28-cd80/86 pathways. the cytotoxic t-lymphocyte antigen 4-immunoglobulin (ctla4) can inhibit the cd28-cd80/86 co-stimulatory pathway. therefore, the introduction of human ctla4-ig (hctla4-ig) into the porcine genome may alleviate t cell response in xenografts. it was shown that neuronal expression of hctla4-ig in pigs reduced human t lymphocyte proliferation [92] . moreover, transgenic hctla4-ig protein in pigs extended the survival time of porcine skin grafts in a xenogeneic rat transplantation model [93] . another approach to inhibit t-cell immune response may be the deletion of swine leukocyte antigen class i. reyes et al. created sla class i knock-out pigs using grna and the cas9 endonuclease. the obtained animals revealed decreased levels of cd4−cd8+ t cells in peripheral blood [94] . recently, pigs carrying functional knock-outs of ggta1, cmah, b4galnt2, and sla class i with multi-transgenic background (hcd46, hcd55, hcd59, hho1, ha20) were produced. in vitro study presented that the four-fold knock-out reduced the binding of human igg and igm to porcine kidney cells [95] .beyond immune barriers in xenotransplantation, there is also concern about the risk of cross-species pathogens infection. the main problem constitutes porcine endogenous retroviruses (perv), which are integrated into multiple locations in the pig genome. utilizing the crispr/cas9 technology gives great hopes for the complete elimination of the risk of perv transmission. niu et al. using the crispr/cas9 system inactivated all 25 copies of functional pervs in a porcine primary cell line and successfully generated healthy perv-inactivated pigs via somatic cell nuclear transfer. what is more, no reinfection was observed in the obtained pigs [96] .advances in genetic engineering and immunosuppressive therapies prolong organ survival time in preclinical pig-to-non-human primate (nhp) xenotransplantation models. the first xenotransplantation using pig hearts with eliminated gal antigen into immunosuppressed baboons was performed in 2005. the longest surviving heterotopic graft functioned in the recipient for 179 days [97] , in comparison to 4-6 hours of survival time with the use of wild-type pig hearts [98] . introducing additional modifications extended the xenograft survival time even more. the longest survival was obtained for heterotopic cardiac xenotransplantation-up to 945 days. the authors used hearts derived from genetically multimodified pigs (ggta1 knock-out, hcd46, htbm) and chimeric 2c10r4 anti-cd40 antibody therapy [99] . additional expression of htbm in ggta1 knock-out, hcd46 genetically modified pigs prevented early dysregulation of coagulation and prolonged the cardiac xenografts survival time [99, 100] . using the same genetic background, orthotopic heart xenotransplantation was performed, resulting in a maximum survival of 195 days [101] . however, xenograft survival time depends on the types of transplanted organs. in the case of kidneys in pig-to-nhp transplantation models, the longest survival of a life-sustaining xenograft was 499 days. ggta1 knock-out pigs carrying hcd55 gene as well as immunosuppression with transient pan-t cell depletion and an anti-cd154-based regimen were used in the experiments. moreover, the selection of recipients with low-titer anti-pig antibodies improved the long-term survival of pig-to-rhesus macaque renal xenotransplants [102] . the success of porcine liver and lung xenotransplantation remains limited, which is mainly associated with the occurrence of coagulation disorders [103] . the longest survival time for orthotopic liver xenografts (29 days) was achieved using ggta1 knock-out pigs, exogenous human coagulation factors, and immunosuppression, including co-stimulation blockade [104] . in turn, watanabe et al. demonstrated prolonged survival time of lung xenotransplants (14 days) from ggta1 knock-out, hcd47/hcd55 donor pigs in immunosuppressed baboons [105] . the authors indicated the important role of hcd47 expression in reducing immunologic damages and extending lung graft survival in the pig-to-nhp model. however, additional genetic modifications of the porcine genome and immunosuppressive regimen strategy are necessary for the clinical application of xenotransplantation. table 4 summarizes the most important genetic modifications of the porcine genome for xenotransplantation purposes. the anatomical and physiological similarity between pigs and humans makes this species very interesting for biomedical research [110] . the rapid development of genetic engineering in recent years has allowed for precise and efficient modification of the animal genome using site-specific nucleases. the nuclease-mediated editing of the porcine genome, as well as potential applications of genetically modified pigs in biomedicine, are shown in figure 1 . certainly, the driving force for development is the human mind and ideas that arise in it. one of the factors limiting the possibilities of using the potential of our ideas is the technical aspect. the transfer of new technologies, tested on smaller animal models, for example, is often limited and requires optimization for a large animal model. in the case of crispr/cas9 technology, a lot of emphasis should be placed on the possibility of reducing the risk of so-called off-targets by improving this system. paired nicking has the potential to reduce off-target activity in mice from 50-1000 times without compromising on-target performance [111] . another strategy to limit the number of undesirable off-targets is to increase the specificity of the system. in this situation, one can focus on enhancing or improving cas9 protein or sgrna modifications. protein cas9 properties can be modified, or their lifespan can be changed [112, 113] . for the future clinical success, it is also important to improve the efficiency of hr-mediated gene correction, especially in the situation of treating disease in which a template sequence is delivered to replace the mutated variant. another important goal to achieve is the possibility of applying hr not only for dividing cells but also for cells in the post-mitotic stage. hopes are placed in the fusion of the crispr/cas9 technique and aav (adeno-associated virus) as a donor template provider [114] . considering the low immunogenicity of the aav virus, the ability to transduce a wide spectrum of cells in terms of both type and developmental stage and strong limiting factor-capacity, it should be considered to minimize the crispr/cas9 system or use more than one separate virus to simultaneously exploit the potential of both technologies. the use of other delivery systems, e.g., nanoparticles, is also worth considering [115] . the different site-specific nucleases (zfn, talen, crispr/cas9) used for genome editing and two techniques (somatic nuclear transfer and microinjection) to produce genetically modified pigs are shown. biomedical applications for which genetically engineered pigs are generated include modeling human diseases, production of pharmaceutical proteins, and xenotransplantation.genetically modified pigs serve as an important large animal model for studying the genetic background of human diseases, testing novel drugs and therapy methods as well as developing models for gene therapy [116] [117] [118] . pigs can be used as anatomical (e.g., endovascular), surgical, behavioral, and cytotoxic models. ideas for new models of large animals are provided by the reality that shapes current demand. a lot has been done (pig model for influenza a infection), but still there is a need for pig models of other human viral diseases (hepatitis b; human immunodeficiency virus, hiv; severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, sars-cov-2) [119] . hiv has been modeled in mice, filoviruses (ebolavirus, marburgvirus) have been modeled in small animals (i.e., mice, hamsters), but still, we need large models to investigate vaccines and antiviral drugs [120, 121] . transgenic pigs can also be a promising source of recombinant proteins used as pharmacological preparations. actually, the possibility of using pigs for the production of biopharmaceuticals has been slowed in recent years. some studies demonstrated that the pig mammary gland can be used as a complex recombinant protein source with appropriate post-translational modifications [122] . despite the advantages of pig animal platform (natural secretion, correct posttranslational modifications, constant production), some ethical doubts are probably limiting the boost. finally, the use of genetically engineered pigs for xenotransplantation is becoming an increasingly feasible alternative to standard allogeneic transplants and a potential solution to the problem of organ shortage. the combination of various multi-modified pigs and immunosuppressive therapies is required for overcoming immune rejection and effective xenotransplantation of different solid organs [123] [124] [125] . when it comes to treating end-stage organ failure, biomedical research could go a step further and try to create chimeric genetically modified pigs that would be carriers of human organs [126] . the publication was co-financed within the framework of a ministry of science and higher education program as "regional initiative excellence" in the years 2019-2022, project no. 005/rid/2018/19.the authors declare no conflict of interest.as noted above, we focus on the two recent crisesdthe global financial crisis and european sovereign debt crisisdthat brought about most of the bailouts and bail-ins discussed in the book. these two crises are inexorably linked, and so any separate discussions of them are inevitably flawed. the global financial crisis began in the us as the us subprime financial crisis and spread through many linkages to europe and the rest of the world, and so it is an integral part of the european sovereign debt crisis. the distresses of banks and governments during the european sovereign debt crisis are also inescapably linked. in some cases, government finances came under pressure because of the economic damages caused by the bank distress and the costs of the bank bailouts. in other cases, bank distress was exacerbated by sovereign debt problems because the banks invested substantially in sovereign debt, particularly the debt of their home countries. despite these links, we briefly describe these two different crises separately.the global financial crisis began as the us subprime financial crisis in 2007:q3 when losses on us mortgage-backed securities (mbs) backed by subprime mortgages started to spread to other markets, including the syndicated loan market, the interbank lending market, and the commercial paper market. in some cases, these other markets at least partially froze up. many banks experienced substantial capital losses and at least partially withdrew from these markets. a number of large financial institutions, especially thrifts that were heavily involved in subprime lending (e.g., countrywide, washington mutual, indymac bank), investment banks that purchased and/or packaged subprime mbs (e.g., bear stearns, merrill lynch, lehman brothers), and a large insurance company that sold many credit default swaps (cdss) on subprime mbs (american international group (aig)) suffered capital, liquidity, and public confidence problems and either failed, were taken over, or were individually bailed out.as the crisis spread to many commercial banks, the tarp program, expansion of the discount window and term auction facilities (tafs), and many other bank bailouts shown in the introduction and described in more detail in chapter 3 occurred. it is also notable that bank and thrift failures became so widespread that the fdic deposit insurance fund fell into a deficit position and assessed banks for 3 years of deposit insurance premiums in advance to try to fill this hole. us stock market values also plunged significantly, with the dow jones industrial average falling by more than half.as a result of these financial problems, the us economy also suffered the most severe recession since the great depression. the recession resulted in a number of government programs to stimulate the economy, including a massive stimulus government spending package and expansive conventional and unconventional monetary policy stimulus by the federal reserve.despite all the bailouts of financial institutions and government stimulus programs, economic losses in the us totaled in tens of trillions of dollars, as noted in the introduction. the us recession officially ended in mid-2009, but economic growth remained slow for many years afterward. the financial crisis in the us was more or less concluded by the end of 2009, by which point much of the tarp funds invested in financial institutions had been repaid, order had been restored to most of the financial markets, and the federal reserve shortly thereafter began rolling back expansions to the discount window and concluded the taf auctions (berger and bouwman, 2016) .however, the financial issues continued in other nations. the us subprime financial crisis became the global financial crisis as financial losses spread to other countries through financial linkages. there are too many such linkages to discuss here, but we simply mention one. the basel ii capital requirements, which had been earlier adopted in europe, gave very low capital weights to aaa-rated tranches of us subprime mortgage-backed securities (mbs). this encouraged their purchases by european banks, helping to spread the problems created by these securities across the atlantic.the european sovereign debt crisis began in 2008, with the collapse of iceland's banking system, and then spread to the giips countries, greece, italy, ireland, portugal, and spain. the crisis was significant through 2012, and some might argue that remnants still exist as of this writing. some government debt remains on shaky grounds, european authorities, such as the ecb, are still engaging in stimulus, and interest rates in a number of nations are negative. as indicated above, this crisis was precipitated in significant part by the global financial crisis, and it involved sovereigns as well as banks, which are also linked (pagano and sedunov, 2016) . other contributing factors include the recessions that covered a number of countries, the real estate market crisis and property bubbles in several countries, and fiscal policies in some nations.regarding the latter point, greece revealed in 2009 that its previous government had underreported its budget deficit, a violation of eu policy, prompting fears of a eurozone collapse via political and financial contagion. in 2010, with the growing fear of excessive sovereign debt, lenders demanded higher interest rates from eurozone states with high debt and deficit levels, aggravating their fiscal problems. some affected countries raised taxes and cut expenditures to battle the crisis, which added to social unrest and confidence problems in their governments. during this crisis, several of these countries, including greece, portugal, and ireland had their sovereign debt downgraded to junk by international credit rating agencies, augmenting investor fears.greece, spain, ireland, portugal, and cyprus were incapable of repaying or refinancing their government debt or bailing out their struggling banks without the help from third-party institutions such as the european central bank (ecb), the international monetary fund (imf), and the european financial stability facility (efsf). seventeen eurozone countries voted to create the efsf in 2010, specifically to resolve the european sovereign debt crisis. these other eurozone countries were partially driven by desires to preserve the eurozone and/or eu, and partly driven by worries related to large investments by the banks in these healthier nations in the sovereign debt of the weaker nations. some of these bank investments in risky sovereign debt were brought about in part by the low risk weights on this debt assigned by the basel ii capital requirements.a number of parties are blamed for creating or exacerbating the effects of the global financial crisis, and by implication, the european sovereign debt crisis that followed. in some cases, the blame is not fully deserved either because the reasoning is incorrect or because the ex post consequences of some of the pre-crisis period actions could not be reasonably anticipated ex ante.the federal reserve and its leaders receive blame for (1) keeping interest rates too low for too long in the pre-crisis period, encouraging risky lending; (2) not recognizing the dangers of the build-up of correlated risks in real estate lending; (3) not devoting sufficient resources to their financial stability mission to identify future stability and systemic risk threats; (4) pushing for basel ii capital standards, which lowered requirements for large, systemically important banking organizations and encouraged risky investments by european banks by putting low capital weights on aaarated tranches of mbs backed by subprime mortgages and sovereign debt of risky national governments; (5) not regulating the new complex and opaque instruments of finance, which were built on faulty models that underweighted the probability of housing price declines; and (6) not applying safety and soundness and consumer protection regulations consistently across intermediaries which gave rise to regulatory arbitrage; and (7) not pursuing accusations of consumer predatory lending.blame is also often assigned to government sponsored enterprises (gses) fannie mae and freddie mac, which were undiversified entities that operated with very little capital and were able to borrow cheaply due to implicit government guarantees, which were realized during the crisis.with the backing of the us president george w. bush and congress, the gses began investing in subprime mbs during the pre-crisis period, encouraging lenders to make more such loans.in addition, the securities and exchange commission (sec) is blamed for allowing the investment banks to operate with very low capital ratios, despite very high portfolio risks in packaging and holding opaque mbs. the investment banks that engaged in these risky activities are also held responsible for their behavior. rating agencies are blamed for faulty ratings on mortgage-related securities in which additional aaa-ratings were assigned to riskier and more opaquetranches. accounting firms are criticized for unrealistic values placed on opaque mbs. mortgage bankers and underwriters are charged with overlooking unfavorable credit information and in some cases, complicity in creating false favorable information.finally, a prior president and congress were blamed for allowing combinations of commercial and investment banks under the financial services modernization act of 1999, aka the grammeleachebliley act. we argue that this blame is misplaced, given that the main financial institutions that created the crisis were not combined commercial banks and investment banks. to the contrary, one of the solutions to the crisis was to encourage such combinations because the stand-alone investment banks had significant liquidity problems during the crisis.there are many other financial crises that are not discussed in this section in the interest of brevity. we refer readers to literature that discusses these crises in detail for the us by berger and bouwman (2013 , 2016 , 2017 ; and worldwide by demirgü ç-kuntand detragiache (1998), von hagen and ho (2007) , reinhart and rogoff (2009) , and laeven and valencia (2018) .there are as many causes as there are financial crises, and each one is different (reinhart and rogoff, 2009 ), so it is not possible to review all of the causes. in the interest of brevity, we focus here on just two recurring causesdlending booms and liquidity buildups. these two causes are not entirely independent, as bank credit also creates liquidity for the economy. it is often argued that unusually high quantities of bank lending and bank loan commitments may help result in financial crises. loans are a form of on-balance sheet bank liquidity creation and loan commitments are a type of off-balance sheet bank liquidity creation (berger and 2.2 research on lending booms and liquidity buildups bouwman, 2009). excessive credit of either type can result in asset price bubbles that burst and result in financial crises (rajan, 1994; acharya and naqvi, 2012) . brunnermeier, gorton, and krishnamurthy (2011) also argue that liquidity build-ups in the financial sector can create systemic risk.the quality of credit issued may also significantly deteriorate during lending and liquidity booms because of an institutional memory problem in banks. veteran loan officers may have difficulty remembering how to deal with problem loans when it has been a long time since they dealt with significant problems, and turnover results in newer loan officers who have not previously faced such problems (berger and udell, 2004) . in a theoretical setting, thakor (2015a thakor ( , 2016 show that good times corrupt risk management in banks and also lead to an "underpricing" of risk from an ex post perspective. this is because an extended period of profitable bank growth may also create a false sense of security among bankers and regulators that banks can withstand significant shocks (thakor, 2015b) . excessive risk-taking may also occur off the balance sheet during economic booms, as banks shy away from exercising material adverse change (mac) clauses on loan commitments 1 due to reputational concerns during such booms (thakor, 2005) . consistent with these views, former federal reserve chairman, alan greenspan argues that "the worst loans are made at the top of the business cycle." (alan greenspan, chicago bank structure conference, may 10, 2001). both excessive credit and poor quality of credit were evident in the us in the buildup to the global financial crisis. subprime mortgages in great numbers were issued to overlevered consumers. in some cases, these mortgages were issued based on the optimistic assumption that housing prices would continue to rise, given that many of the subprime borrowers would be unable to make the future payments without refinancing at higher home prices. in addition, fannie mae and freddie mac lowered their credit standards by buying subprime mortgages in the mid-2000s, further encouraging banks to make such loans. finally, another reason for bank failures and crises is that regulatory career concerns may lead bank regulators to pursue selfinterest and delay closures of financial institutions until things get really bad (e.g., boot and thakor, 1993) .for the interest of brevity, we review one empirical paper on lending booms and one on liquidity buildups, both using us data. dell'ariccia, igan, and laeven (2012) examine factors related to the rapid expansion of the us mortgage market prior to the global financial crisis. using a large data set of loan applications, they find that the denial rates were lower in 1 mac clauses are intended to protect the lender against gaps in due diligence or unforeseen "material" changes to the borrower's financial condition and assets that could affect the borrower's ability to repay the loan. if a change is deemed material enough, the lender can modify terms or terminate its agreement with the borrower. areas that experienced faster credit demand growth, and that lenders in these high-growth areas put less weight on applicants' loan-to-income ratios, after controlling for other economic fundamentals.the other study explicitly tests the propositions that excessive onbalance sheet and off-balance sheet liquidity creation increase the likelihood of future financial crises. berger and bouwman (2017) use data on five financial crises in the us. they essentially use empirical models to predict when the fifth crisis (the subprime crisis) would occur, controlling for a number of other aggregate factors that might cause financial crises. they find that lagged detrended aggregate liquidity creation has a statistically and economically significantly positive effect on the probability of a future crisis, supporting the theories discussed above. they also find that the effects are primarily driven by off-balance sheet liquidity creation, which is mostly composed of loan commitments.as discussed above, the distress of tbtf, titf, and/or tmtf banks may trigger bailouts or bail-ins outside of crisis times. the tbtf term was introduced in 1984 by the bailouts of continental illinois national bank and trust company, which failed at that time, but was not closed. it was propped up by government bailouts for a number of years, and was eventually bought by bank of america. the chicago bank was the seventh largest bank in the us, with about $40 billion in assets (fdic, 1997) , and its failure was the largest in us history as of that time. 2 after continental illinois, investors had reasons to believe that the creditors of large banks were likely to be protected. in addition, in congressional hearings after the event, comptroller of the currency, c. todd conover, the primary supervisor for national banks, explicitly stated that regulators were unlikely to allow the nation's 11 largest banks to fail. 3 congressman 2 https://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/failure_of_continental_illinois. 3 although conover did not name the banks, barth and wihlborg (2015) collected information from the wall street journal, the banker, federal reserve, and milken institute and identified the 11 largest banks and their associated bhcs in 1983 as: citibank; bank of america, san francisco; chase manhattan bank; morgan guaranty trust, new york; manufacturers hanover trust, new york; chemical bank, new york; continental illinois national bank and trust, chicago; security pacific national bank, los angeles; first national bank of chicago; bankers trust new york; and wells fargo bank. the authors follow these banks through time and note that many of them got integrated into larger organizations, while two of the original bhcs remain, and all became much bigger over the past three decades. stewart mckinney responded, "let us not bandy words. we have [created] a new kind of bank. it is called too-big-to-fail, tbtf, and it is a wonderful bank." this was the first time that government officials confirmed the existence of such a government policy.tbtf theory describes the motivations of the regulators in bailing out tbtf banks and the incentives that the expectations of such bailouts create for the banks and their stakeholders. regulators' bailout decisions may be motivated by the desires to reduce damages to the financial system and the real economy. the failure of a large bank may spill over to other financial institutions and increase the likelihood of future financial crises. supporting this, acharya (2009) finds that the limited liability of banks and the presence of a negative externality of one bank's failure on the health of other banks give rise to a systemic risk-shifting incentive where all banks undertake correlated investments, thereby increasing economy-wide aggregate risk. the loss of credit and other banking services of a single large bank may also cause significant economic losses. in addition, they may bail out large banks to avoid personal embarrassment about failures on their watches or to direct credit according to their preferences (e.g., kane, 1989 kane, , 1991 stern and feldman, 2004; mishkin, 2006) . the expectation that the largest banks are likely to be bailed out in the event of their distress from tbtf policies is a subsidy to large banks in conditions of financial distress and good financial health as well because the lessened probability of failure allows the large banks to raise equity and debt capital more cheaply. this motivates the banks to become larger to be able to raise capital more cheaply, and motivates shareholders, creditors, and other counterparties to do business with them (e.g., cetorelli and traina, 2018) . table 2 .1 provides some data indicating how large banks have grown since the tbtf policy was introduced in 1984. the number of fdic insured banks has fallen by about 70% as of 2019:q1, while the number of banks with at least $10 billion in assets has increased by about 340%, and their share of industry assets has more than tripled. of course, both inflation and real growth of banks play roles in these figures, but it seems likely that tbtf be responsible for some of the growth of the large banks.the theoretical motivations behind titf and tmtf mostly follow those of tbtf. they also involve regulators avoiding risks to the financial system and the economy, circumventing personal embarrassment, and/ or maintaining the ability to direct credit, and banks and their stakeholders taking actions to gain the subsidies of bailout expectations. titf theory differs from tbtf theory in that it takes into account the highly interconnected network among banks, rather than the size of these institutions. banks may be interconnected either directly or indirectly. direct interconnectedness arises from bilateral transactions or relationships between banks, such as interbank deposits, loans, or derivatives (e.g., interest rate swaps). if the bank that owes money or is out-of-the- money on derivative contracts becomes financial distressed or fails, the banks with direct interconnections to it suffer losses on the values of their claims, losing all of the values in the event of failure. indirect interconnectednessdin which the financial distress or failure of a bank may spread losses to banks without direct bilateral exposures to itd stems from many potential sources. these include mark-to-market losses on similar assets, margin calls, and/or increased haircuts on posted collateral triggered by fire sales by other banks, or information spillovers from other banks that result in runs (e.g., lui, quiet, and roth, 2015) . under titf theory, the financial distress or failure of more interconnected banks causes more damage to the financial system than problems of less interconnected institutions. thus, regulators are more likely to bail out more interconnected banks and banks have incentives to become more interconnected to increase their likelihoods of receiving such bailouts. the theoretical arguments in choi (2014) suggest that bailouts be allocated to the stronger of the interconnected banks, who are in better positions to reduce systemic risk than the weaker banks. tmtf theory posits a more dynamic view that includes multiple banks. holding the total number of banks constant for a period of time, when the number of failed banks increases and the number of surviving banks decreases, the investment opportunity set for surviving financial institutions grows large, but the total investment capacity of surviving banks decreases (acharya and yorulmazer, 2007) . to prevent widespread damage, the optimal choice for regulator is to bail out when the number of failures is large. the expectations of such widespread bailouts may encourage banks to engage in herding behavior that results in highly correlated portfolios to be able to benefit from future bailouts (e.g., acharya and yorulmazer, 2007, 2008; brown and dinc, 2011; farhi and tirole, 2012; acharya, mehran, and thakor, 2016) . perhaps surprisingly, some empirical research suggests that the asset similarity created by tmtf may actually reduce systemic risk because the market expects banks with greater similarities to be more likely to survive during financial crises (cai, 2019) .distress or failure of tbtf, titf, and/or tmtf banksin this section, we focus on what might cause tbtf, titf, and/or tmtf banks to become financially distressed and potentially fail that would result in bailouts or bail-ins. most of the studies on the determinants of bank problems focus on bank failure, rather than financial distress, and so we review the bank failure literature. presumably, the factors that bring about financial distress are largely in common with those that cause failure, given that banks usually fail before a period of financial distress.most of the literature on bank failure concentrates on accounting variables. virtually all such studies find that low capital ratios raise the probability of bank failure. other weak accounting performance measures such as low profitability and poor loan quality raise the probability of failure, as do certain activities, commercial real estate credit, particularly construction and development loans, and nontraditional activities (e.g., lane, looney, and wansley, 1986; gunther, 1995, 1998; wilson, 1995, 2000; mason, 1997, 2003; elsinger, lehar, and summer, 2006; schaeck, 2008, cole and white, 2012; knaup and wagner, 2012; admati, demarzo, hellwig, and pfleiderer, 2013; berger and bouwman, 2013; deyoung and torna, 2013; berger, imbierowicz, and rauch, 2016) .sampling a few of these studies, cole and gunther (1995) find that capital, troubled assets, and net income are key indicators in explaining bank failure. berger and bouwman (2013) find that low capital ratios reduce the probability of survival for small banks under all general economic conditionsdbanking crises, market crises, and normal timesdwhile low capital hurts medium and large banks primarily during the banking crises. schaeck (2008) finds that liability structure affects a bank's time to failure. fee-based nontraditional activities (e.g., securities brokerage and insurance sales) decrease and asset-based nontraditional activities (e.g., venture capital, investment banking, and asset securitization) increase the probability of distressed bank failure (deyoung and torna, 2013) . some also find that commercial real estate loans, particularly real estate construction and development loans, play important recurring roles in explaining bank failure (e.g., cole and fenn, 2008; cole and white, 2012) . in addition, some composite measures of bank soundness or risks forecast bank failure, including the traditional measure of bank soundness, camels components (cole and white, 2012) , and a marketbased measure of credit portfolio quality and bank performance, credit risk indicator (cri) (knaup and wagner, 2012) .others focus on corporate governance with mixed results on both bank performance and failure (e.g., fahlenbrach and stulz, 2011; beltratti and stulz, 2012; berger and bouwman, 2013; berger, imbierowicz, and rauch, 2016; calomiris and carlson, 2016) . one study also finds that bank cost inefficiency during normal times, a signal of poor management, predicts both performance problems and failure during subsequent financial crises (assaf, berger, roman, and tsonias, 2019) .in recent years, studies showed that obesity involves a series of dietary controlling and metabolic disorders caused by specific biochemical factor, and its pathogenesis process is very complicated. at present obesity has already become the main killer threatening human health in place of former illnesses induced by malnutrition and infection. therefore, its pathogenesis and treatment has become the focus in the concern of current world medicine and a hot point for contemplation. there has been no breakthrough in treatment on obesity, and ideal non-toxic medicine without any adverse reaction is still under exploration. the author established an approach of acupuncture in treating obesity and its complications, the effect of which proved long-lasting, without any toxic and adverse reaction, and was welcomed by the vast obesity patients (1~. this study has explored the effect of acupuncture on the uncoupling protein 1 (ucp1) gene expression of brown adipose tissue (bat) in obesity organisms, and now is reported as follows.sd rats, male, 1 month old and weaned, body weight 50--70 g, were provided by experimental animal center of nanjing military region general hospital, and slightly modified referring to liu's method of experimental obesity modeling (2) .rats fed with ordinary whole priced forage were used as normal control group (n= 6); and successfully established experimental model rats were randomly divided into two groups, one group without any treatment as model control group (control " the item is supported by the national nature science foundation (no. 39970923) 1. nanjing university of tcm, nanjing (210029)~ 2. nanjing population administration college~ 3. nanjing normal university correspondence to: liu zhi-eheng, tel: 025--6798143; email: zhieheng-liu168@hotmail, corn group, n = 6), and the other treated with acupuncture (acupuncture group, n=6).the acupuncture group rats were placed in a fixed container, unilateral "housanli" (corresponding to zusanli) and "neiting" points selected, 32 gauge 1 cun filiform needle applied to insert for 5 mm and 3mm in depth, electroacupuncture ( ea, comprehensive therapeutic device g6805-iii type, manufactured by fujian medical instrument factory) connected, frequency 10 hz, strength 1. 5v continuous wave, 10 min/ time, once daily, for 14 consecutive days, the point on left and right side used alternatively.each group of rats during experiment period was fed freely with fresh ordinary whole priced rat forage and fresh water every day. while the acupuncture group were undergoing needling, the normal and control group were placed in the fixed rat container for 14 consecutive days, 15 rain/day for adaptation. before and after experiment the rats were observed for their forage intake, amount of drinking water, stool and urine, body weight, body length and lee's index [-ax/body weight (g)/body length (cm))4 1031, etc.by the end of experiment, the rats were fasted for a night, and on the next day the rats were decapitated, fat of pericardium, peri-renal and epididymis swiftly isolated, weighed and recorded; at the same time bat between scapulae and located at the neck-back part was swiftly isolated, washed with pre-cooling phosphate buffer, cut into small pieces in a ice bath of plate, liquid nitrogen poured on the tissue to coagulate it, the coagulant transferred to labeled freezing tube, and preserved in the liquid nitrogen container. the next day place the frozen brown adipose tissue in the mortar to pulverize it and provide it for extraction.for reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) examination, refer to method reported by nisoli e, et al (3) (4) (5) .the extraction and purification of total rna. according to the instruction manual of tripure isolation reagent kit given by german bm company, a total of 50 /~g rna was isolated from 100 mg bat and purified; ultraviolet spectrophotometry detection revealed that the a260/a280 ratio of rna sample is greater than 2.0; formaldehyde agarose gel electrophoresis determination showed the total rna segment was kept intact and has not been down-regulated, and the 18s and 28s band were clear.reverse transcription (rt) 9 1 big rna rt was taken to synthesize cdna, rt reaction should follow the instruction manual of rt system reagent kit provided by promega company, usa for implementation. the total volume of rt reaction system was 20/11. the chief component concentration of reaction system were. 25 mmol/l mgcl2 6 /~1, 10 x rt buffer 2 tzl, 10 mmol/l deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate (dntp) 2 /~1, 2.5 t~mol/l oligo (dt)ls primer 0.5 tzl, 10 unit (u) rnaase inhibitor, 15 u avian myeloblastosis virus (amv) rt. rt reaction was carried out in dtc 150 type pcr reactor of mj research company, usa. the procedure was: 42"c 15 min, 99"c degeneration 15 min, 0--5~ and incubation 5 min. the rt product was preserved at --70~ for use.design and synthesis of primer. according to ucp1 cdna sequence, the primer was designed and synthesized for amplifying ucp1 cdna. the primer was synthesized by shanghai shenggong bio-engineering co. ltd. the sequence of primer was 5'-gag ttc ggt acc cac atc agg-3"; ucp1 rs'-gca tag gag ccc agc ata gg-3'. the amplifying length was 1062 bp.in order to precisely detect expression level, ~-actin edna primer was selected for internal reference. 13-actin f5 '-cgt aaa gac ctc tat gcc aa-3 "; [3-actin r5 '-agc cat gcc aaa tgt gtc at-3"; the amplification length was 473 bp.pcr amplification reaction. it was carried out following the pcr amplifying system provided by promega company of usa and its procedure. the pcr reaction system: rt product 12 ~l, upper and lower reach of primer each 2 t~l, dntp 2 td, 10x pcr buffer 2 ~1, 25 mmol/l mgc12 6/~1, taq dna polymerase 2.5 u, and the total reaction volume was 30 ~1. the amplification was implemented according to following procedure: 95~ 3 min, 55~ 40s, 72"c 1 min, 30 cycles, finally 72~ prolonged for 7 rain.analysis of products: take 5 /11 pcr reaction product for electrophoresis in 1.2 % agarose aldehyde for 1 hr, the scanning quantitation by gds-800 gel imaging system of bio-rad company, usa and the grey of video electrophoretic band were applied to affirm the relative amount of amplifying substance. for the analysis of ucp1 cdna expression ucp1 cdna/13-actin edna ratio amplified under the same condition would show the difference between the changes of sample ucp~ mrna expression.spss software was used to analyze the experimental data, for the comparison between groups t test was adopted, and multivariate analysis was adopted for correlation analysis.see table 1 . from table 1 we could see that the body weight and lee's index of model rats were all obviously higher than the level of normal rats, and after the treat-ment of acupuncture, the body weight and lee's index obviously reduced, the difference being significant statistically (p~0.01). table 2 showed the adipose amount at the 3 locations of control group rats were all higher-than that of normal rats, and that of acupuncture group rats were significantly lower than that of control, the difference being significant statistically (p(0.01). table 3 showed that the rats' bat ucp1/[3-actin ratio of control group was significantly reduced, and when compared with normal group, the difference was significant (p~ 0.01) ; acupuncture group rats" bat ucp1/13-actin ratio was obviously elevated, and when compared with control group, the difference was significant (p~0.05) ; compared with normal group, the difference was also significant (p%0.05). it denoted that the effect of acupuncture on obese organism bat ucpi gene expression was up-regulated. the results showed that the rats" bat ucp1 gene expression level with body weight, lee's index and amount of body fat were--0. 706, --0. 559, --0. 618 respectively, all displaying negative correlation, indicating that the more obese the organism, the lower the bat ucp1 gene expression level.recent study showed that the pathogenesis of obesity is correlated with multiple factors such as hereditary gene, environmental factor, dietary structure, etc. among them, the chief' deciding factor is gene (6~. ucp is a specific expressed mitochondria intimal protein of bat, with its molecular weight as 32kd (7). the function of ucp is a transportation carrier of fatty acid ion which carries, from inside the mitochondria to outside mitochondria, the fatty acid ion that can not penetrate the mitochondria intima. the fatty acid ion outside the mitochondria would combine with h + and re-enter the mitochondria, and is again reoxidized to fatty acid ion. such repetition would eliminate different concentration gradients on both sides of mitochondria intima induced by oxidation, so that adp cannot be phosphorylated to generate atp. the final results of respiratory and oxidized phosphorylation uncoupling would bring about the transformation of energy production to 9 207 9 heat production (8~. at present there have been discovered 3 kinds of ucp. ucp1, ucpz and ucp3. ucpi is the earliest discovered uncoupling protein, and in bat expression in rodent animal, it is an important uncoupling protein of non-shivering heat production. ucp2 not only exists in bat, but existed widely in various tissues and cells, including white adipose tissue, lung, liver, spleen and inside macrophage. ucp3 mainly exists in skeletal muscle, and also in bat. studies showed that ucpz and ucp3 are uncoupling protein with the same function as ucp1 (9.m it is well known that ucp gene expression level plays the deciding role in its own content and bat heat production, which is called the center of bat heat production. heat production is closely related with energy balance, metabolism, and body weight regulation. the important protein participating in metabolism under normal physiologic status, most likely, also participates in the target protein of patho-physiologic metabolic disturbance, and therefore it is inferred that ucps possibly are related with obesity pathogenesis.the results of the present study showed that obese rats displayed characteristics of overeating, overdrinking, and their heavy weight, lee's index and body fat were obviously higher than normal. at the same time, the obese rats" bat ucp1 gene expression level showed lower than that of normal rats, which is to say, the obese rats" bat ucp1 transcription level was abnormally reduced. correlation analysis revealed that the obese rats" bat ucp1 gene expression level and body weight, lee's index and amount of body fat showed negative correlation. this result showed that bat ucp gene expression was abnormally decreased, its heat production and energy consumption weakened, which is sure to cause obesity.it is known that ucps gene expression is regulated by multiple factors such as certain central nervous system nucleus group, sympathetic nerve, endocrine factors etc.noradrenaline, thyroxin, corticosteroid, leptin (lp) and insulin (ins), etc. could stimulate the fat of adipose cell to disintegrate and produce heat. this function mainly would be realized through 133-adrenergic receptor (133-ar). na and 133-ar combined together could precisely regulate ucp1 gene expression and transform pro-adipose cell into bat cell. owing to the increase of mitochondria and cell count, ucp1 could increase. na's promotion of ucp~ gene expression also can elevate the synthesis of camp related to g coupling protein, the latter could activate the proteinkinase (pka), which in turn acted on the target protein including corticosteroid (cs) sensitive lipase. when this enzyme was activated by phosphorylation, it could inhibit the storage of triglyceride, so as to disintegrate the fat and increase the free fatty acid~ the target protein of pka also includes camp reaction element protein, and it might promote the transcription of ucps gene to raise the heat production and energy consumption (12-~5~.our previous research work revealed that the balance index of vegetative nerve of obese patients is abnormally reduced, with their sympathetic mediator na, adrenaline and dopamine (da) concentration extremely low, and their parasympathic nerve function index [salivary amylase (s-am) and blood acetylcholinesterase (ache) ] extraordinarily elevated. at the same time, obese patients plasma camp, thyroxin, corticosteroid, noradrenaline, adrenaline, and adrenoeorticotropic hormone content were all very low~ and serum lp and ins content abnormally raised. animal experiments indicated that the obese rats' bat cell volume increased, full, fatty drops large, mitochondria in the cytoplasm obviously reduced in size, mitochondria matrix density increased, the crista unable to be clearly displayed, and interstitial capillary decreased, showing that bat heat production was abnormally decreased.another experiment displayed that the serum lp and ins content of obese rats ab-normally increased, which denoted that there existed leptinemia and hyperinsulinemia as well as leptin resistance (lr) and insulin resistance (ir) in obese organisms. at the same time the hypothalamic lp and ins content of obese rats were abnormally low, denoting that the lp blood brain transportation abnormality was likely to be one of the important factors of lr. experiment showed that the number of rbc's insulin receptor (insr) of high affinity and low volume and that of low affinity and high volume in obese rats was all decreased, but the dissociation constant in insr of high or low affinity was abnormally elevated, which denoted that obese organisms' insr abnormality and ins blood brain transportation abnormality were possibly one of the important factors of ir (1'16). the above-mentioned data showed that the abnormal lowering of obese organisms" bat ucps gene expression level was possibly related with abovementioned regulating factors.the present study showed that after acupuncture the obese rats" body weight, lee's index and body fat all markedly reduced, denoting that acupuncture does have beneficial fat reducing effect. at the same time, the bat, ucp1 gene expression level markedly increased, i. e. , acupuncture could up-regulate bat ucp mrna level, and elevate the effect of ucp1, and therefore the energy consumption and heat production increased, finally obtaining the fat reduction efficacy.in summary, abnormal decrease of biologic organisms' bat ucp1 gene expression level is possibly the important cause of obesity. the promotion of obese organisms" bat ucp1 gene expression by acupuncture is possibly one of the cellular biological mechanisms in weight-reducing by acupuncture.coli expression systems. it has been suggested that the cytotoxicity of gp41 protein to e. coli is the main factor hindering gp41 expression [l] .the special topological structure of the viral transmembrane protein may attribute to the cytotoxicity and dominate the fate of the proteins expressed in e. coli. for example, semliki forest virus 6 k protein, protein 3ab of hepatitis a virus, and protein e of sars [2] [3] [4] could be expressed effectively in e. coli, but hepatitis c virus el protein, ns2b protein of japanese encephalitis virus, and rotavirus nsp4 protein[s-7] could not. the transmembrane proteins function via their hydrophobicity and formation of a-helix. the transmembrane helix is inserted into the hydrophobic core of the lipid bilayers by hydrophobic force from hydrophobic amino acids, this insertion raises a perturbation and makes the lipid bilayers irregularly rearranged to complete the transmembrane procedure. our previous studyl) showed that gp41 contains two transmembrane a-helices, the first one is formed by amino-acid residues 4-16 and the second one by 167-189 resudues. segments nl and n3 of gp41, each containing one of the trasmembrane a-helices, could not be expressed effectively in e. coli, where as segment n2, which contains no transmembrane a-helices, could be successfully produced. by investigating the expression level of different gp41 segments, as well as their cytotoxicity in e. coli, we have determined the cause for the failed gp41 expression in e.coli. this paper establishes the base for the further exploration of the effectors of gp41 protein in hiv pathology. 1 materials and methods ( i) materials. plasmids pet-hgp41, pet-hnl, pet-hn2, pet-hn3, and pet-hc were constructed as described previously [9] i). the loci of segments nl, n2, n3, c in gp41 gene are shown in fig. 1 ( ii) gene manipulation. plasmids transformation, rna extraction, probe hybridization were performed as described in ref. [10] .(iii) preparation of dna probe. segments nl and c of gp41 gene were labelled by [a-32 p]datp/dctp as probe nl and c.(iv) growth curve of bacteria. pet-hn3, pet-hc were transformed into e. coli bl21(de3), single clones of bl21(de3) cells containing the indicated plasmid were grown overnight at 37'c in lb medium in the presence of ampicillin at 100 mg/ml. then, the cells were diluted 100-fold in lb medium supplemented with the antibiotics and grown at 37'c respectively. once the cultures reached an a 600 of about 0.8, they were induced by the addition of 1 mmolll of isopropylthiogalactopyranoside (iptg) and plotted against a600 at given times.( v) comparison of the survival rate of bacteria. cells were grown as described above and once a600 = 0.5, they were induced by adding 1 mmolll iptg and diluted aliquots of cultures were spread on lb solid plate at given times and the clones were counted after incubation for 18 hat 37'c.(vi) uridine loading of e. coli cells. cells were grown as described above, incubated with 2 mci of eh] uridine for 1 h before induction. the cells were sedimented and washed twice with the uridine-free, prewarmed growth medium. then, the cells were resuspended in the initial volume of the growth medium and incubated at 37 'c. fifteen minutes later, the cells were induced with iptg. samples are taken at the given times, and 0.2-ml supernatant is used to quantify the radioactivity released to the medium. the results represent the mean of triplicated experiments, cv<15%.(vii) rna dot blotting. the overnight culture of bacteria containing pet-hgp41, pet-hnl, pet-hn2, pet-hn3, pet-hc were diluted 100-fold and continued to grow at 37'c in lb medium supplemented with the antibiotics. once the cultures reached an a600 of about 0.5, they were induced by adding 1 mmolll iptg. 3-ml aliquots of cultures were collected at 0.5, 1, and 1.5 h, respectively, the total rna was extracted from each sample. 20 flg total rna were dotted on a nitro cellulase membrane, pre-hybridized for 2 h, then hybridized with probe nl and c overnight at 68 'c, respectively. after drying, membranes were exposed to x-ray films (kodak) at -70 'c overnight.( i ) expression of gp41 segments affects the growth of host bacterium. in order to understand the effect of expression of different segments of gp41 gene on bacterial growing, a600 of the host bacteria at given times was measured and plotted (fig. 2 ). e. coli bi21 (de3) with pet-h and pet-hn2 had an increase in a 600 , but the ( ii) expression of gp41 of some segments is lethal to the host. counting the survival rate of bacterium induced showed that bacterium with pet-hgp41, pet-hnl, pet-hn3 and pet-hc has a high death rate, as the counts decrease from about 10 8 to 10 5 ml during 4 h. but bacteriums carrying pet-hn2 were relatively viable (fig. 3 ). (iii) segments of gp41 permeabilize bl21(de3) cells membrane. in order to understand the reason for host bacteria death caused by expression of gp41 segments, eh]uridine release assay was performed to measure the cytotoxicity of gp41 protein to host bacteria cells. in fig. 4 , expression of segments of gp41 led to eh] uridine release from the host bacterium more or less (cpm from 67 to 163 in 5 h). the data showed that the expression of the segments permeabilizes host bacteria cells' membrane and leads to cytotoxicity. from fig. 4 , gp41 showed the highest permeability (163 cpm), while n2, though expressed well, also permeablizes host membrane (iv) transcript of some gp41 mutants decreases rapidly after induction. rna dot blotting assay was used to measure transcript of segments of gp41 gene. in fig. 5 , mrna transcript of the segments except for n2 decreased rapidly following iptg induction, especially the fulllength gp41 gene. the results suggested that the expression of various segments causes different levels of permeability to cell membrane, and the rise of permeability leads to bacteria death and a rapid mrna transcript decrease. in brief, the cytotoxicity of gp41 protein to bacteria cell membrane results in the low survival rate of host bacteria in which the gp41 is expressed. analyses of n -terminal segments of gp41 reveal that segment n2 contains a leucine zipper structure and an a-helix region, which may also permeabilize cells membrane [ll] . however, because the hydrophobicity of n2 is lower than that of nl and n3, its cytotoxicity is lower, therefore, it can be expressed effectively. 26 residues at n-terminal of segment nl are fusion peptide of gp41 protein and are mainly composed of hydrophobic residues. 670 its function is to induce fusion of hiv envelop with host cell membrane; segment n3 is mainly composed of hydrophobic amino acid too and its function is to anchor gp41 protein on hiv envelop and host cell membrane. hydrophobic amino acids bring a perturbation effect on hydrophobic core of lipid bilayers when embedded in membrane, thus causing cytotoxicity on cells [8] . because segments nl and n3 have higher hydrophobicity than n2 does, they may have stronger cytotoxicity. therefore, they are expressed less effectively in host bacteria. there are two lentivirus lysis peptide (llp), llpi and llp2, in segment c. llp can be folded into the amphipathic ahelix structure, which contains abundant arginine and the hydrophilic arginine may change cell membrane's structure and function. it is speculated that the arginines in segment c are the main reason for cytotoxicity to cell . edward [7] found that the expression of the rotavirus nonstructural glycoprotein nsp4 in e. coli leads to a decrease in optical density of the culture and release of eh] uridine into the medium, and the nsp4 contains abundant lysines in the membrane-spanning-proximal region. ciccaglione [5] found that hepatitis c virus el protein membrane-spanning hydrophobic region and arginine-339 and lysine-370 of membrane-spanning-proximal region have cytotoxicity effect on e. coli. chang [6] found that the deletion of 6 residues (lkttkr) of ns2b c-terminal protein in japanese encephalitis virus may alleviate its cytotoxicity. cole [12] have studied antibacterial activity of peptides derived from envelop glycoproteins of hiv-l, and found that membrane-spanning domain of gp41 protein and two 15residue peptide derived from llpi have antibacterial activity. though the antibacterial action occurred in vitro, it is likely that there would be a common mechanism involved in gp41 protein's cytotoxicity in vivo in our experiment.u sing different assays we have found that gp41 protein permeabilizes cell membrane and kills most bacteria, this may attribute to the difficulty of its expression in e. coli. in addition, among all the gp41 gene segments, only segment n2 can be expressed effectively in e. coli, with a few cells dead. this reported data suggest that the hydrophobicity of protein and positively charged arg may be the major factor for their cytotoxicity.in fek ti ons krank hei ten ste hen mit ge schätzten 15 mil lio nen to des fäl len pro jahr weltweit an zwei ter stel le der to des ur sa chen [1] . die kon trol le und be kämp fung wird durch die ent wick lung von re sis ten zen der er re ger ge gen die ver füg ba ren me di kamen te er schwert. ein wich ti ges bei spiel ist die aus brei tung mul ti re sis ten ter tu ber kulo seer re ger [2] . an de re er re ger, wie z. b. das west-nil-oder dengue-vi rus, ha ben sich auf re gio nen aus ge brei tet, in de nen sie bis her kei ne rol le spiel ten [3, 4] . immer wie der kam es in den letz ten jah ren zu aus brü chen mit "neu en" in fek ti ons er regern aus ei nem be kann ten oder un be kannten zo o no ti schen re ser voir, de nen es gelang, die spe zies bar rie re zu über win den. der jüngs te, welt weit größ te aus bruch des mar burg-vi rus in an go la mit 266 erkran kun gen in ner halb ei nes mo nats, davon 244 mit töd li chem aus gang (le ta lität >90) [5] (stand 22.4.2005) , die ausbrü che von ebo la-, hen dra-und ni pah-vi ren in den letz ten jah ren so wie die rasche welt wei te aus brei tung des schwe ren aku ten re spi ra to ri schen syn droms (sars) sind ein drück li che bei spie le für das epi demi sche po ten zi al neu er krank heits er re ger [6, 7, 8] . be güns ti gen de fak to ren für das auf tre ten neu er krank heits er re ger sind die wach sen de welt be völ ke rung mit armut, man geln den ver sor gungs struk tu ren und schlech ten hy gie ni schen be din gungen ins be son de re in kri sen ge bie ten so wie die zu neh men de mig ra ti on. von wach sen-der be deu tung ist auch die zer stö rung der na tür li chen öko sys te me [9] .in fek ti ons krank hei ten wie cho le ra oder ma la ria sind häu fig die fol ge na türli cher ka ta stro phen wie über schwemmun gen, dür re und erd be ben. sie können durch re gio na le oder welt wei te ausbrei tung in ner halb kur z er zeit räu me aber auch zur ka ta stro phe wer den. dies be legen die his to ri schen da ten über die in fluenza pan de mi en im letz ten jahr hun dert. die zahl der to des fäl le al lein durch die pan de mie der "spa ni schen grip pe" von 1918 wird auf 20-40 mil lio nen ge schätzt und über stieg da mit die an zahl der to ten im 1. welt krieg [10] .das ri si ko welt wei ter epi de mi en ist durch die stei gen de mo bi li tät der menschen wei ter ge stie gen. die ex plo si ve ausbrei tung von sars mit mehr als 3000 erkran kun gen -da run ter mehr als 100 todes fäl len, ver teilt auf 20 län der und alle kon ti nen te -in ner halb des ers ten monats nach der war nung durch die who im jahr 2003 be legt dies ein drück lich. die mög lich keit der ge ziel ten oder un be ab sichtig ten frei set zung von er re gern mit pande mi schem po ten zi al [la bo r in fek tio nen wur den als ur sa che der sars-aus brü che in sin ga pur (sep tem ber 2003) und beijing (april 2004) nach ge wie sen und sind auch die ver mu te te quel le für das wie derauf tre ten von in flu enza a/h1n1 mit weltwei ter zir ku la ti on im jahr 1977/78] muss eben falls be rück sich tigt wer den und un terstreicht die not wen dig keit vor be rei ten der maß nah men.fast je des jahr kommt es in deutsch land zu ei ner in flu enza epi de mie, die meist zwischen ja nu ar und märz das ge sam te land er fasst und zu meh re ren mil lio nen er krankun gen mit meh re ren tau send hos pi ta lisie run gen und to des fäl len führt. für die sai son 2002/2003 schätz te die ar beits gemein schaft in flu enza, dass es in ner halb von nur 6-8 wo chen zu 4,5-5 mil lio nen zu sätz li chen arzt be su chen, min des tens 1,5-2 mil lio nen ar beits un fä hig kei ten (unter den 16-bis 60-jäh ri gen), etwa 20.000-30.000 hos pi ta li sie run gen so wie zwischen 12.000 und 20.000 zu sätz li chen todes fäl len ge kom men ist [11] .den noch wird die sai sonal wie der kehren de in flu enza nicht nur von me di zi nischen lai en wei ter hin un ter schätzt. ein zei chen hier für ist die um gangs sprach liche gleich set zung grip pa ler in fek te mit der ech ten vi rus grip pe oder der in fluenza. wäh rend etwa 200 ver schie de ne viren als er re ger aku ter atem wegs in fek tionen ge fun den wer den, wird die ech te virus grip pe durch sub ty pen des in flu enza-a-vi rus oder durch das in flu enza-b-vi rus aus ge löst, die in sai sonal und re gio nal unter schied li chem aus maß beim men schen zir ku lie ren.im ge gen satz zu an de ren vi ren, die primär den atem trakt be fal len und vor nehmlich im kin desal ter zu sys te mi schen sympto men mit fie ber füh ren, ist die in flu enza durch schwe re fie ber haf te er kran kun gen in al len al ters grup pen ge kenn zeich net. cha rak te ris tisch ist der plötz li che be ginn mit fie ber, mus kel-und kopf schmer zen und zu nächst tro ckenem hus ten. für diesen ty pi schen sym ptom kom plex, der während ei ner in flu enza epi de mie einen hohen di ag nos ti schen vor her sa ge wert besitzt, wur de der be griff der in flu enza-like ill ness (ili) ge prägt. > die ge fahr durch die sai sonal wie der keh ren de in flu enza wird nicht nur von me di zi ni schen lai en un ter schätzt ne ben ei ner schä di gung des re spi ra to rischen epi thels spielt mög li cher wei se eine vor über ge hend re du zier te ab wehr bei der ent ste hung von kom pli ka tio nen durch eine bak te ri el le su pe r in fek ti on eine rol le. ge fürch tet sind pe ra ku te ver laufs for men mit aku ter vi ruspneu mo nie, myo kar di tis oder en ze pha lo pa thie, die in ner halb von stun den bis ta gen zum tod füh ren können. die jähr lich wie der keh ren de aus breitung der sai sona len in flu enza in der be völke rung wird durch die fort lau fen den mole ku la ren ver än de run gen in den ober flächen an ti ge nen, ins be son de re des hämagglu tin ins, er mög licht. die bin dung des hämag glu tin ins an sia lin säu re-re zep toren in den atem we gen er mög licht die in fek ti on und ist ein we sent li cher fak tor für die spe zi es-spe zi fi tät [12] . die an häufung von punkt mu ta tio nen in dem für das hämag glu ti nin ko die ren den gen, die durch die feh len de "proofrea ding"-ak ti vität der rna-po ly me ra se ge för dert wird, führt dazu, dass neu tra li sie ren de an ti körper das vi rus nicht er ken nen und eine in fek ti on ver hin dern. die ses phä no men wird als an ti gen-drift be zeich net. impfstof fe ge gen in flu enza ba sie ren pri mär auf der in duk ti on neu tra li sie ren der an tikör per ge gen das hämag glu ti nin und müssen da her stän dig an die ak tu ell zir ku lieren den vi ren an ge passt wer den. wie eine kürz lich er schie ne ne ar beit zur ge ne tischen evo lu ti on des hämag glu tin ins von in flu enza a/h3n2-vi ren zwi schen 1968 und 2003 zeigt, kann ein ein zi ger ami nosäu re aus tausch die an ti ge ne ti schen ei genschaf ten grund le gend ver än dern [13] .eine wei te re vo raus set zung für die rasche aus brei tung der in flu enza vi ren vonbun des ge sund heits bl -ge sund heits forsch -ge sund heits schutz 2005 · 48:1020-1027 doi 10.1007/s00103-005-1120-8 © sprin ger me di zin ver lag 2005prin zi pi en und aspek te der seu chen alarm pla nung am bei spiel der in flu enza pan de mie pla nung zu sam men fas sung in den letz ten jah ren ist zu neh mend deutlich ge wor den, dass un ge ach tet der fortschrit te der me di zin in fek ti ons krank hei ten nicht an be deu tung ver lo ren ha ben, sondern das ri si ko welt wei ter epi de mi en gestie gen ist. auf grund ih rer ho hen in fektio si tät und der ra schen aus brei tung von mensch zu mensch stellt die ent ste hung neu er in flu enza vi ren mit pan de mi schem po ten zi al eine be son de re be dro hung dar. ein pan de mie vi rus trifft auf eine im mu nolo gisch "nai ve" be völ ke rung, in der es sich wie ein lauf feu er aus brei ten kann. drei pan de mi en al lein im ver gan ge nen jahr hundert be le gen, dass die ent ste hung ei ner influ enza pan de mie kein hy po the ti sches risi ko dar stellt. ak tu ell muss be fürch tet werden, dass durch die zu neh men de an passung der en de misch in asi en zir ku lie renden avi ären in flu enza vi ren an den men-schen ein neu es pan de mie vi rus ent ste hen kann. mit der ver öf fent li chung des na tio nalen in flu enza pan de mie plans für deutschland zu be ginn die ses jah res hat die dies bezüg li che pla nung und vor be rei tung ein wesent li ches etap pen ziel er reicht. die um setzung der er for der li chen maß nah men muss nun rasch vor an ge trie ben wer den, wo bei die se weit über den be reich des ge sundheits sys tems hin aus ge hen. die lang fris ti ge ziel set zung ist eine bes se re vor be rei tung auf ge sund heits ge fah ren, ins be son de re durch die ent ste hung neu er seu chen un ter den be din gun gen ei ner zu neh men den globa len ver net zung.in flu enza · pan de mie · h5n1 · avi äre in flu enza · ge ne ral pre pa red nessde spite sig nif i cant med i cal progress, re cent events have shown that in fec tious dis eases have not lost sig nif i cance. in deed, the threat of world wide epi demics has in creased. due to their high in fec tious ness and rapid per son-to-per son trans mis si bil i ty, the emergence of new in flu en za virus es with pandem ic po ten tial pos es an es pe cial ly alarming sit u a tion in this re gard. the world pop ula tion would be "im mu no log i cal ly naïve" to a new pan dem ic vi rus, per mit ting ex plo sive spread of the dis ease. dur ing the last cen tury, three in flu en za pan demics have dem onstra ted that this is not mere ly a hy po thet i cal risk. cur rent ly it is feared that the pos si ble hu man ad ap ta tion of avi an in flu en za viruses that have re cent ly be come en dem ic in birds in south east asia could re sult in a new pan dem ic strain. with the pub li ca tion of the ger man in flu en za pan dem ic pre pared ness plan, prep a ra tion for this po ten tial threat has reached an im por tant stage in ger many. the im ple men ta tion of the plan, which includes mea sures that go be yond the scope of pub lic health, must now pro ceed swift ly. the long-term goal of pan dem ic pre paredness plan ning is to be bet ter equipped to deal with po ten tial health threats in gen er al, in par tic u lar those en su ing from the emergence of new in fec tious dis eases un der condi tions of a grow ing glob al net work.2. das vor kom men der avi ären in fluenza a/h5n1 wird von der welt tier ge sundheits or ga ni sa ti on (oie) ak tu ell in 9 ländern (ko rea, vi et nam, ja pan, thai land, kam bod scha, hong kong (sar prc), indo ne si en, volks re pu blik chi na und ma laysia) be stä tigt. es muss da von aus ge gan gen wer den, dass sich das vi rus bei vö geln/tieren in die sen re gio nen im sinn ei ner en demi schen in fek ti on etab liert hat [20] .3. das vi ra le wirtss pek trum, ins be sonde re die pa tho ge ni tät ge gen über säu ge tieren hat sich er wei tert (mäu se, kat zen, tiger), wäh rend die in fek tio nen bei wild vögeln wei ter hin vor wie gend asym pto matisch ver lau fen [21, 22] die wur zeln ei ner welt wei ten in flu enzapan de mie pla nung ge hen auf for de rungen aus dem jahr 1993 im rah men des in ter na tio na len sym po si ums der groupe d'étu de et d'in for ma ti on sur la grippe (geig) in ber lin zu rück [24] . ein muster plan, der die we sent li chen ele men te einer na tio na len pan de mie pla nung auf zeigt und den mit glieds staa ten als grund la ge die nen soll te, wur de von der who 1999 ver öf fent licht [25] . auf ini ti a ti ve der leitung des ro bert koch-in sti tuts (rki)lek ti on zu ei ner in fek ti on mit neu en in fluenza-a-vi rus sub ty pen füh ren und so mit auch der mensch po ten zi ell als ein mischge fäß bei dop pe l in fek tio nen die nen. rezep to ren, die durch avi äre in flu enza-a-viren er kannt wer den, kön nen in an de ren ge we ben als dem re spi ra ti ons trakt auch beim men schen ge fun den wer den. so wurde erst kürz lich die hy po the se auf ge stellt, dass be ob ach te te kon junk ti vitiden durch avi äre in flu enza-a/h7-vi ren 2003 auf dieser re zep tor spe zi fi tät be ru hen [12] . ge gen über neu en in flu enza-a-sub typen ist die mensch li che be völ ke rung immu no lo gisch "naiv", wo durch es zu ei ner ra schen, welt wei ten aus brei tung und zu be son ders schwe ren er kran kun gen kommen kann. vo raus set zun gen hier für sind eine pa tho ge ni tät des vi rus für den menschen und eine ef fek ti ve trans mis si on von mensch zu mensch (. abb. 1).im letz ten jahr hun dert kam es zu 3 influ enza pan de mi en, die je weils den startpunkt für die zir ku la ti on ei nes neu en vira len sub typs in der hu ma nen po pu la ti on dar stell ten (. ta bel le 2). nach mei nung in ter na tio na ler ex per ten ist eine er neu te in flu enza pan de mie un aus weich lich und steht mög li cher wei se kurz be vor [18] . diese an nah me wird durch ver schie de ne entwick lun gen un ter stützt:1. seit dem jahr 2000 wur den weltweit 15 in flu enza aus brü che durch hochpa tho ge ne avi äre in flu enza vi ren bei geflü gel mit ins ge samt mehr als 200 mil lionen ver en de ten oder ge tö te ten tie ren regis triert. die se zahl ist 10fach hö her als die ge samt zahl der wäh rend 23 aus brüchen in den ver gan ge nen 40 jah ren ge töte ten tie re [19] .mensch zu mensch be ruht auf ih rer hohen in fek tio si tät. zur ver deut li chung sind in . ta bel le 1 das in fek ti öse po tenzi al von sars und in flu enza ein an der gegen über ge stellt.die auf tei lung des ge noms der in fluenza-a-vi ren in 8 seg men te er laubt zusätz lich eine ge ne ti sche va ria ti on durch mi schung der seg men te bei dop pe l in fektio nen mit ver schie de nen vi rus stäm men und -sub ty pen. die ser pro zess wird auch als ge ne ti sches re as sort ment be zeich net. es er mög licht eine sprung haf te än de rung der an ti ge ne ti schen ei gen schaf ten der viren, die auch als an ti gen-shift be zeich net wird [14] .wäh rend beim men schen bis her nur 3 ver schie de ne in flu enza-a-sub ty pen mit den hämag glu ti ni nen h1, h2 und h3 zirku lier ten, wur den bei den in flu enza vi ren von (was ser-)vö geln (avi äre in flu enza viren) welt weit 16 ver schie de ne hämag glu tini ne be schrie ben [15] . durch ein re as sortment zwi schen avi ären und hu ma nen influ enza-a-vi ren kann die pha se der adapta ti on an den men schen stark ver kürzt und das über sprin gen der spe zies bar riere durch neue sub ty pen, die bis her noch nicht beim men schen vor kom men, er möglicht wer den [16, 17] .dop pe l in fek tio nen mit un ter schied lichen vi rus sub ty pen set zen das vor handen sein ent spre chen der re zep to ren für das je wei li ge hämag glu ti nin vo raus. rezep to ren für hu ma ne und avi äre in flu enza-a-vi ren wer den im re spi ra ti ons trakt von schwei nen ge fun den, wor auf die hy po these vom schwein als so ge nann tes "misch gefäß" (mi xing ves sel) für ein re as sort ment zwi schen hu ma nen und avi ären in flu enzavi ren be ruht. al ler dings kann auch eine kon ti nu ier li che an pas sung avi ärer vi ren an den men schen durch mu ta ti on und se-abb. 1 8 vo raus set zun gen für eine in flu enza pan de mie. pan de mie: welt um span nen de epi de mie wur den ers te grund le gen de über le gungen zur deut schen pan de mie pla nung durch die bund-län der-ar beits grup pe seu chen schutz (ags) er ar bei tet und im ok to ber 2001 pub li ziert [26] . ba sie rend auf ei nem be schluss der 74. ge sund heitsmi nis ter kon fe renz be auf trag te das bundes mi nis te ri um für ge sund heit das rki im glei chen jahr, eine ex per ten grup pe "in flu enza pan de mie pla nung" ein zu richten. die se soll te in ab stim mung mit den län dern und un ter be rück sich ti gung der fö de ra len or ga ni sa ti on der bun des re publik deutsch land so wie der grund sätz lichen zu stän dig keit der län der und gemein den für die durch füh rung der maßnah men zum in fek ti ons-und ka ta strophen schutz einen na tio na len pan de mieplan auf der grund la ge der who-empfeh lun gen er ar bei ten. der ent wurf der exper ten grup pe für einen ge mein sam von bund und län dern ge tra ge nen in flu enzapan de mie plan für deutsch land wur de im früh jahr 2004 den län dern zur wei te ren be ra tung über ge ben und die ser im ja nu ar 2005 auf den in ter netsei ten des rki publi ziert (teil i: emp feh lun gen und teil ii: kon zep te und ana ly sen). die pub li ka tion des ak ti ons plans (teil iii) folg te im april 2005 [27, 28]. der na tio na le in fluenza pan de mie plan soll fort lau fend fortge schrie ben wer den und in kon sul ta ti on mit fach ge sell schaf ten und an de ren betrof fe nen or ga ni sa tio nen um einen tech-ni schen an hang zur un ter stüt zung bei der um set zung er gänzt wer den.das haupt ziel der pla nung und vor be reitung auf eine in flu enza pan de mie ist die re duk ti on von mor bi di tät und mor ta lität in der be völ ke rung. auf grund des raschen an falls großer fall zah len kommt es durch eine pan de mie schnell zu ei ner über las tung der res sour cen im me di zi nischen be reich, die dann auch für an de re er kran kun gen und not fäl le nicht mehr zur ver fü gung ste hen. gleich zei tig droht der aus fall zent ra ler ver sor gungs ein richtun gen, so dass die si cher stel lung der öffent li chen ord nung und si cher heit bei der pla nung be rück sich tigt wer den muss. alle maß nah men müs sen da her da rauf ab zielen, die dy na mik der krank heits aus breitung zu ver lang sa men so wie am bu lan te ver sor gungs struk tu ren zu stär ken, um statio näre be hand lungs maß nah men für entspre chend schwe re er kran kun gen und kom pli ka tio nen vor zu be hal ten so wie die ver sor gung und si cher heit der be völ kerung zu ge währ leis ten. die er for der li chen maß nah men ge hen hier bei weit über den ge sund heits be reich hi naus und be tref fen die ge sam te be völ ke rung.als grund la ge der pla nung müs sen szena ri en ent wi ckelt wer den, die die be las tungen der ver schie de nen durch eine pan de-mie be trof fe nen be rei che re a lis tisch aufzei gen. in die sem zu sam men hang wird inter na tio nal mit ei nem "wahr schein li chen sze na rio" und ei ner er kran kungs ra te mit symp to men, die zu ei nem arzt be such führen, von etwa 30-35 ge ar bei tet. we der die kon struk ti on von "hor rors ze na ri en" mit er kran kungs ra ten von 50 (wie sie bei kin dern und ju gend li chen in der pande mie von 1957/58 be ob ach tet wur den), noch er kran kungs ra ten von 15 und darun ter sind für eine re a lis tisch um setz bare und wirk sa me vor be rei tung hilf reich. nach den be rech nun gen, die dem na tiona len in flu enza pan de mie plan zu grun de lie gen, wür de es bei ei ner er kran kungsra te von 30 ohne in ter ven ti on zu etwa 13 mil lio nen zu sätz li chen arzt be su chen, 360.000 kran ken haus ein wei sun gen und 96.000 to ten kom men.die ma the ma ti sche mo del lie rung der fol gen ei ner in flu enza pan de mie, de ren aus brei tung und ins be son de re der wirksam keit von ge gen maß nah men ge winnt zu neh mend an be deu tung [29, 30] . dennoch muss be rück sich tigt wer den, dass die er geb nis se aus mo del len nur so gut sein kön nen wie die an nah men, die ihnen zu grun de lie gen. hier be steht bei der in flu enza pan de mie pla nung ein prinzi pi el les pro b lem, da vie le ei gen schaf ten des pan de mie vi rus nicht si cher vor her gesagt wer den kön nen, so z. b. die vi ru lenz des er re gers, die re pro duk ti ons ra te (r 0 ) und die am stärks ten be trof fe nen al tersgrup pen.die vor be rei ten de pla nung für eine in flu enza pan de mie muss im gro ßen zusam men hang mit der all ge mei nen be drohung durch ein seu chen ge sche hen ge sehen wer den. da her ist es be son ders wichtig, dass be reits be ste hen de oder zur umset zung des po cken rah men plans ge schaffe ne struk tu ren auf ihre taug lich keit in ei ner in flu enza pan de mie über prüft wer- f die ein füh rung ei ner so ge nann ten pan de mi schen warn pe ri ode, f die be to nung der be deu tung der surveil lan ce der tie rin flu enza, f die un ter tei lung der pha sen und empfeh lun gen für län der, die be reits von der pan de mie er reicht wur den, und sol che, in de nen noch kei ne er krankun gen durch das pan de mie vi rus aufge tre ten sind.im über ar bei te ten plan wer den zu je der pha se spe zi fi sche zie le und maß nah men für die na tio na le und in ter na tio na le ebe ne for mu liert. die na tio na len emp feh lun gen wer den in dem pub li zier ten deut schen influ enza pan de mie plan be reits weit ge hend be rück sich tigt. ein zen tra les pro b lem stel len die sowohl na tio nal als auch in ter na tio nal begrenz ten res sour cen für die schaf fung von schutz maß nah men dar. dies gilt insbe son de re hin sicht lich der be grenz ten pro duk ti ons ka pa zi tä ten für impf stof fe und an ti vi ra le me di ka men te, die beim ein tritt des pan de mie falls nur mit ei ner lan gen vor lauf zeit und in ge rin gem umfang wei ter ge stei gert wer den kön nen.an ti vi ra le me di ka men te kön nen aufgrund der lan gen sta bi li tät der wirk stoffe und der wirk sam keit ge gen ver schie dene in flu enza-a-sub ty pen be vor ra tet werden. ent schei dend ist hier bei der recht zeiti ge auf bau ei ner aus rei chen den vor ratsmen ge, um eine kon kur renz um me di kamen te zur the ra pie von ver sor gern (medi zi ni sches per so nal, ein satz kräf te zur auf recht er hal tung der öf fent li chen si cherheit und ord nung etc.) und pa ti en ten zu ver hin dern. auch struk tu ren zur ver teilung von me di ka men ten müs sen ge schaffen und die in die sem zu sam men hang auf tre ten den lo gis ti schen fra gen be reits im vor feld ge löst wer den, um einen möglichst fle xiblen ein satz für die grup pen und re gio nen mit dem je weils höchs ten be darf zu er mög li chen.in flu enza muss ins be son de re bei den be kann ten ri si kogruppen ge stei gert wer den . ins be son de re bei be kann ten ri si kogrup pen, für die eine schutz imp fung gegen in flu enza emp foh len ist, muss die durch imp fungs ra te deut lich ge stei gert wer den. hier durch kön nen nicht nur schwe re er kran kungs fäl le, kom pli katio nen und die an zahl von to des fäl len wäh rend der sai sona len in flu enza epi demie ver rin gert wer den, gleich zei tig würden auch die pro duk ti ons ka pa zi tä ent für impf stoff im pan de mie fall deut lich er höht.der groß teil der vor be rei tun gen muss be reits wäh rend der in ter pan de mi schen pha se er fol gen. ein pro b lem liegt hier aber da rin, dass res sour cen ge schaf fen wer den müs sen, von de nen noch nicht be kannt sein kann, wann sie zum ein satz kom men. da welt weit in den meis ten län dern, so auch in deutsch land, die res sour cen im ge sund heits be reich be schränkt sind, bedarf es ei ner wirk sa men kom mu ni ka tionss tra te gie, um die be völ ke rung über die ge fähr dung durch eine in flu enza pande mie auf zu klä ren und die ent schei dungsträ ger von der not wen dig keit ei ner möglichst ra schen um set zung der er for der lichen maß nah men zu über zeu gen. auch hin sicht lich der in halt li chen kon kre ti sierung ein zel ner maß nah men, wie z. b. der dies be züg li chen prio ri sie rung be stimm ter be völ ke rungs grup pen, ist ein brei ter konsens in der be völ ke rung not wen dig, der nur durch eine frü he und um fas sen de infor ma ti on er reicht wer den kann. da her ist eine früh zei ti ge und ak ti ve ri si ko kom muni ka ti on ein we sent li cher be stand teil der vor be rei ten den maß nah men.der pub li zier te na tio na le in flu enza pan demie plan für deutsch land be steht aus 3 teilen: dem teil i: ge mein sa me emp feh lungen, dem teil ii: ana ly sen und kon zep te für deutsch land und dem kürz lich pub lizier ten pha sen spe zi fi schen ak ti ons plan (teil iii). im teil ii, der auf dem be richt der ex per ten grup pe in flu enza pan de miepla nung am rki ba siert, wird die ak tu elle si tu a ti on ana ly siert, und es wer den verschie de ne kon zep te zur vor be rei tung einer pan de mie auf ge zeigt, wo bei je doch auch ein deu ti ge emp feh lun gen ab ge lei tet und mi ni ma lan for de run gen for mu liert wer den. die ser zent ra le ab schnitt des plans wird in die fol gen den 9 the men berei che un ter glie dert: epi de mio lo gie, phasen ein tei lung (who), recht li che aspekte, sur veil lan ce (inkl. tie rin flu enza), impfung, an ti vi ra le me di ka men te, vor be reitung der län der und ge mein den, in ter nes kran ken haus ma na ge ment so wie kom muni ka ti on und in for ma ti on. der be ste hende plan soll im rah men sei ner fort schreibung und wei ter ent wick lung durch einen tech ni schen an hang er gänzt wer den, in dem leit li ni en, check lis ten und wei tere do ku men te zu den ein zel nen the menbe rei chen zu sam men ge führt wer den. bei der er ar bei tung des tech ni schen an hangs kön nen fach ge sell schaf ten und wei te re be trof fe ne or ga ni sa tio nen einen we sent lichen bei trag leis ten.eine wirk sa me vor be rei tung auf eine influ enza pan de mie kann nur im in ter na tiona len kon text er fol gen. eine be son de re rol le spielt hier bei die in ter na tio na le koor di na ti on der sur veil lan ce-maß nah men durch die who und auf eu ro päi scher ebe ne. das glo bal in flu enza sur veil lan-ce net work der who wur de be reits 1952 zur über wa chung der in flu enza ein gerich tet und um fasst welt weit 4 who colla bo ra ting cen tres und 112 in sti tu tio nen in 83 län dern, die als na tio na le re fe renzzen tren durch die who an er kannt sind. die se sam meln und ana ly sie ren kon ti nuier lich die zir ku lie ren den in flu enza vi ren. die er geb nis se die ser un ter su chun gen bil den die grund la ge der je weils im frühjahr und herbst von der who pub li zierten emp feh lun gen zur zu sam men set zung der in flu enzaimpf stof fe zum schutz ge gen die sai sona le in flu enza auf der nord-bzw. süd halb ku gel. da rü ber hi naus hat die ses who-netz werk auch die auf ga be, als früh warn sys tem das auf tre ten neu er influ enza vi ren mit pan de mi schem po ten zial zu er ken nen.die eu ro pä ische uni on (eu) hat mit der ent schei dung 2000/57/eg ein eu ro pawei tes netz zur epi de mio lo gi schen überwa chung von in fek ti ons krank hei ten sowie ein früh warn-und re ak ti ons sys tem ein ge rich tet [33] . das eu ro pean in flu enza sur veil lan ce sche me (eiss) bün delt als ei nes der be ste hen den krank heits s pe zi fischen über wa chungs netz wer ke die vi rolo gi schen und epi de mio lo gi schen da ten zur aus brei tung der in flu enza.in deutsch land ba siert die in flu enz asur veil lan ce auf 3 säu len: auf den mel dungen nach dem in fek ti ons schutz ge setz ( § 7 abs. 1 ifsg) über den la bor dia gno s ti schen di rekt nach weis von in flu enza vi ren, auf den ana ly sen di ag nos ti scher pro ben und iso lier ter vi ren durch das na tio na le re ferenz zen trum für in flu enza am rki und auf den da ten aus dem sen ti nel sur veil lance-netz werk der ar beits ge mein schaft influ enza (agi) zu aku ten re spi ra to ri schen er kran kun gen (are).> eine wirk sa me vor be rei tung auf eine in flu enza pan de mie kann nur im in ter na tio na len kon text er fol gen die ak tu el len in for ma tio nen aus die sen sur veil lan ce-in stru men ten wer den während der in flu enz a sai son zwi schen der 40. und 15. ka len der wo che fort lau fend aus gewer tet und auf den in ter netsei ten der agi pub li ziert (http://www.in flu enza.rki.de/ agi). die er geb nis se der aus wer tung werden da rü ber hi naus auch an die in ter na tiona len netz wer ke über mit telt. die sem system zur über wa chung der hu ma nen in fluenza ste hen ent spre chen de netz wer ke für die tie rin flu enza ge gen über. eine wich ti ge ak ti vi tät der who und eu ist die ko or di na ti on des in ter na tio nalen in for ma ti ons aus tau sches und die or-ga ni sa ti on von in ter na tio na len ar beits treffen zur ent wick lung von emp feh lun gen für die vor be rei tung auf eine in flu enzapan de mie in den ver schie de nen mit gliedsstaa ten. da rü ber hi naus er folgt auf fach licher ebe ne eine mul ti la te ra le zu sam menar beit ver schie de ner staa ten zu be stimmten aspek ten der in flu enza pan de mie planung, an de nen deutsch land, ver tre ten durch das rki, teil nimmt.auch wer den pa ral lel fra gen zur versor gung mit impf stof fen oder an ti vi ralen me di ka men ten auf na tio na ler und inter na tio na ler ebe ne dis ku tiert, da es sich bei de ren pro du zen ten um mul ti na tio nale kon zer ne han delt und u. a. re gu la to rische aspek te oder fra gen des pa tent schutzes nur im in ter na tio na len kon text ef fektiv ge löst wer den kön nen.in flu enza pan de mie pla nung und all ge mei ne seu chen alarm pla nung die in flu enza pan de mie pla nung baut auf be ste hen den struk tu ren auf und soll lang-fris tig in ein ge samt kon zept zur ab wehr von ge sund heits ge fah ren ein ge bet tet werden. tat säch lich er scheint die kom ple xe pro b le ma tik ei ner in flu enza pan de mie als kon kre tes bei spiel für die ent wick lung der we sent li chen aspek te ei nes sol chen plans be son ders ge eig net. dies be ruht zum einen da rauf, dass bei ei ner in flu enza pande mie zu nächst kei ne oder nur be grenz te spe zi fi sche maß nah men zur prä ven ti on und the ra pie von er kran kun gen zur verfü gung ste hen. zum an de ren muss da von aus ge gan gen wer den, dass alle ein ge setzten maß nah men im güns ti gen fall dazu bei tra gen, die dy na mik der aus brei tung der pan de mie zu brem sen, die se letzt lich aber nicht ver hin dern kön nen. hie raus folgt die not wen dig keit ei ner um fas senden vor be rei tung, die weit über den bereich des ge sund heits sys tems hin aus geht und die in ter ak ti on der be tei lig ten kompo nen ten und ak teu re be rück sich tigt. mittel-und lang fris tig kann dies nach hal tig die res sour cen zur be kämp fung von gesund heits ge fah ren auf lo ka ler, re gio na ler, ent spricht der in ter pan de mi schen pe ri ode ent spricht pha se 0 b die un ter schei dung zwi schen pha se 3, pha se 4 und pha se 5 ba siert auf der ein schät zung des pan de mie ri si kos. ver schie de ne fak to ren und ihre re la ti ve be deutung ent spre chend dem wis sen schaft li chen er kennt nis stand kön nen hier bei be rück sich tigt wer den. dies kann fol gen de fak to ren um fas sen: über tra gungs ra te, geo gra phi sche lo ka li sa ti on und aus brei tung, schwe re der er kran kun gen, der nach weis von ge nen hu ma ner sub ty pen/stäm me (wenn das vi rus von ei nem avi ären stamm stammt), an de re in for ma tio nen aus der an a ly se des vi ra len ge noms und/oder wei te re wis sen schaft li che in for ma tio nen.(fortsetzung)purpose insulinomas are neuroendocrine tumours derived from pancreatic beta-cells. the glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (glp-1r) is expressed with a high incidence (>90%) and high density in insulinomas. glucagon-like peptide 1 (glp-1), the natural ligand of glp-1r, is rapidly degraded in vivo. a more stable agonist of glp-1r is exendin-3. we investigated imaging of insulinomas with dota-conjugated exendin-3 labelled with (68)ga. methods targeting of insulinomas with [lys(40)(dota)]exendin-3 labelled with either (111)in or (68)ga was investigated in vitro using insulinoma tumour cells (ins-1). [lys(40)((111)in-dtpa)]exendin-3 was used as a reference in this study. in vivo targeting was investigated in balb/c nude mice with subcutaneous ins-1 tumours. pet imaging was performed using a preclinical pet/ct scanner. results in vitro exendin-3 specifically bound and was internalized by glp-1r-positive cells. in balb/c nude mice with subcutaneous ins-1 tumours a high uptake of [lys(40)((111)in-dtpa)]exendin-3 in the tumour was observed (33.5 +/- 11.6%id/g at 4 h after injection). uptake was specific, as determined by coinjection of an excess of unlabelled [lys(40)]exendin-3 (1.8 +/- 0.1%id/g). the pancreas also exhibited high and specific uptake (11.3 +/- 1.0%id/g). high uptake was also found in the kidneys (144 +/- 24%id/g) and this uptake was not receptor-mediated. in this murine tumour model optimal targeting of the glp-1r expressing tumour was obtained at exendin doses < or =0.1 microg. remarkably, tumour uptake of (68)ga-labelled [lys(40)(dota)]exendin-3 was lower (8.9 +/- 3.1%id/g) than tumour uptake of (111)in-labelled [lys(40)(dtpa)]exendin-3 (25.4 +/- 7.2%id/g). the subcutaneous tumours were clearly visualized by small-animal pet imaging after injection of 3 mbq of [lys(40)((68)ga-dota)]exendin-3. conclusion [lys(40)((68)ga-dota)]exendin-3 specifically accumulates in insulinomas, although the uptake is lower than that of [lys(40)((111)in-dtpa)]exendin-3. therefore, [lys(40)((68)ga-dota)]exendin-3 is a promising tracer to visualize insulinomas with pet.68ga-labelled exendin-3, a new agent for the detection of insulinomas with pet.angiotensin converting enzyme (ace)2 is an enzymatically active ace homologue, which shares 42% of its amino acidic sequence identity in its catalytic domain; however, ace and ace2 show several differences. whereas ace is a dipeptidylcarboxypeptidase, presenting both n-and c-terminus catalytic domains with two zinc-binding motifs (hexxh, where x is any amino acid); ace2 is a monocarboxypeptidase with only one zinc-binding motif at its n-terminal domain [1] [2] [3] . through this catalytic domain, ace2 hydrolyzes angii (angiotensin ii) to generate ang1-7, a peptide that binds to the mas receptor (ang1-7 receptor) and activates vasodilation, anti-fibrosis, anti-proliferation, and anti-inflammatory effects as well as counterbalances the ace-angii-atr1 axis actions [4] [5] [6] .renin angiotensin system (ras) was classically described as a regulation system responsible for blood pressure regulation, electrolyte, and fluid homeostasis, exerting most of its actions through kidneys [7] . later on, its elements were also found in extrarenal tissues, indicating the presence of a local paracrine system that coexists with the circulating ras [8] . thus, ace expression was mainly found in the surface of endothelial cells of lungs, renal brush border membranes, intestines, choroid plexus, placenta [9] [10] [11] , and, to a lesser extent, in cardiac, hepatic, pancreatic, and adrenal tissues [12] .in contrast, ace2 protein expression was initially reported to be more tissue restricted and higher than ace, being described preferentially in kidneys (renal tubules and glomeruli), heart, and testis [13] . subsequently, ace2 expression was also found widespread in many other organs such as lungs, pancreas [14, 15] , bladder, stomach, ileum, adipocytes, and liver [16, 17] .ras activation is known to play a key role in several diseases, namely diabetes, and renal and cardiovascular pathologies [18, 19] . ace2 and ace enzymes have found to be altered in the kidney from different diabetic experimental models, the db/db (type 2) and streptozotozin (stz) (type 1) diabetic mice [20] [21] [22] . however, ace2 and ace enzymes have not been extensively studied in other tissues from diabetic mice. the non-obese diabetic (nod) mice is a strain that spontaneously develops autoimmune diabetes that mimics type 1 diabetes in humans [23, 24] . we hypothesized that ace2 and ace enzymes are present in different tissues other than kidney and differentially expressed. in addition, the administration of insulin can alter ace2 and ace expression within these tissues from nod mice. for this purpose, we studied both ace and ace2 activities as well as their protein expression in several tissues from nod diabetic mice. we also analyzed the effect of diabetes on ace2 and ace modifications in tissues from nod diabetic mice as compared to non-obese resistant (nor) mice. in addition, we assessed the effect of insulin administration on ace2 and ace expression in the studied tissues.ace enzymatic determination technique was set up using two buffers. for this study, human recombinant ace (hrace) was used. phosphate buffer (pb) and borate buffer (bb) were incubated with increasing amounts of hrace ( figure 1a ). we observed that ace activity at lower hrace amounts was only detected by the use of bb. in addition, the hrace activity measurement was found to be linear with bb as compared to pb. pb needed higher amounts of hrace for its detection, suggesting a lower sensitivity when this buffer was used.after the above-mentioned experiments, we decided to use bb for our ace activity assays. the next step was to test the optimal amounts of tissue protein for ace activity measurements (figure 1b,c) . increasing amounts of protein for each tissue of both control (cont, dashed lines) and diabetic (db, continuous lines) mice were used. pulmonary tissue presented a linear enzymatic activity in both cont and db mice due to its high enzymatic activity ( figure 2b ). in contrast, no linearity in increasing amounts of heart (triangle), pancreas (circle), and liver (cross) samples due to the low ace activity detection was observed ( figure 1c ). furthermore, it is worth noting that ace activity in db was higher as compared to cont, and lung presented the highest levels of ace activity.ace2 enzymatic activity was already previously established and validated in our laboratory by using a specific ace2 quenched fluorogenic substrate [25] [26] [27] . the optimal amount of each studied tissue was determined by reactions with increasing amounts of protein in pulmonary, cardiac, hepatic, and pancreatic tissues of both cont and db samples ( figure 2 ). higher ace2 activity was observed in lung, heart, liver, and pancreas from cont mice, with increased amounts of protein. interestingly, increased levels of enzymatic activities were found in tissue samples from db mice as compared to controls. among all studied tissues, pancreas presented higher levels of ace2 activity followed by heart, lung, and liver. figure 1 . implementation of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) activity assays with different buffers and in different tissues. (a) ace activity with borate (bb) and phosphate buffer (pb) after increasing amounts (ng) of human recombinant ace (hrace). ace activity at lower concentrations of hrace was only detected by the use of bb; (b) ace activity in lung measured with bb (black rhombus), and (c) ace activity in heart (blue triangle), pancreas (green circle), and liver (red cross) from control (dashed lines) and diabetic (continuous lines) mice. increasing amounts of micrograms of total protein extracts were tested.ace2 activity assays in different tissues and with increasing protein amounts. ace2 activity was measured in lung (black rhombus), heart (blue triangle), pancreas (green circle), and liver (red cross) from control animals (cont) (left panel) and diabetic animals (db) (right panel) mice. increasing amounts of micrograms of total protein extracts from each studied tissue were tested (1, 3, 5, 7.5, and 10 μg of protein). increasing amounts of micrograms of total protein extracts from each studied tissue were tested (1, 3, 5, 7.5, and 10 μg of protein).ace2 activity assays in different tissues and with increasing protein amounts. ace2 activity was measured in lung (black rhombus), heart (blue triangle), pancreas (green circle), and liver (red cross) from control animals (cont) (left panel) and diabetic animals (db) (right panel) mice. increasing amounts of micrograms of total protein extracts from each studied tissue were tested (1, 3, 5, 7.5, and 10 µg of protein).serum, lung, heart, liver, and pancreas from diabetic, insulin-treated, and control micein serum samples, ace activity was significantly increased in db at early and late stages of diabetes as compared to cont mice (p = 0.04 in 21-day follow up and p = 0.0003 in 40-day follow up). insulin administration slightly decreased circulating ace activity in db mice at both early and late stages (p = ns, not significant) (figure 3a ). ace activity was significantly increased in lungs from db mice at early and late stages of diabetes as compared to cont mice (p = 0.045 and p = 0.026, respectively). insulin administration did not modify ace activity in lungs from db as compared to cont mice (p = ns) (figure 3b ). regarding heart samples, no statistically significant differences were observed in ace activity in db as compared to their respective cont mice (p = ns). furthermore, no significant effect was observed in cardiac tissue after insulin treatment in db as compared to cont mice (p = ns) ( figure 3c) . ace activity was also tested in liver. as observed in heart, no differences in ace activity levels between db and cont mice were found in liver tissue (p = ns). no changes were observed after insulin administration (p = ns) ( figure 3c ). no significant differences in ace activity levels were found in pancreas from db and cont mice (p = ns) ( figure 3c ). in serum samples, ace activity was significantly increased in db at early and late stages of diabetes as compared to cont mice (p = 0.04 in 21-day follow up and p = 0.0003 in 40-day follow up). insulin administration slightly decreased circulating ace activity in db mice at both early and late stages (p = ns, not significant) (figure 3a ). ace activity was significantly increased in lungs from db mice at early and late stages of diabetes as compared to cont mice (p = 0.045 and p = 0.026, respectively). insulin administration did not modify ace activity in lungs from db as compared to cont mice (p = ns) (figure 3b ). regarding heart samples, no statistically significant differences were observed in ace activity in db as compared to their respective cont mice (p = ns). furthermore, no significant effect was observed in cardiac tissue after insulin treatment in db as compared to cont mice (p = ns) ( figure 3c) . ace activity was also tested in liver. as observed in heart, no differences in ace activity levels between db and cont mice were found in liver tissue (p = ns). no changes were observed after insulin administration (p = ns) ( figure 3c ). no significant differences in ace activity levels were found in pancreas from db and cont mice (p = ns) ( figure 3c ). in serum samples, there was a significant increase of ace2 activity in db mice at early and late stages of diabetes as compared to cont (p = 0.0003 and p = 0.0003, respectively) and insulin administration significantly decreased ace2 activity in db mice at early and late stages (p = 0.001 and p = 0.001, respectively) ( figure 4a ). in lung homogenates, no changes were observed between db and cont mice (p = ns). interestingly, insulin administration significantly increased ace2 activity in db mice at late stage as compared to db mice (p = 0.05) (figure 4b ). at cardiac level, there was a in serum samples, there was a significant increase of ace2 activity in db mice at early and late stages of diabetes as compared to cont (p = 0.0003 and p = 0.0003, respectively) and insulin administration significantly decreased ace2 activity in db mice at early and late stages (p = 0.001 and p = 0.001, respectively) ( figure 4a ). in lung homogenates, no changes were observed between db and cont mice (p = ns). interestingly, insulin administration significantly increased ace2 activity in db mice at late stage as compared to db mice (p = 0.05) (figure 4b ). at cardiac level, there was a significant increase of ace2 activity in db mice in both early and late stages of db as compared to cont mice (p = 0.011 and p = 0.029, respectively), however, insulin administration did not modify this pattern (p = ns) (figure 4b) . in liver samples, no changes were observed between the studied groups ( figure 4b ). pancreatic ace2 activity was increased in db mice as compared to cont mice (p = 0.014 in 21-day follow up and p = 0.0003 in 40-day follow up of study). in addition, insulin administration did not change ace2 activity in pancreas from db mice (p = ns) (figure 4b ).int. j. mol. sci. 2017, 18, 563 5 of 13 significant increase of ace2 activity in db mice in both early and late stages of db as compared to cont mice (p = 0.011 and p = 0.029, respectively), however, insulin administration did not modify this pattern (p = ns) (figure 4b ). in liver samples, no changes were observed between the studied groups ( figure 4b ). pancreatic ace2 activity was increased in db mice as compared to cont mice (p = 0.014 in 21-day follow up and p = 0.0003 in 40-day follow up of study). in addition, insulin administration did not change ace2 activity in pancreas from db mice (p = ns) (figure 4b ). after ace and ace2 activities were measured, ace2/ace activity ratios were calculated for each studied tissue to infer the status of ras in different tissues as an ace-ace2 balance. in serum samples, ace2/ace activity ratio in db mice at early and late stages was higher as compared to cont (p = 0.011 and p = 0.0003, respectively). insulin administration significantly decreased circulating ace2/ace activity ratio in db mice (p = 0.001) (figure 5a ). in lung, there were no differences in ace2/ace activity ratio between the db and cont groups at early stage. interestingly, ace2/ace activity ratio was significantly decreased in db at late stage as compared to cont mice (p = 0.001). insulin administration significantly increased ace2/ace activity ratio in db mice (p = 0.014) (figure 5b) . at cardiac level, ace2/ace activity ratio was significantly increased in db mice in both early and late stages as compared to cont mice (p = 0.0003 and p = 0.008, respectively), but insulin administration had no effect on ace2/ace activity in db (figure 5c ). after ace and ace2 activities were measured, ace2/ace activity ratios were calculated for each studied tissue to infer the status of ras in different tissues as an ace-ace2 balance. in serum samples, ace2/ace activity ratio in db mice at early and late stages was higher as compared to cont (p = 0.011 and p = 0.0003, respectively). insulin administration significantly decreased circulating ace2/ace activity ratio in db mice (p = 0.001) (figure 5a ). in lung, there were no differences in ace2/ace activity ratio between the db and cont groups at early stage. interestingly, ace2/ace activity ratio was significantly decreased in db at late stage as compared to cont mice (p = 0.001). insulin int. j. mol. sci. 2017, 18, 563 6 of 13 administration significantly increased ace2/ace activity ratio in db mice (p = 0.014) (figure 5b) . at cardiac level, ace2/ace activity ratio was significantly increased in db mice in both early and late stages as compared to cont mice (p = 0.0003 and p = 0.008, respectively), but insulin administration had no effect on ace2/ace activity in db (figure 5c ). in pancreas, ace2/ace activity ratio was significantly increased in db mice in both early and late stages as compared to cont mice (p = 0.05 and p = 0.001, respectively), but insulin administration had no effect on ace2/ace activity in db ( figure 5, panel c) . in liver, there were no differences in ace2/ace activity ratio in db as compared to their respective cont (p = ns). insulin administration did not modify ace2/ace activity in liver (figure 5c ). in pancreas, ace2/ace activity ratio was significantly increased in db mice in both early and late stages as compared to cont mice (p = 0.05 and p = 0.001, respectively), but insulin administration had no effect on ace2/ace activity in db ( figure 5, panel c) . in liver, there were no differences in ace2/ace activity ratio in db as compared to their respective cont (p = ns). insulin administration did not modify ace2/ace activity in liver (figure 5c ). to assess ace protein expression, immunoblotting techniques were performed. in lungs, ace protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at early and late stages as compared to cont (p = 0.008 and p = 0.012, respectively). in addition, insulin administration significantly decreased ace protein expression in db mice (p = 0.05 and p = 0.024, respectively) ( figure 6a ). in heart, ace protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at late stage as compared to cont (p = 0.03) (figure 6b ). insulin administration did not modify ace protein expression. in liver and pancreas, there were no differences between db and cont mice (figure 6c) .in lungs, ace2 protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at early stage as to assess ace protein expression, immunoblotting techniques were performed. in lungs, ace protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at early and late stages as compared to cont (p = 0.008 and p = 0.012, respectively). in addition, insulin administration significantly decreased ace protein expression in db mice (p = 0.05 and p = 0.024, respectively) ( figure 6a ). in heart, ace protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at late stage as compared to cont (p = 0.03) (figure 6b ). insulin administration did not modify ace protein expression. in liver and pancreas, there were no differences between db and cont mice (figure 6c ). protein expression in db mice (p = 0.05) (figure 6a ). in heart, ace2 protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at early stage as compared to cont mice (p = 0.022 and p = 0.035, respectively). insulin administration did not modify ace2 protein expression in db mice (p = ns) (figure 6b ). in liver, ace2 protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at late stage as compared to cont mice (p = 0.008) and insulin administration did not modify ace2 protein expression (figure 6c ). in pancreas, there were no changes observed when ace2 protein expression was studied (figure 6d ). mean blood glucose levels in control animals were 160.25 ± 9.47 mg/dl at the end of the study. in diabetic animals, blood glucose levels were significantly increased to 550 ± 33.08 mg/dl in animals followed for 21 days and 555 ± 3.47 mg/dl in the animals followed for 40 days. insulin pellets in lungs, ace2 protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at early stage as compared to cont mice (p = 0.008). in addition, insulin administration significantly decreased ace2 protein expression in db mice (p = 0.05) (figure 6a ). in heart, ace2 protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at early stage as compared to cont mice (p = 0.022 and p = 0.035, respectively). insulin administration did not modify ace2 protein expression in db mice (p = ns) (figure 6b ). in liver, ace2 protein expression was significantly increased in db mice at late stage as compared to cont mice (p = 0.008) and insulin administration did not modify ace2 protein expression (figure 6c ). in pancreas, there were no changes observed when ace2 protein expression was studied (figure 6d ).mean blood glucose levels in control animals were 160.25 ± 9.47 mg/dl at the end of the study. in diabetic animals, blood glucose levels were significantly increased to 550 ± 33.08 mg/dl in animals followed for 21 days and 555 ± 3.47 mg/dl in the animals followed for 40 days. insulin pellets significantly reduced blood glucose levels at 110.65 ± 11 mg/dl and 97.67 ±9.48 mg/dl for 21 and 40 days of diabetes, respectively.blood glucose levels positively correlated with ace2/ace ratio in serum (r = 0.455, p = 0.003) and negatively correlated with ace2/ace ratio in lung (r = −0.546, p = 0.0005).several works have been focused on the study of ace and ace2 enzymes within the diabetic kidney [21, 28] . ace2 has been shown to be increased in the kidney from different models of diabetic nephropathy, the stz-diabetic model and the non-obese diabetic mice (nod), among others [20, 25] . however, in other tissues from diabetic animals, such as liver and heart, ace and ace2 enzymes have not been widely studied. in the present study, we demonstrated that ace and ace2 activities are present in different tissues. interestingly their expression is different depending on the tissue: ace is highly expressed in lung, whereas ace2 is highly expressed in pancreas among the studied tissues. we also observed that diabetes up-regulated ace and ace2 activity and protein expression in the majority of the studied tissues.a large number of ace activity detection techniques have been described, such as radioassays, high-performance liquid chromatography, and colorimetric-based assays [29] [30] [31] . of note that, ace activity measurement based on fluorimetric quantification is the most widely used technique because of its sensitivity, simplicity, speed, and high reproducibility [32] . in 1971, cushman and cheung developed an ace activity assay using synthetic ace-specific substrates, including one of the substrates most commonly cited in literature, hippuryl-l-histidyl-l-leucine (hhl) [33] . as an indirect determination, this technique is based on the hydrolysis of hhl and the measurement of fluorescence through the o-phthalaldialdehyde adducts formation with hhl [34] . in this work, ace activity was indirectly measured using hhl as the substrate for ace, as previously described. previous studies have shown that ace activity from the same samples differs depending on the homogenization buffer used [32, 35] . we now show that borate buffer is the most suitable to detect lower levels of ace activity, showing better linearity, conferring less variability, and offering a more reliable assay.our results showed that ace activity in lungs was higher as compared to other studied tissues. moreover, a significant increase was observed in serum and lung from diabetic mice at early and late stages as compared to control mice. the same pattern was observed when ace protein expression was studied. these observations are consistent with previous studies from huang and co-authors showing increased ace activity in plasma and mrna levels in lung from stz-induced diabetic c57bl/6 mice [36] . thus, there is a coupled (serum and pulmonary) alteration in ace activity, suggesting that pulmonary and circulating ras may exert a common regulation.since ras has a key role in cardiovascular diseases, recent studies have associated ras with liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, and portal pressure regulation [37] . interestingly, pancreas is found to express local ras. the role of ras components in diabetes have been previously studied [15, 25, 38] . in addition, ace was also increased in liver from db mice at late stage of follow-up. we found that ace activity was decreased in heart from db mice, but only at early stage. however, in previous studies by colucci and co-authors, there were no differences between control and diabetic mice [12] . in all studied tissues, the insulin-treated group presented no significant differences compared to the non-treated diabetic group.ace2 enzyme, a novel ace homologue, was discovered in the last decade [1, 2] . for years, the detection of endogenous ace2 activity in mouse tissues was difficult and ace2 activity assay is a relatively recent reliable technique [39, 40] . ace2 activity was performed in serum, lung, heart, liver, pancreas, and kidney tissues by measuring the hydrolysis of mca-apk(dnp), a quenched-fluorescent specific ace2-substrate.our findings showed that ace2 activity levels were higher in pancreas as compared to other studied tissues. interestingly, significant increases in serum, pancreas, and heart in ace2 activity from nod diabetic mice as compared to nor mice at 21 and at 40 days after the onset of diabetes were observed. in addition, ace2 activity was also increased in liver at 40 days of diabetes in nod mice. with regard to protein expression, ace2 expression levels were increased in lungs and heart at early stage of diabetes and in pancreas at late stage of diabetes. previous studies postulated that the differences observed in ace2 activities are related to adam17 sheddase activity [41] . however, no differences were found when studying ace2 and adam17 activities and gene expression in pancreas islet from db/db mice as compared to the respective db/m controls [42] .it is of note that insulin administration mainly restored ace and ace2, and ace2/ace ratio activities in serum samples at longer time of follow-up. however, these results were not consistent in other tissues. these findings may be ascribed to the direct correlation observed between glucose levels and ace2/ace ratio. thus, the results observed may indicate in part a protective effect of insulin on normalizing circulating ras activities.in conclusion, we assessed ace and ace2 activities in different tissues of nod mice and demonstrated that ace activity is highly detected in lungs, whereas ace2 activity is highly detected in pancreas. in diabetic mice, there is a coupled (serum and pulmonary) alteration in ace activity that suggests that pulmonary and circulating ras may exert a common regulation. the increase of ace2 activity within the circulation in diabetic mice may be related to a compensatory ras mechanism.nod/shiltj and nor/ltj female mice (from the jackson laboratory, bar harbor, me, usa) were housed in cages under 12 h light/dark cycle in a specific pathogen germ free (spf) environment. female mice only were used because the development of diabetes is more predictable in female than in male nod mice [43] . mice were fed with a chow diet and were provided access to tap water ad libitum. the ethical committee of animal experimentation of the barcelona biomedical research park (ceea-prbb) (mso-08-1106) and the catalan government (dmah: 4097) approved this study. mice had their blood glucose levels determined every two weeks starting at 10 weeks of age. fasting blood samples from tail vein were obtained and used for glucose level determination with the accu-chek compact ® (roche, st. cugat, spain). female nod mice were considered diabetic when glucose blood level higher than 250 mg/dl was first detected. nod diabetic mice were randomly assigned to two groups, without (db) or with insulin treatment (db + ins). for blood glucose levels control, insulin pellets (~0.1 u/24 hr/pellet, linbit, linshin canada inc, toronto, canada) were subcutaneously implanted under anesthesia with ketamine and medetomidine. after surgery, atipamezol was injected to revert the effects of medetomidine. diabetic animals were compared to the non-diabetic strain, nor (cont). studied animals were weekly controlled for body weight and glucose blood levels and were followed for 21 and 40 days after diabetes diagnosis, and then final surgery was performed. the total number of animals included in each study group were the following: eight animals in each cont group, seven animals in each db group, and five animals were studied for 21 days with insulin pellet and six animals for 40 days with insulin treatment.studies were performed in serum, heart, lungs, liver, and pancreas. animals were sacrificed under anesthesia, with pentobarbital. blood samples were obtained by intracardiac puncture and organs were next perfused with phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) solution by transcardiac puncture.serum was obtained after 10 min of centrifugation at 6000× g and stored at −80 • c. tissues were quickly removed and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. they were then stored at −80 • c until use.ace activity was first set up using human recombinant ace (hrace) and, for this reason, two different buffers were used with increasing concentrations of recombinant. one buffer contained 0.5 m potassium phosphate (pb) ph 8.3 [34] and the other was a mix of 0.4 m borate buffer (bb) ph 7.2, 0.34 m sucrose, and 0.9 m nacl [32] . after that, increasing amounts of hrace were incubated with 27.3 m hip-his-leu at 37 • c for 25 min. reaction was stopped with 0.28 m naoh and then 20 mg/ml of o-phtaldialdehyde in methanol were added to generate an adduct formation. the reaction was incubated at room temperature (rt) in dark conditions for 10 min and then it was stopped using 3 n hcl. samples were clarified for 5 min at 800× g and his-leu fluorescent adduct was measured fluorometrically at 360-nm excitation and 485-nm emission using a fluorescence plate reader tecan infinite 200 (tecan instruments, männedorf, switzerland). for mouse samples, bb was used following the protocol previously described. for serum, 2 µl of sample were used and for tissues, between 5 and 10 µg of total protein were analyzed depending on the tissue. results were expressed as rfu (relative fluorescent units) per µl of serum or µg of protein (rfu/µl or rfu/µg).ace2 enzymatic activity assay was performed as previously published by our group [25, [44] [45] [46] and adapted to different tissues. briefly, 5 µl of serum or 5 µg of tissue samples that were previously homogenized were incubated using a 100 mm tris-hcl, 600 mm nacl, 10 µm zncl 2 , ph 7.5 buffer in the presence of protease inhibitors containing 100 µm captopril, 5 µm amastatin, 5 µm bestatin (all from sigma-aldrich, madrid, spain), and 10 µm z-pro-prolinal (enzo life sciences, grupo taper, madrid, spain). samples were incubated with 20 µm mca-ala-pro-lys(dnp)-oh (enzo life sciences), a specific ace2 quenched fluorogenic substrate, at 37 • c. enzymatic activity was determined after 4 hours of incubation in tissue, and 16 h of incubation in serum. the plates were read using a fluorescence plate reader tecan infinite 200 (tecan instruments) at an excitation wavelength of 320 nm and an emission wavelength of 400 nm. results were expressed as rfu (relative fluorescent units) per µl of sample or µg of protein and per hour (rfu/µl/h or rfu/µg/h).protein expression was analyzed by western blotting techniques using tissue homogenates. briefly, 30 µg of protein were denatured by heat shock. samples were loaded into 8% acrylamide/bisacrylamide gel and transferred to hydrophobic pvdf (polyvinylidenedifluoride) membranes (amersham hybond-p, ge healthcare, madrid, spain) using trans-blot ® turbo™ transfer system (bio-rad laboratories, madrid, spain). membranes were blocked using 5% skimmed milk in tris-buffered saline (tbs) containing 0.1% tween-20 for 1 h at room temperature. membranes were then incubated using primary antibodies for ace (f940 1:500, bioworld, st. louis park, mn, usa) and ace2 (ab15347 1:2000, abcam, cambridge, uk), followed by incubation with hrp-conjugated secondary antibodies (dako, barcelona, spain). to control for protein loading, all membranes were probed with mouse monoclonal anti-β-actin (a1978 1:4000, sigma, madrid, spain) or mouse monoclonal anti-tubulin (t5168 1:10000, sigma). densitometric analyses of protein bands were performed using imagej software (1.47v, nih, usa) and corrected by control protein.values of each data are expressed as mean ± sem. comparisons between groups were assessed by kruskal-wallis for multiple comparisons and mann-whitney u-test for two group comparisons (spss version 18 for windows). statistical significance was considered when p ≤ 0.05.. correctional facilities are by nature a physical environment where inmates are in constant close contact with one another, whether in cells or recreational areas, sharing the same ventilation system (james & foster, 2020) . compared to cruise ships and petri dishes in regard to the ease of sharing germs, correctional facilities contain areas (i.e., cells, recreation rooms, cafeterias) where it is extremely difficult to maintain distance and remain hygienic. multiple past studies, prior to the emergence of covid-19, found a significant relationship between residing in cell blocks and the spread of these infectious and communicable diseases in correctional facilities (simpson, simpson, adily, grant, & butler, 2019) . highly contagious illnesses, such as the flu and covid-19, can easily be passed between inmates.much like the rest of the world, american federal and state correctional facilities launched into action to determine the best action plan for decreasing the spread of covid-19. on march 23, 2020, the center for disease control released a detailed form on interim guidance of the management of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) for all correctional and detention facilities. the suggestions given to the american public, such as handwashing, staying six feet apart, and disinfecting household items, are often not feasible in a correctional setting (morris, 2020 , as cited in james & foster, 2020 . even the use of hand sanitizer is forbidden in most facilities due to the alcohol content (francescani & barr, 2020) . the options for correctional facility housing and daily activities are very limited, forcing inmates to spend a notable amount of time in close contact with others (williams, weiser, & rashbaum, 2020) . as a result, correctional facilities have relied on other measures to decrease the spread of covid-19.this article will explore the federal and state correction system responses to covid-19 as of early may 2020. it is important to keep in mind that while responses to the virus were fluid and changing on a daily basis, the most recent information reported on government websites and in the news media are presented in this piece. adjustments to inmate activities and staff will be reviewed, as well as responses by community corrections agencies. a virus as contagious covid-19 can be easily introduced to a correctional facility via the staff or with face-to-face visits with family, friends and legal counsel, all who could be exposed in environments outside the prison. as a result, the bureau of prisons (bop) suspended all social visits for inmates until further notice (bureau of prisons, 2020b), and state governments have taken similar approaches. in order to attempt to maintain communication with loved ones and legal counsel, the federal and each state government are providing concessions. for example, each bop inmate received 500 additional telephone minutes per month to allow for communication with individuals outside the correctional facility. inmates in new york have been granted five free stamps per week and two free 30-min telephone calls per week (new york department of corrections and community supervision, 2020). other concessions have been provided to lessen the stress of incarceration, such as providing the ability for family and friends to send post cards, video messages, and emails to the inmates. the state of washington even approved a contract with swank motion pictures to provide facilities with movies for inmate viewing (department of corrections washington state, 2020). visits from legal counsel are essential for inmates to pursue civil liability and appeals cases during incarceration. however, the bureau of prisons suspended attorney visits for at least 30 days, upon which re-evaluation will occur once stay-at-home orders are lifted nationwide with states following suit (bureau of prisons, 2020b). the bop and state correctional facilities do allow confidential legal calls via telephone and/or video platforms to ensure access to counsel. if an in-person legal visit is deemed a necessity, the attorney must undergo a health screening and temperature check before entry into a correctional facility (bureau of prisons, 2020b).the bureau of prisons, with state correctional administrative bodies following suit, have made efforts to regulate inmate movement within correctional facilities (bureau of prisons, 2020b). staggered meal times and recreation times have been implemented to limit congregate gatherings. internal facility inmate movements have been suspended overall, with some exceptions. for instance, transfers related to writs or interstate agreements on detainers are still permitted, as well as transfers related to medical or mental health reasons. if a bop inmate is transferred, the following conditions must be met:1. inmate must be in bop custody for at least 14 days; 2. regional directors must notify bop emergency operations center prior to movement of the inmate; 3. exit screening performed for covid-19 symptoms. if symptoms are exhibited (cough, shortness of breath and/or temperature of 100.4 degrees fahrenheit or greater), the inmate will not be transferred and immediately placed in isolation.the bop recognized that new inmates would be entering the system on a regular basis and would obviously require transfer approval. however, any newly-arrived bop inmates will be screened for covid-19 exposure risk factors and symptoms. if an inmate is asymptomatic with a risk of exposure, he/she will be quarantined. inmates exhibiting symptoms will be isolated and tested for covid-19 (bureau of prisons, 2020b).many states have made concessions for inmate medical visits with the hopes of encouraging inmates to seek medical attention if they are experiencing symptoms and decrease the spread of covid-19 through early detection (prison policy initiative, 2020). states like alabama, minnesota, and west virginia have suspended co-payments for incarcerated individuals as a result of the epidemic. co-pays for inmates are usually between $2-5, but this is an extreme cost for inmates who often make less than $1 per hour (prison policy initiative, 2020). lower to no cost for a medical visit would hopefully decrease hesitation to seek medical attention and in turn, increase likelihood of early detection and diagnosis of covid-19.as of late april 2020, the bop had obtained over 5000 test kits and multiple ventilators from local hospitals to assist with inmate treatment (balsamo, 2020) . however, treatment of infected inmate cases has come under fire by some of the families of those who are ill. for example, michael fleming's 59 year-old father, also named michael, was serving 20 years at fci terminal island in los angeles for drug conspiracy and contracted covid-19 (balsamo, 2020) . according to fleming, the family was never notified that his father's condition was worsening, even when he was hooked to a ventilator. they were unaware of his father's condition until the prison chaplain contacted the family asking how they would like his remains to be handled. california prison officials insisted they are following the guidelines set by the cdc and managing the prison population as efficiently as possible to stop the spread of the disease, but special circumstances arise depending on the situation.the covid-19 outbreak also had a tremendous effect on the professional and personal lives of correctional staff in federal and state facilities due to the high potential for transmission of the virus by a staff member to a facility. in bledsoe county, tennessee, 583 of the 588 identified covid-19 cases were from the bledsoe correctional complex, with a high potential for the initial infection entering the facility originating from a staff member (according the facility's medical director) (hutchinson, 2020) . staff in the state of washington have been issued n95 respirators to wear during work hours department of corrections washington state, 2020). with the exception of relocation travel, any planned travel by correctional staff nationwide has been suspended. if staff live in areas with "sustained community transmission," as indicated by the center for disease control, they were directed to participate in daily temperature checks and self-reporting of exposure for at least the next 30 days (center for disease control, 2020). the same requirement applied to outside contractors performing essential services or maintenance (all other contract work was suspended).furthermore, volunteer visits have been suspended, with the exception of consideration of inmates who request access to a religious advisor.many states have considered early release for low level offenders. on march 23, 2020, the new york times reported the state of new jersey was planning to release approximately 1000 individuals from its jails to decrease the risk of spread of coronavirus disease (covid-19) (tully, 2020) . offenders with probation violations and lowlevel crimes sentenced in superior court were those considered for release. also, in late march 2020, the county jail in houston, texas, holding a population equivalent to "three cruise ships," stopped taking in individuals arrested for certain non-violent crimes (aspinwall, blakinger, vansickle, & thompson, 2020) . california governor gavin newsom announced the intent to release up to 3500 inmates to parole supervision to lessen the prison population.while lowering the population levels in jails and prisons could decrease the likelihood of spread of covid-19, there are potential negative health repercussions to early release based on lack of housing. for instance, in los angeles county in california, approximately 30% of the jail population was homeless before incarceration (williams et al., 2020) . returning to the streets will equate to a vulnerability for exposure the same as incarceration. los angeles recently reopened some of its recreation centers, formerly closed due to the covid-19, to provide housing for homeless individuals.the infiltration of covid-19 into our criminal justice system has also affected our community corrections programming. with government buildings closed all over the nation, physical check-ins with probation and parole officers are suspended indefinitely to practice social distancing. states like massachusetts have decreased the use of electronic monitoring as a supervisory tactic to avoid physical contact between the person fitting the device and the probationer or parolee. probation and parole officers are using video and telephone calls to communicate with clients, rather than home or office visits (schwartzapfel, 2020) . while a seemingly reasonable alternative, there are potential barriers to prevent effective supervision. for example, the officer and supervised offender must both have reliable technology and internet connection to maintain communication. lack of finances and other resources can limit the ability to ensure successful remote supervision, as well as sporadic work schedules and personal circumstances.susan rice, chief probation officer in miami county, indiana, called this community corrections adaptation to covid-19 a "social experiment" (as cited in schwartzapfel, 2020) . roles of the officers are evolving, responsibilities of the offenders are changing, and the success of these two melding together is yet to be determined. the inability to meet in person with supervised individuals loses the personal connections officers have with their clients, as well as the ability to monitor living environments and others in the household. the potential to identify potential risky behaviors or unsafe living conditions could be diminished. on the other hand, it may provide evidence of a more cost-effective method of supervision. rather than spending time and mileage to travel to see supervised individuals, more check-ins per day can be accomplished via video chat or phone with less time and cost.rice's "social experiment" also involves the adaptation of probation and parole officers to their new job responsibilities as a result of covid-19. the roles of the supervising officers are now expanding in many situations, requiring more time and effort to assist offenders with daily needs and living situations (schwartzapfel, 2020) . probation and parole officers are also spending copious amounts of time helping clients file for unemployment and finding new resources, as many social support resources (e.g., alcoholics and narcotics anonymous, counseling sessions, and education courses) are no longer physically meeting. while some have moved to virtual meetings, many do not have access to the technology to participate in the meetings or are unable to find meetings that work with their schedules.community corrections agencies in the united states are also using covid-19 as an opportunity to revisit current sentencing policies. brian lovins, president-elect of the american probation and parole association, stated "this gives us a big opportunity to challenge the need for incarceration of nonviolent folks" (as cited in schwartzapfel, 2020) . probation and parole chiefs across the nation are calling for jurisdictions to strongly reconsider policies of jailing individuals for supervision violations. the nyu marron institute of urban management found some probation and parole departments are only doing drug testing in high risk cases and ceased arresting individuals for low level technical violations (schwartzapfel, 2020) . community corrections stakeholders like lovins are hoping for data that demonstrates successful community-based methods of supervision.efforts are also being made on the federal and state level to identify inmates at high risk for contraction of the virus and consideration of alternate placement in the community. on march 26, 2020, attorney general william barr sent a memorandum to bop director, michael carvajal, requesting the bop utilize available statutory authorities to grant home confinement to eligible inmates who are at risk for covid-19. as of may 3, 2020, an additional 1972 inmates had been placed on home confinement, equating to an increase of 69.1% (bureau of prisons, 2020a). the coronavirus aid, relief and economic security act (cares act, p.l. 116-136) provided assistance to multiple facets of the criminal justice systems, including the realm of community corrections, extending the amount of time a bop inmate can be placed on home confinement when the attorney general "finds that emergency conditions will materially affect the functioning" of its facilities (as cited in james & foster, 2020) .even juvenile probation departments are reconsidering use of sanctions during the pandemic. dozens of federal and state agencies across the nation have joined together to demand a moratorium on fees and fines (e.g., court costs, restitution) for juvenile probationers. notable groups, such as the american civil liberties union, drug policy alliance, the sentencing project and national association for the advancement of colored people, signed a petition along with state legal aids and juvenile resource centers to cease assessment and collections of fines and fees and provide notification to families of this change. in addition, these groups are requesting free video and telephone calls for juveniles who are in custody so they may communicate with family and friends, as well as providing free medical care and other resources (berkeley law clinical program, 2020).currently, there are many unanswered questions about covid-19, including best practices regarding detection and prevention in our correctional facilities. of the approximate 3300 covid-19 cases in four state correctional facilities (arkansas, north carolina, ohio, and virginia), 96% of those cases were asymptomatic (so & smith, 2020) . this lack of continuity in symptoms makes it difficult to identify all contracted cases. while states like texas with larger inmate populations are reporting less cases than smaller states (e.g., ohio), it is important to keep in mind that the reported number of covid-19 contracted cases is most likely substantially higher than reported as individuals who are asymptomatic or exhibiting minimal symptoms may not get tested.one of the most proactive and efficient measures that should be taken is increased testing of staff and inmates in correctional facilities. any individual who is exhibiting any of the symptoms associated with covid-19 or has been exposed to someone with the virus should be tested. states like michigan, tennessee and california are beginning mass testing of inmates in some of their facilities to identify potential cases. some facilities, such as michigan's lakeland correctional facility, houses many of the state's elderly inmates or those with underlying health conditions. facilities such as these are moving to use proactive testing as much as possible to prevent spread and fatalities (so & smith, 2020) , a trend that should be pushed as a nationwide policy.throughout this pandemic and time of crisis, government agencies have stepped up with massive financial opportunities to help support criminal justice agencies. on april 1, 2020, the bureau of justice statistics made $850 million available to public safety agencies struggling with response to covid-19 (department of justice, 2020). the coronavirus emergency supplemental funding program was open for 60 days for local, state and tribal governments to apply for emergency assistance. these funds could be used, but were not limited to, the following requests: hiring personnel and paying overtime, inmate medical needs and necessary resources, and protective equipment. 1 later that month, the office of justice programs (2020) announced almost $70 million in grant availability to support adult and juvenile reentry. this funding will fund reentry programs focusing on agendas such as education, substance abuse, and community supervision.as mentioned previously, this is a fluid situation for the entire world. every day new information is released and decisions are made by government and private agencies, including our federal and state corrections system. at the time this piece was written, many states were still at stay at home orders and/or phasing into some form of economic reopening. it was yet to be determined if the rate of infection was stabilized, and while the hope is a continued decrease of infection rate with social distancing practices, the world awaits the fall season and potential spike. much like other private and public entities, any lessening of restrictions and increase of freedoms for individuals under correctional control can be changed at any due to maintain the safety of the community and those supervised.eine haltung als psychoanalytiker und psychotherapeut, die auf transparenz und teilhabe achtet, verändert die perspektive auf den psychoanalytischen prozess. dabei ist zu erfahren, welch wertvolle begleiter transparenz und teilhabe sind: unseren patienten und analysanden wird es leichter, uns an ihren gedanken und gefühlen teilhaben zu lassen -eine für den therapieerfolg unabdingbare voraussetzung. es entsteht ein dialog, der von der dyade gemeinsam hervorgebracht und getragen wird. im therapeutischen prozess kann über spezifische übertragungsmomente und deren einfluss auf die beziehung kommuniziert werden. in dieser arbeit möchte ich zeigen, welcher gewinn aus einer transparenten haltung in reflektierter offenheit und wechselseitiger teilhabe entsteht und welche weiterführenden möglichkeiten sich daraus ergeben. das führe ich am beispiel der introjektiven identifizierung aus. wenn ich in der männlichen form schreibe, meine ich beide geschlechter.transparenz entsteht, wenn der patient die grundregel der freien assoziation als aufforderung zu offenheit ernst nimmt und der therapeut in reflektierter offenheit nach außen und nach innen, in gleichschwebender aufmerksamkeit und gebotener abstinenz die unbewussten prozesse zu verstehen und zu interpretieren sucht. diesen letzten teil fasse ich nochmal kürzer: transparenz entsteht aus der reflektierten offenheit des therapeuten. nach meinem verständnis verlangt dies bisweilen auch, dass der therapeut sein empfinden mitteilt. sein schweigen kann, auch wenn es abstinent intendiert ist, in manchen momenten manipulativ wirken. luiz (2006) gibt ein eindrucksvolles beispiel einer notwendig transparenten behandlung wieder. transparente momente entstehen in behandlungen besonders dann, wenn überraschende begegnungen, die beispielsweise in "now moments" (stern 2010) entstehen, analysiert werden.teilhabe wird wechselseitig verstanden: der analysand lässt seinen analytiker an seinen assoziationen teilhaben. der analytiker wiederum lässt seinen analysanden an seinen überlegungen und empfindungen insoweit teilhaben, wie diese für den analytischen prozess fruchtbar, sinnvoll und zur klärung notwendig sind. teilhabe ist also ein prozess in zwei richtungen: vom patienten in richtung auf den therapeuten und vom therapeuten in richtung auf seinen patienten. beide nehmen aktiv teil und lassen passiv an sich teilhaben. diesen vorgang beschreiben stolorow und atwood (1992) aus relationaler sicht, ferro (2005) unter dem gesichtspunkt des feldes, das bohleber (2014, s. 66) in ein kontinuierliches, gemeinsames träumen, das wachtraumdenken bei bion (1962) , auflöst und das von ogden (2006, s. 61) revolutionär neu in einer passageren auflösung der subjektgrenzen konzipiert wird.das große feld der intersubjektiven und relationalen psychoanalyse präsentiert sich vielgestaltig. altmeyer und thomä (2006) nennen ihr buch die vernetzte seele im untertitel die intersubjektive wende in der psychoanalyse. die beiden autoren gehen davon aus, dass es die ergebnisse der säuglingsforscher sind, die der intersubjektivität letztlich zum durchbruch verholfen haben. aus einer anderen perspektive sieht bohleber (2014) in der kritischen gesellschaftstheorie der 1960er-jahre einen ausgangspunkt dafür, dass sich die intersubjektive sicht durchgesetzt hat: die philosophischen ansätze von buber und binswanger hatten großen einfluss auf die tiefenpsychologie in deutschland, die zum teil noch geprägt war vom alten göring-institut. wenn auch die damaligen ansätze bereits die fundamentale bedeutung der intersubjektivität betonten, gelang die übersetzung in reale klinische beziehungskonstellationen nicht. zu einer neuaufnahme der themen um intersubjektivität kam es ausgehend von der kritischen gesellschaftstheorie ab den 1960er-jahren: lorenzer hebt 1970, s. 141, hervor, dass "sich das hier beschriebene verstehen der interaktion der subjekte mit ihrer mitwelt und umwelt zu [wendet] ".ebenso lässt sich eine psychoanalytisch-intersubjektive sicht auf dem theoretischen fundament von klein und bion gründen (böhme 2014) . und mertens (2013) wiederum legt in seinem aufsatz "das zwei-personen-unbewusste -unbewusste wahrnehmungsprozesse in der analytischen situation" den schwerpunkt auf die unbewusste wechselseitige einstimmung. aber auch die perspektive des psychoanalytischen feldes mit sich in dieses feld hinein auflösender individualität, wie von baranger und baranger (2008) sowie von ferro (2005 ) und ogden (2006 beschrieben, kann als theoretische untermauerung einer intersubjektiven betrachtungsweise gewählt werden.intersubjektives psychoanalytisches denken und arbeiten wurden in der vergangenheit durch vielgestaltige, auch außerhalb der psychoanalyse gelegene einflüsse befördert. auch in der gegenwart beeinflussen die gesellschaftlichen entwicklungen unsere psychoanalytische theorie: der veränderte umgang mit daten und das wachsende bewusstsein zur infomationellen selbstbestimmung wirken auf unsere theorie und praxis ebenso wie der gewaltige druck, der beispielsweise aufgrund einer epidemie wie covid-19 ("coronavirus disease 2019") auf der bevölkerung lastet. daraus entstehende konflikte lassen sich in einem demokratischen gemeinwesen nur durch transparenz und teilhabe mildern. die begriffe "transparenz" und "teilhabe", die ich für die psychoanalytische theorie und behandlungstechnik vorschlage, tragen dazu bei, aktuell bedrohlichen entwicklungen einen mit hoffnung angereicherten sprachlichen ausdruck gegenüberzustellen.eine besondere rolle spielt in diesem zusammenhang der abwehr-oder interaktionsmechanismus der introjektiven identifizierung. transparenz und teilhabe helfen dabei, die unbewussten anteile der introjektiven identifizierung zu entschlüsseln. den zusammenhang und das zusammenspiel dieser mechanismen werde ich in der vorliegenden arbeit theoretisch untersuchen und an einem klinischen beispiel veranschaulichen.ebenso vielgestaltig wie theorie und praxis der intersubjektivität ist heutzutage die handhabung der abstinenz. dies ist nur folgerichtig, wenn wir uns die geschichte der begriffe, "abstinenz" und "indifferenz" (s. freud 1919a) vergegenwärtigen, die aus der zeit der triebtheorie (s. freud 1915b) und des zweiten topischen modells ab 1920 (s. freud 1923b) stammen. die erste zeit der psychoanalyse war geprägt von modellen, in denen personen eher voneinander abgegrenzt aufgefasst wurden (s. freud 1912e). heute hingegen weisen die modelle der intersubjektiven affektivität auf wege hin, wie durch affekte personengrenzen überschritten werden und interaktionen in die psyche des anderen hineinwirken können.im jahre 1984 plädiert cremerius für eine operationale anwendung der abstinenzregel als funktion des analytischen prozesses (1984). ogden geht zwanzig jahre später erheblich weiter (2006, s. 61) und spricht im rahmen der projektiven identifizierung von einer passageren auflösung der subjektgrenzen von analytiker und analysand. insoweit sich die wahrnehmung der subjektgrenzen auflöst, ist eine abstinenz, die diese grenze eigentlich voraussetzt, nicht mehr eindeutig zu definieren. zusammenfassend ergibt sich daraus nach ermann (2014, s. 121 ) "eine neukonzeption des klassischen abstinenzprinzips .... aus intersubjektiver sicht ist diese regel, die oft sehr starr gehandhabt wurde, durch ein funktionales prinzip ersetzt worden. danach hat der analytiker je nach lage der dinge zu entscheiden, ob, wie weit und in welcher form er auf wünsche und begehren des patienten eingeht, um anschließend zu untersuchen, wie der patient sein verhalten verarbeitet." zu diesem reflexionsprozess trägt eine haltung von transparenz und teilhabe wesentliches bei, weil durch sie die motive der interaktion klarer beschrieben und bearbeitet werden können.nach meiner einschätzung finden im psychoanalytischen theoriegebäude transparenz und teilhabe nicht die beachtung, die ihnen aufgrund ihres potenzials, unbewusstes bewusst werden zu lassen, zukommt. ich verfolge in meiner arbeit die these, dass dies insbesondere für die bearbeitung der introjektiven identifizierung k gilt. sie kann günstigenfalls dann gelingen, wenn der analytiker in einer haltung arbeitet, durch die transparent wird, was gerade vor sich geht. seit ferenczi (1933) sind uns die grundlagen für das verständnis der introjektiven identifizierung bekannt, die er in seiner berühmten arbeit "sprachverwirrung zwischen den erwachsenen und dem kind" gelegt hat. es war dann klein (1946) , die den vorgang der introjektiven identifizierung auf den begriff gebracht hat.die introjektive identifizierung, wie wir sie heute verstehen, ist ein abwehrund interaktionsmechanismus, der an der grenze zwischen pathogenese und salutogenese steht: durch die initiale introjektion "verschwinden" quasi konflikthaftbedrohliche affekte im unbewussten der introjizierenden person -insofern trägt der vorgang einen pathogenetischen charakter. die folgen im neurotischen geschehen können bis zur entwicklung eines falschen selbst führen. auf der anderen seite kann in der depressiven position eine identifizierung des subjektes mit den introjizierten affekten die tür zu einer neuen entwicklung öffnen. mit dem aufscheinen eines neuen verständnisses beginnt eine salutogenetische wirkung der introjektiven identifizierung.diese prozesse können sowohl im individuellen leben wie in der psychoanalyse geschehen. neue erfahrungen entstehen aus einer bewussten aneignung der zunächst unbewussten introjektion: in der regel nimmt im psychoanalytischen prozess der analytiker zuerst etwas wahr, das sich in seinem inneren fremd, nicht zu ihm gehörend, anfühlt. das gefühl der fremdheit kann längere zeit verborgen bleiben. erste wahrnehmungen tauchen auf und kündigen die mögliche bewusstwerdung an. erst vorsichtig, dann ermutigt durch ein erstes verstehen kommt der weg zu einem bewussten verständnis in gang. in dem maße, wie dieser vorgang gelingt, öffnet sich ein verständnis für umfangreiche, bisher nicht bewusstseinsfähige zusammenhänge.um zusammenzufassen: durch den mechanismus der introjektiven identifizierung kann von unbewusst zu unbewusst eine brücke zwischen analytiker und analysand geschlagen werden. den zentralen unterschied der introjektiven im vergleich zur projektiven identifizierung fasst schoenhals hart (2007, s. 171 ) wie folgt: "die introjektiven identifizierungen (mit den guten objekten) fördern die integrative entwicklung in richtung depressiver position, während die projektiven identifizierungen den ausstieg aus dieser entwicklung bedeuten".beispiele für introjektive identifizierungen finden wir in unseren behandlungen häufig dann, wenn es in der entwicklung des kindes eine notwendigkeit oder einen zwang gab, empathiegeleitet, mithilfe einer introjektiven identifizierung zu versuchen, unverständliches, verletzendes elterliches verhalten durch übernahme und verinnerlichung zu entschärfen. das kind nimmt unverständliches in sich auf, bildet daraus ein introjekt und identifiziert sich damit. die äußere gefahr wird so durch verinnerlichung entschärft. das kind verzichtet damit aber zugleich auf eigene entwicklung und versucht stattdessen, die eltern, die es so dringend braucht, doch noch gut genug zu machen. ferenczi hat es in seinem aufsatz (1933) beschrieben.den inneren abbildern jener vorgänge und dem häufig damit verbundenen entwicklungsverzicht begegnen wir sehr viel später in unserem behandlungszimmer. eine haltung empathischer transparenz des analytikers bietet dann die chance, verborgene signale aufzunehmen, introjektive identifizierungen bewusst zu machen und dadurch einen ausweg zu öffnen -diesen weg illustriere ich nun in meiner fallvignette.eine vorbemerkung zum verständnis von vignetten: mit schülein (2002) gehe ich von der psychoanalyse als einer wissenschaft aus, die mit konnotativen theorien arbeitet. daher bleiben ihre aussagen zwangsläufig offen und unscharf, an narrative gebunden. falldarstellungen können folgerichtig keine beweise liefern; sie beziehen ihre qualität aus ihrer plausibilität und begründen ein "denken in fällen", wie dies hampe und strassberg beschreiben (2015, s. 281; dreyer 2017, s. 34-39) : die methode der psychoanalytischen erkenntnis "ist eine disziplin, die mythen und geschichten aus der literatur zu entwicklungsschemata formalisiert und sie zusammen mit wirklich erhobenen fallgeschichten aus der psychoanalytischen praxis zum erkenntnishintergrund individueller geschichten macht.""als ich heute vor ihrer haustüre stand, wollte ich mit meinem schlüssel aufschließen!" beginnt die patientin heiter die stunde; ihre fehlleistung ist für mich ein zeichen, dass sie bei mir eine heimat gefunden hat. in der stunde spricht sie über ihre aktuelle beziehung und die bedeutung von sexualität. sie fragt sich, ob ihr partner für sie der richtige sei. ich stelle nach einiger zeit überrascht fest, dass in mir traurigkeit entsteht. sie passt nicht zu der stimmung und dem tonfall der patientin; ich kann mir mein empfinden selbst nicht erklären. ich bin weder bedrückt noch traurig in die stunde gekommen. im zuhören bleibe ich mit dieser diskrepanz beschäftigt und frage mich, ob ich diese im sinne der "negative capability" (bion 1970, s. 125) aushalten oder durch aussprechen die diskrepanz der reflexion zugänglich machen soll. wenn ich eine möglichkeit wähle, verliere ich damit zugleich die andere und beeinflusse in jedem fall den weiteren verlauf -auch durch schweigen.den gedanken, ich könnte komplementär zu ihr die empfindungen ihres verlassenen freundes fühlen, spreche ich aus. dieses verstehensangebot gewinnt jedoch keine bedeutung. sehr viel später, in der reflexion der hiesigen veröffentlichung erkenne ich in meinem frustranen deutungsversuch eine parallele zum vergeblichen versuch meiner patientin, mit ihrem schlüssel mein haus aufzuschließen."ich habe bemerkt, dass ich während ihrer schilderung traurig wurde, ohne dass ich sagen könnte weswegen", formuliere ich dann offen. der weitere verlauf der stunde nimmt eine überraschende wendung. wir fragen uns in der stunde, ob ihr beziehungsproblem mit ihrer missbrauchserfahrung als teenager zu tun haben könnte. sie gebraucht im gesprächsverlauf den ausdruck "dumm", um ihre aktuelle reaktion in der stunde und ihr selbstempfinden generell zu beschreiben. ich frage nach, woraufhin sie bekräftigt: "ich bin dumm". ich bitte um weitere erläuterung. sie findet schließlich zu einem literarischen vergleich mithilfe des romans 1984 von orwell (2002 . darin würden sich die protagonisten selbst "dumm" machen, sagt sie. so gehe es ihr auch. sie sei ebenso "dumm" wie die bürger im roman von orwell und betont damit den aktiven part des sich-selbst-verdummens, der aktiven k ich-einschränkung, von der ferenczi 1933 schrieb. ganz im gegensatz zum inhalt ihrer überlegung finde ich ihre erklärung ausgesprochen klug.nun tauchen in mir mögliche zusammenhänge zwischen ihrem gefühl, dumm zu sein, und meinem gefühl von traurigkeit auf: ich frage mich, ob mein mir rätselhaft gebliebenes gefühl möglicherweise ihre abgewehrten, nicht ins bewusstsein zugelassenen affekte enthält: traurigkeit entsteht stellvertretend in mir, während die patientin nach ihrer aussage kein anderes mittel fand, als sich selbst zu verdummen, um quälende zusammenhänge unbewusst zu halten. als ich diesen zusammenhang ausspreche, beginnt für die patientin der weg, ihre selbstverdummung und ihre scham darüber zu verstehen und die lang verborgenen emotionen wieder zu erleben. ich denke, dass ich zunächst im rahmen einer introjektiven identifizierung die trauer aus dem unbewussten der patientin übernahm; nur über mich konnte sie auch ihr bewusst werden.zum verständnis der vignette: sie beginnt mit einer fehlleistung, die wir manchmal in fortgeschrittenen behandlungen beobachten können, wenn patienten versuchen, mit ihrem schlüssel die praxis ihres analytikers aufzuschließen. ebenso wie die praxis für meine patientin bleibt mir meine empfindung zu beginn der stunde verschlossen, und mein erster deutungsversuch war ebenfalls vergeblich. gleichzeitig wird durch die fehlleistung der wunsch ausgedrückt, zugang zum verborgenen zu finden. in der stunde entfaltet sich ein unbewusster "plan" der patientin. die offenkundige fehlleistung und mein erstes nicht-verstehen erklären nicht, auf welchem wege mich die empfindungen erreicht haben, die ich als fremd wahrnahm. ich gehe im verstehensprozess der stunde davon aus, dass es auf vollkommen unbewusstem weg geschah. die fremdheit ist ein klinisches zeichen, dem ich immer wieder begegne (dreyer 2017) . es handelt sich um eine besondere qualität des fremden, unerklärlichen und ich-dystonen. zunächst gilt es, meine eigenen affekte in ihrer bedeutung für die behandlung zu erschließen. dieser weg führtso meine erfahrung -zum erfolg, wenn ich mich dazu entschließe, transparent zu benennen, dass es da etwas gibt, das ich spüre, das ich mir allein aber nicht erklären kann. dieses vorgehen gründet in der annahme, dass es sich um eine introjektive identifizierung handelt, durch die ich am unbewussten meines patienten oder analysanden unmittelbar teilhabe und die über meine gegenübertragung aufzufinden ist. der austausch darüber schafft bewusstsein, wenn er in einer atmosphäre der transparenz und teilhabe stattfindet. es ist weiter meine these, dass es sich um abläufe handelt, die regelhaft und in verschiedenen analysen ähnlich wiederkehren.um dies näher auszuführen, werde ich nun unter dem aspekt von transparenz und teilhabe die theorie zur gegenübertragung und zur introjektiven identifizierung näher betrachten, um danach -erneut an meinem fall -meine thesen abschließend zu diskutieren.bahnbrechend für unser heutiges verständnis der gegenübertragung waren die veröffentlichungen von heimann (1950 heimann ( /2016a "zur gegenübertragung" und heinrich racker (1950 racker ( /2002 ) "übertragung und gegenübertragung -studien zur psychoanalytischen technik". beide arbeiten erscheinen im gleichen jahr und betonen unabhängig voneinander, dass die gegenübertragung nicht länger als hindernis zu betrachten ist, sondern vielmehr ein förderndes element für die analyse darstellt. das, was zunächst als technischer fehler erschien, wurde zum katalysator des therapeutischen prozesses. racker (1950 racker ( /2002 sah bereits die möglichkeit der wechselseitigen bezogenheit von übertragung und gegenübertragung, von analytiker und analysand. es kann also auch die (gegen-)übertragung des analytikers sein, die erst die übertragung des analysanden anschiebt, die dann anschließend vom analytiker gedeutet wird. das henne-ei-problem löst sich auf, wenn man nicht mehr in vorher-nachher-kategorien denkt, sondern von einer wechselwirkung ausgeht. der satz "die gegenübertragung des analytikers geht der übertragung des patienten voraus", drückt dann nur die eine hälfte des geschehens aus. er könnte ergänzt werden durch den satz: "die übertragung des analytikers geht der gegenübertragung des analysanden voraus".heimann (2016b) vertieft ihre auffassung 30 jahre nach der erstveröffentlichung, 1978, mit einem titel, der bereits die kernaussage der arbeit formuliert: "über die notwendigkeit für den analytiker, mit seinem patienten natürlich zu sein". sie berichtet eine überraschende "intuitivdeutung", die, wäre sie nicht so treffend, kränkend gewirkt hätte. zur überraschung beider öffnet die analytikerin durch diese deutung eine lange von ihrer patientin verschwiegene geschichte, die die analyse entscheidend voranbringt. die autorin weist darauf hin, dass ihr vorgehen weiterer ausarbeitung bedürfe.racker und heimann machten mit ihren veröffentlichungen deutlich, welch überraschende erkenntnisse die analyse der gegenübertragung zugänglich macht. andere autoren entwickeln die intersubjektive auffassung von gegenübertragung weiter: jacobs (1986), gabbard (1995) und ogden (2006) , bezogen auf das feldkonzept schließlich baranger und baranger (2008) sowie ferro (2005) . auf eindrucksvolle weise deutet besonders ogden (2006, s. 61) diese ereignisse in analysen. er zeigt, wie "enactments" oftmals für das verständnis des unbewussten prozesses entscheidend sind und die aufgabe darin besteht, sich ihnen träumerisch überlassen zu können, bis sich ein neues verständnis eingestellt hat: ogden beschreibt damit eine radikale verwandlung."was dabei im psychoanalytischen prozess geschieht, ist ein partieller zerfall der unbewussten dialektik von subjektivität und intersubjektivität. dieser zerfall führt schließlich zur erzeugung einer besonderen form des analytischen dritten, der sich analytiker und analysand als getrennte subjekte in hohem maße unterwerfen (dem ,dritten der unterwerfung'). eine erfolgreiche psychoanalyse bedeutet, dass die daran beteiligten dieses unbewusste dritte, das nur eine spielart von intersubjektivität ist, aufheben und sich den im psychoanalytischen prozess freilich verwandelten subjektstatus wieder aneignen, indem sie zu eigenständigen (und gleichwohl voneinander abhängigen) individuen werden. das erreichen sie dadurch, dass sie einander gegenseitig anerkennen."wie gelangen die von racker theoretisch ausgearbeiteten und von ogden klinisch dargestellten phänomene in die interaktion der partner der dyade, und wie können sie bewusst gemacht werden? eine antwort ergibt sich aus der beschreibung der brückenfunktion der introjektiven identifizierung.ogden beschreibt klinisch den sich im unbewussten abspielenden brückenschlag zwischen den beiden an der analytischen situation beteiligten, unterscheidet jedoch nicht zwischen projektiver und introjektiver identifizierung. er spricht nur von projektiver identifizierung. ich halte es für zulässig, seine beschreibung einer partiellen und passageren auflösung der subjektgrenzen für die introjektive identifizierung zu übernehmen: gerade in der introjektiven identifizierung sind die übernahme und vermischung von affekten beider beteiligter subjekte zu beobachten. bollas (1997, s. 168 ff.) fügt den beiden mechanismen noch die extraktive introjektion hinzu.zunächst ist eine abgrenzung der introjektiven von der projektiven identifizierung erforderlich. in der literatur werden beide vorgänge in der großen übersichtsarbeit von grotstein (1994) beschrieben. sodré (2012) und spillius (2012) unterscheiden zwischen projektiver und introjektiver identifizierung: sie betonen die positivlibidinösen seiten der introjektiven identifizierung und warnen zugleich vor ihrer idealisierung. o'shaugnessy (2007, s. 105) weist darauf hin, dass die introjektive identifizierung im vergleich zur projektiven identifizierung insgesamt wenig beachtet wurde. dies ergänzt scharff (1992) sowohl für die projektive als auch für die introjektive identifizierung aus intersubjektiver sicht. eekhoff (2016) benennt schließlich die außergewöhnliche qualität des wechselseitigen austauschs von unbewusst zu unbewusst und nennt die wirkung der introjektiven identifizierung in ihrem titel "evokativ".eine differenzierung zwischen den unbewussten vorgängen der projektiven und der introjektiven identifizierung:bei der projektiven identifizierung wird der projizierte inhalt vom projizierenden als nicht mehr zu seiner person gehörend wahrgenommen, der projizierte inhalt wird stattdessen demjenigen zugerechnet, der damit projektiv identifiziert wurde; der projizierende ist dadurch vom inhalt seiner projektion befreit.bei der introjektiven identifizierung dagegen bleibt der innere dialog des introjizierenden mit den introjizierten inhalten bestehen. introjiziert wird etwas fremdes, das in teilen als fremd erkennbar bleiben kann, in anderen teilen dem erfahrungshorizont des introjizierenden nahe, vertraut ist. letzteres bildet den anker für die bewusstwerdung.die extraktive introjektion (bollas 1997, s. 173) ist ein mechanismus, "bei dem ein mensch in das innenleben eines anderen eindringt und bestimmte elemente davon vereinnahmt. das opfer einer extraktiven introjektion fühlt sich der betreffenden anteile seines selbst beraubt. ist das opfer ein kind, so hat es keine klare vorstellung davon, weshalb es auf bestimmte elemente seines psychischen lebens kein recht zu haben scheint." sie spielt sich also im inneren des introjizierenden ab und steht der projektiven identifizierung in ihrem aggressiv-aufgeladenen modus nahe.wie wird aus einer introjektiven identifizierung ein fruchtbarer beitrag zur behandlung? die brückenbildung der introjektiven identifizierung beruht auf der zweiseitigen eigenschaft des introjizierten inhalts: einerseits bleibt er spürbar behaftet mit etwas fremdem, bislang unbekanntem, und andererseits ist er stabil eingebettet in die psyche dessen, der introjiziert. mit etwas übung kann dieser doppelcharakter vom analytiker im dialog herausgespürt werden. es findet zuerst eine innere prüfung und aufarbeitung in der phase der gegenübertragungsanalyse im analytiker statt: was wurde mir zur introjektion angeboten, und was wurde von mir introjiziert? soweit spielt sich der vorgang im inneren des analytikers ab.im nächsten schritt wird mithilfe der noch vagen hypothese ein brückenschlag versucht; eingeleitet durch worte, die vorsichtig das ungewöhnlich-unsichere des vorgehens zum ausdruck bringen, um dem analytiker einen rückzug von seiner idee zu ermöglichen, sollte ein irrtum vorliegen. sollte der patient durch neu ins bewusstsein tretende einfälle dem dialog eine entscheidende wendung geben, dürfen wir davon ausgehen, dass es gelungen ist, unbewusstes und abgespaltenes material aufzuspüren. wir prüfen und präzisieren dann unsere hypothese. wenn dies alles gelingt, ist die analyse einen wesentlichen schritt vorankommen.hier noch einmal die möglichen wirkungen und chancen der konzeptualisierung der introjektiven identifizierung als einem brückenkonzept:dem analytiker wird es möglich, empfindungen aus seinem eigenen unbewussten mit anteilen aus dem unbewussten seines analysanden zu verbinden, sich diese bewusst zu machen und als analytisches material zu nutzen: eine bereicherung des analytischen prozesses. im analysanden bleiben die prozesse der introjektiven identifizierung zunächst unbewusst, sie stammen aus seiner kindheit und bedürfen der analytischen aufarbeitung, da sie mit umfangreichen pathologischen abwehrvorgängen verbunden sind. mithilfe der inneren arbeit des analytikers gelingt es, einen bewussten zugang zu finden und die gründe für die abspaltung ins unbewusste aufzuheben. in den zwei jahren der zweistündigen behandlung im sitzen gibt es viele bewegende momente, in denen beispielsweise meine art, die treppe herunterzukommen, sie an ihren "professeur" erinnert; dazu unsere mikrointeraktion: im ersten behandlungsjahr bemerkt sie einmal, sie könne nicht denken. mir geht es in der stunde ähnlich. schließlich kommt mir der einfall: "es ist die zerstörung durch den missbrauch: der missbrauch zerstört das denken. wenn ich als ,professeur' die treppe herunterkomme, haben wir jetzt hier, was sonst draußen bleibt: die erinnerung an den missbrauch." ab diesem moment verbindet sich mit meinem treppab die alte missbrauchssituation.die nun folgende, ausführliche sequenz liegt zwei wochen vor dem material meiner eingangsvignette. die patientin kommt zurückhaltender als sonst in eine stunde. "was ist, wenn wir schweigen?" fragt sie mich. ich vermute, was sie bestätigt, dass sie darüber nachdenkt, ob sie mich dann langweilen würde. das wäre eine große gefahr, denn in ihrer fantasie wird aus langeweile missbrauch. wir gelangen durch diese unscheinbare eingangsfrage unmittelbar in die vergangene welt ihres missbrauchs.bald darauf fasst sie sich versehentlich mit dem finger in ihr rechtes auge und sagt "entschuldigung". mich berührt schmerzlich, dass sie sich selbst schmerzen zufügt und sich auch noch dafür entschuldigt -unklar bleibt, bei wem. wir sprechen weiter darüber, was es mit dem schweigen auf sich haben könnte, und dass dies für sie mit der angst einhergeht, es könnte so etwas schreckliches wie ein missbrauch passieren. mir dämmert, was ich noch nicht glaube, aussprechen zu können: meine assoziation, ein auge auf jemanden werfen, führt mich schließlich zu der deutung: ob sie sich wohl deshalb entschuldigt habe, weil sie -so seltsam es auch klingen mag -tatsächlich schuld empfinde. schuld dafür, dass sie "langeweile" habe entstehen lassen, wodurch sie den professeur provoziert haben könnte. oder genauer: sie könnte im rückblick denken, dass sie ihn provoziert und dadurch das ganze missbrauchsunglück selbst ins rollen gebracht habe. die patientin denkt kurz darüber nach; ich bin sehr in sorge, ob ich ihr zu viel zugemutet habe. dann lacht sie befreit und sagt "das stimmt!" sie schüttelt den kopf darüber, was ich herausgefunden habe. sie ist durch meine deutung nicht gekränkt, sondern befreit. ein besonderer moment in der behandlung.in eine der folgestunden kommt sie in guter stimmung, setzt sich und lacht: es sei schön gewesen im konzert, das sie im ausland gespielt hat: über nacht sei sie mit drei kollegen, "zwei violinen und einem cello" hingefahren. kleine stadt, kirche mitten im see auf einer insel, die aus dem see herausragt. es hat gut geklappt. morgen will ihr chef mit ihr sprechen, alle waren sehr angetan, bei ihr lief es sehr gut. auch die anderen finden das. überhaupt ist sie frei im rücken, keine verspannungen mehr. ihre kollegen sind oft schlechter laune, sie nicht. nach einiger zeit, in der ich darüber nachdenke, welche bedeutung wohl dieses bild des sees mit insel und kirche hat, fragt mich die patientin, woran ich denke. ich spreche in meiner antwort über meine im stillen entwickelte hypothese: ob es wohl richtig sei, von einer art umkehrung ins gegenteil zu sprechen: da ist die insel im see, umgeben von wasser, eine isolierte idylle mit konzert und besuchern, und als bild des gegensatzes dazu das haus des professeur, einsam und isoliert, isoliert im schrecken! zu meiner überraschung antwortet die patientin: "ja, genau, das ist es!" ich bin perplex, denke, das ist ihr schnelles tempo, und weiß selbst nicht, was ihre antwort bedeutet. ich hatte unfertige gedanken ausgesprochen und finde zunächst keine verbindung zu ihrer reaktion. "ich weiß jetzt nicht, wie sie das meinen", sage ich deshalb. daraufhin erläutert sie mir, wie sie in den letzten tagen immer wieder über einen satz von mir nachdenken muss, der sie jedes mal aufs neue befreie. es war meine antwort auf die frage des professeur, die sie so sehr quälte: er fragte sie, ob sie sex hatte. "he, mit 13!?", stellt sie ihre hochgradige irritation von damals dar, hinter der ich die extraktive introjektion des klavierlehrers vermute. befreit habe sie, dass ich vor ein paar stunden kommentiert hatte: "das war sein gedanke!" seither wird sie nicht mehr von fragen gequält, weil sie erkennen kann, dass es gar nicht ihr thema, sondern seines war. offenbar wurden die folgen der extraktiven introjektion durch den professor, der ihr das gefühl ihrer unschuldigen körperlichkeit genommen hatte, durch meinen hinweis, dass es seine gedanken waren, wirksam aufgelöst! immer wieder sei sie seit unserer stunde auf diese erkenntnis zurückgekehrt, und jedes mal sei danach die geschichte anders, befreit verlaufen! das habe ihr gute laune gemacht, dass sie sich nicht mehr durch die frage "was hat ihn zu der vermutung gebracht?" belastet fühle.ich glaube verstanden zu haben und sage: "ich habe s/sie ihnen geschenkt." gleich ist mir meine bemerkung in ihrer doppeldeutigkeit peinlich: einerseits kann "sie" auf die gute laune bezogen werden, andererseits kann "sie" auf die patientin als person bezogen werden, und das eine oder das andere hätte ich ihr "geschenkt". die patientin befreit mich aus meiner peinlichen lage und verbessert mich: "nein, zurückgegeben!" ich antworte erleichtert: "ja, sie haben recht! zurückgeben ist das richtige wort." ich kann noch anfügen: "hier hat sich zwischen uns eben wiederholt, worüber wir sprachen -in einer kleineren dimension natürlich!" dann ist die stunde zu ende.k zwei wochen später ereignet sich die stunde, von der ich eingangs berichtet habe: meine patientin versucht, die praxistüre mit ihrem schlüssel aufzuschließen, und mich beschleicht das gefühl der traurigkeit.in psychoanalytischen behandlungen sind viele wege möglich, auf denen unbewusstes verstanden werden kann. nur einer davon wird verwirklicht. im prozessgeschehen stellt sich die frage: wie lange -im hinblick auf das ziel der bewusstwerdung -soll man in indifferenz und offenheit abwarten und sich dem wachtraumdenken (bion 1962) überlassen? wann und wie lassen sich introjektive prozesse optimal verstehen? es kann im zuhören zu früh gedeutet oder zu lange gewartet und in beiden fällen die besonderheit des augenblicks verpasst werden. die bedeutung des augenblicks für eine deutung fasst strachey (1934, s. 150) in den begriff des "point of urgency". für die darstellung in einer fallvignette und ganz generell gilt darüber hinaus: die plausibilität einer fallgeschichte bleibt gebunden an idiosynkratische kreisprozesse, deren ablauf sich im kreislauf zwischen annahme einer psychodynamik, deutung der interaktion, beobachtung der reaktion, vermutung über erreichte effekte und korrektur der annahme abspielt. jede prognostische aussage bleibt ebenso einem kreisprozess verhaftet und immer offen für alternative konzeptualisierungen und alternative kreisprozesse.zur wissenschaftstheoretischen einordnung dieses vorgehens greife ich auf die erläuterungen zum "denken in fällen" von hampe und strassberg (2015, s. 281; vgl. obigen abschnitt "eine fallvignette") zurück: durch generalisierung, wie sie uns auch aus mythen und geschichten entgegentritt, entstehen "entwicklungsschemata" und narrative, die einen gesetzmäßigen charakter haben. im alltag der klinischen stunde wird das "entwicklungsschema" zur grundlage der deutenden analytischen aktivität. gleichzeitig damit bleibt auch das "entwicklungsschema" selbst offen für modifikation. mit schülein (2002) auf meine bemerkung zur diskrepanz in mir und zwischen uns antwortet die patientin überraschend und sagt: "ich bin dumm". sie erläutert ihre empfindung mit einem literarischen bild, das mir die selbstverdummung als schutzmechanismus erklärt. das legt mir den gedanken nahe, dass ich gefühle von traurigkeit über die auswirkungen des missbrauchs empfinde, die ihr noch unbewusst sind. ich gelange so zur annahme einer introjektiven identifizierung: mein mir fremdes gefühl von traurigkeit enthält die von mir introjizierten affekte. ich war eindeutig mit diesem gefühl identifiziert; es war "mein" gefühl, über dessen ursprung ich mir gedanken machte, und zugleich war es dem (noch unbewussten) empfinden meiner patientin nahe.die deutung des zusammenhangs, selbstverdummung als schutz vor den auswirkungen des traumatischen geschehens, wirkt befreiend; meine patientin findet ihre traurigkeit wieder. die traurigkeit, die ich zu stundenbeginn diskontinuierlich empfinde, kann als eine vorwegnahme, eine vorleistung des analytikers in gestalt einer introjektiven identifizierung verstanden werden. loch versteht unter einer "notwendigen vorleistung" (1965, s. 20/21) den moment, in dem der analytiker den infantilen übertragungswunsch seiner analysanden zunächst in seiner gegenübertragung auflöst. dann kann auch der analysand erkennen, was er übertragen hat.in meiner fallvignette entdeckt die patientin, dass sie weder beim kranken, misshandelten vater noch beim aggressiv-missbrauchenden klavierlehrer sitzt. lochs gedankengang wirkt sich rückblickend konzeptualisierend aus. thomä betont in seiner arbeit aus dem jahr 1981 (... vom spiegelnden zum aktiven analytiker) die gleichzeitigkeit von handeln und reflexion; zwei arbeiten, die wesentlich zur entwicklung der intersubjektiven theorie in deutschland beigetragen haben (1981) .in das affektive geschehen ist der analytiker -wie ich in meinem fallbeispiel zeige -unmittelbar verwickelt (ogden 2006, s. 61) . durch die unbewusste übernahme der affekte verschwimmen die subjektgrenzen. zuerst übernimmt der analytiker das misslingen, dann formuliert er sein ihm unerklärliches gefühl und öffnet damit den weg zum verständnis der introjektiven identifizierung: auch die patientin gewinnt ihre sprache wieder und spricht von selbstverdummung -die auflösung der introjektiven identifizierung gelingt.theoretisch stehen die hier dargestellten klinischen beobachtungen im einklang mit ferenczis verständnis der ich-einschränkung (1933) . um verstehen zu können, braucht der analytiker genügend negative capability (bion 1970, s. 125); er mussin ogdens formulierung "unter-das-joch-gehen" können (engl. "subjugate"; ogden 2004, s. 189, hervorhebung k.-a. d.) : "the individuals engaged in this form of relatedness [projective identification] unconsciously subjugate themselves to a mutually generated intersubjective third .... in projective identification, analyst and analysand are both limited and enriched".der auf den ersten blick vielleicht vage und unsicher erscheinende verstehenszusammenhang gewinnt wachsende plausibilität, wenn wir bereit sind, introjektividentifizierende mechanismen auf uns wirken zu lassen. die prüfung unserer psychodynamischen hypothesen erfolgt danach im querschnitt des klinischen augenblicks und im längsschnitt des analytischen prozesses, der biografie und der äußeren ereignisse.die therapeutisch-psychoanalytische arbeit in einer haltung von transparenz und teilhabe ist zunächst keine selbstverständlichkeit. der verstehensweg über die introjektive identifizierung als bedeutungsvollem abwehr-und interaktionsmechanismus setzt verständnis und erfahrung in der haltung von transparenz und teilhabe voraus. die arbeit mit der introjektiven identifizierung eröffnet für die klinische arbeit wertvolle perspektiven. transparenz fördert die selbstanalytischen fähigkeiten unserer patienten. transparenz und teilhabe gemeinsam schärfen den blick für die komplexen abwehr-und interaktionsmechanismen der introjektiven identifizierung im psychoanalytischen prozess.novel coronavirus pneumonia (ncp) caused by zoonotic 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) outbreaks in china during early december 2019 1 government has progressively implemented several measures to stop the spread of the epidemic 2 . given the high prevalence and wide distribution of coronaviruses, the all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02. 16.20023614 doi: medrxiv preprint condition will continue for some time 3 . as of february 10th, 2020, 37,626 laboratory-confirmed cases and 1016 death cases have been documented in china.pragmatic effectiveness trials are increasingly recognized as an essential component of medical evidence and good prediction models can help formulate scientific prevention and treatment programs 4, 5 .in the recent past, two other novel coronaviruses (covs), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov; in 2002) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov; in 2012) have emerged, and the world is placed on high alert 6, 7 . they have similar symptoms, while sars-cov and mers-cov have low potential for sustained community transmission 8 . infections and deaths of sars-cov and mers-cov are less than 2019-ncov, thus the previous prediction model is no longer suitable for 2019-ncov 9 .in this study, we provide state transition matrix model to predict the 2019-ncov infection peak and patient distribution. more importantly, from a public health viewpoint, we then estimate the risk metrics (infectivity, severity and lethality) of the ncp. we set up six different scenarios, in order to control for model error. so, we can identify the close contact/patient's state by utilizing a state vector at any moment.medical observation, discharge, infected, non-severe, infected and severe, cure and death data and corresponding information released by the national health commission of the people's republic of china from jan 25, 2019, to feb 28, 2020 were analyzed.state transition matrix modeling is a well-regarded approach widely applied in clinical decision analysis based on computer simulation. for estimating the infection peak time and the scale of severe and critical cases in subsequent days, we chose the markov model cohort simulation. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02. 16.20023614 doi: medrxiv preprintin order to estimate the risk metrics (infectivity, severity, lethality) of the ncp, we build a state transition matrix model as the following.we define the states in this model. medical observation (mo) is a close contact of a known infected patient is identified and put into medical observation. in the next day, outcome could be any of the three: confirmed infection, discharged without infection, or stay in mo. discharge (dis) is a terminal state for a close contact, until he or she becomes another incident of close contact again. infected is an intermediate state, where the patient becomes a confirmed infected case. the outcome is binary:severe, or non-severe. and the outcome is revealed immediately. non-severe (ins) is the patient also has three possible outcomes in the next day: cure, severe, or stay in non-severe. infected and severe (is), the patient has three possible outcomes in the next day: death, non-severe, or stay in severe. cure (cu) is also a terminal state for the patient. death (d) is a terminal state for the patient. so, at any moment, we can identify the close contact/patient's state by utilizing a state vector, defined as the following:where each element of the vector stands for one state in the same sequentially all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02. 16.20023614 doi: medrxiv preprint arranged order as mentioned above. please note that infected itself is not an independent state, since the outcome is revealed instantaneously, so we combine infected with severe and non-severe. let's define the state transition matrix as the following:suppose we have a state vector v(t) for a sample population at time t, how do we predict the state vector v(t+1) in the next day?apply simple linear algebra, we can get the following equation:since the head count of a certain state comes from itself, all other possible transitions into the state (e.g. ins has two possible income states, mo and is), minus the outcome states (is, and cu).if we want to predict for n period, the equation becomes the following:if the population is limited and the transition matrix is stationary, the above formula will be sufficient in predicting all future outcomes. in our case, the population is not fixed, so we need to introduce the additional input into the population: new close contacts.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02. 16.20023614 doi: medrxiv preprint every day, new close contacts are added to the medical observation pool, as people already in the pool will gradually be discharged or confirmed of infection.also we assume ncc will gradually decay as quarantine measures are put into effect. ratio of severe caseswe collected all available data from caixin data (a subsidiary of caixin group), all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02. 16.20023614 doi: medrxiv preprint who collects the original data from national health commission. we collected supplementary data from hubei health commission. the data period starts from 2019/12/31, and ends on 2020/2/11. data is updated on a daily basis.next, we describe how we estimate these parameters from empirical probabilities.we set up six different scenarios, in order to control for model error. two of the scenarios are very optimistic, two of them are relatively optimistic, and two of them are relatively pessimistickan (table 1) .this decay rate is closely linked to r0 and is directly estimated from empirical data.the 8-day average is -6%, but it is volatile, so we will test -1%, -5%, -10% respectively ( figure 1a ). since we could not obtain the one-day probability of lifting medical observation in hubei province, we used national rate for reference. the latest one-day probability is 17% and the 10-day moving weighted average is 13%.considering that the probability of hubei province may be lower than that of the whole country, we test it with 17% and 13%, respectively. ( figure 1b) . in hubei province, the latest one-day probability of transition from medical observation to confirmed infection is 2.15%, with a weighted average of 3.94% over the last 10 days, ending at 2/11. as this probability continues to decline, we use the average (3.04%) of these two values as our model parameter to be cautiously optimistic ( figure 1c ). the latest single-day mortality rate was 0.33% and the 10-day moving weighted average was 0.41%. as this probability continues to decline, we use the average (0.37%) of these two values as our model parameter to be cautiously optimistic ( figure 1d ). the latest one-day cure rate is 1.46% and the 10-day moving weighted average is 1.27%.as this probability continues to decline, we use the average (1.37%) of these two values as our model parameter to be cautiously optimistic ( figure 1e ). from the historical data, the proportion of critical cases is relatively stable; the proportion of all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02. 16.20023614 doi: medrxiv preprint severe cases fluctuates more. as these two probabilities continues to fluctuate, we also use the average (17.56%, and 4.82%) of the latest value and 10-day moving weighted average as our model parameters to put more weight on recent observation. ( figure   1f ). the parameters we use in our forecast are listed in table 2 .in very optimistic scenarios (daily ncc decay rate of -10%), the peak time of open inflection cases will arrive around february 23-february 26. at the same time, there will be a peak in the numbers of severely ill and critically ill patients, between 6800-7200 and 1800-2000, respectively (figure 2a and 2b) . in a relative optimistic scenario (daily ncc decay rate of -5%), the inflection case peak time will arrive around february 28-march 2. the numbers of critically ill and critically ill patients will lie between 7100-7800 and 1900-2200, respectively ( figure 2c and 2d) . in a relatively pessimistic scenario (daily ncc decay rate of -1%), the inflection peak time does not arrive around the end of march. estimated time is march 25 -april 2. the numbers of critically ill and critically ill patients will lie between 8300-9800 and 2200-2700, respectively ( figure 2e and 2f) . we are using parameters with 50% weight on the diagnosis rate, mortality rate, cure rate as of 2/11. there should be room for improvement, if these metrics continue to improve. in that case, the peak time will arrive earlier than our estimation. also, the severe and critical case ratios are likely to decline as the virus becomes less toxic and medical conditions improve. if that happens, the peak numbers will be lower than predicted above ( figure 2g and 2h ).the parameters we use in our forecast are listed in table 2 .in hubei province, since the outbreak of 2019-ncov and the determination of human-to-human transmission, it has spread to all over china and even the world 10 .the growth trend of its cases is exponential during the epidemic period, but with the strict implementation of disease prevention and control, the inflection point of case growth will come as scheduled. our results predicted the inflection point of patient all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02. 16.20023614 doi: medrxiv preprint growth and the distribution of patient status under different expectations by using mathematical models with infectivity, severity, and lethality as indicators. the results show that under the existing medical and public health intervention, the decay rate of new close contacts is 10%, the inflection point of growth will come as early as february 23 (very optimistic), and the attenuation rate is 5% to 3 the beginning of the month (relatively optimistic), and when the decay rate drops to 1%, it will arrive at the latest on april 14 (very pessimistic).as the birthplace of the disease, hubei province has mountains of confirmed and suspected cases. in order to finally overcome the disease, hubei province adopted plenty of even severe measures to restrict population movements, and adopted various strategies, such as prohibiting assembly, delaying school and resumption of work, or working from home, to significantly reduce the internal population contact rate.although cases have spread throughout china, according to plans developed and implemented during previous major outbreaks such as sars, the middle east respiratory syndrome or a pandemic influenza outbreak, hubei province has eased intercity transmission through strict disease prevention and control and limits the worst cases to hubei province [11] [12] [13] . persistent and compulsory implementation, as well as the cooperation of the people and the efforts of medical staff, will bring real relief.through the guidance of the inflection point of the epidemic and the distribution of patient status, the government, medical work and tight medical resource allocation will become more efficient and reasonable. wu, j. t. et al. indicated that it will peak in april with the infection rate staying put; it will reach a peak in may with the infection rate decreasing by 25%,; if the infection rate decreases to 50%, the epidemic will slowly increase in the first half of 2020 and will not reach its peak 9 .the difficulty of the current epidemic control is that when these patients were admitted to the hospital, only 43.1% of them were feverish at the time, and more patients had fever during their hospitalization. a recent study showed that 2019-ncov was detected in stool samples from patients with abdominal symptoms 14 . however, identifying and screening patients with atypical symptoms is difficult 15 . rapid interpersonal transmission between close contacts is an important feature of all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02. 16.20023614 doi: medrxiv preprint 2019-ncov pneumonia 10, 16 furthermore, ct diagnosis is recommended, yet still with uncertainty 14 . therefore, another advantage of this model is that, relative to the new cases, we choose to analyze critical and severe cases, which possess better stability, and the main medical resource consumption group is this group of patients. with the help of our model would optimize the critical medical resources allocation.at present, tremendous medical resources are deployed in wuhan, hubei. if there is a slight slack in other areas, the prevention and control of the epidemic will be a devastating blow. community governance is the basis of social governance and the most basic unit of national governance. in the comprehensive prevention and control system formed by the combination of national joint defense and joint control and group defense and group control, the community is an important coupling point, and the social epidemic prevention and protection system must be woven in the community. only victory from hubei can lead china to victory, and victory from all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02. 16.20023614 doi: medrxiv preprint china will bring the global victory.nevertheless, there are still limitations. primarily, critical or severe cases will be affected by the gradually rational allocation of treatment teams and medical resources, the strengthening of medical power or virus toxicity decreasing. as a result, the peak time might arrive earlier than our estimates. secondly, the impact of seasonal factors has not been considered and supposing 2019-ncov is affected by the season, our prediction results may be unreliable. hence, if these indicators continue to change, the model could have opportunities for improvement. in addition, due to the characteristics of severe and critical cases, there may be a huge impact on factors such as age and complex underlying diseases. therefore, with the increasing awareness of the severity of the disease and the strengthening of prevention and control in various sectors of the society, various indicators may be reduced. at the same time, because of the instability of the previous indicators, these dynamic changes may affect the predictive efficacy of the model.we can infer that we are still not close to the end of this outbreak and the number of critically ill patients is still climbing. and assisting critical care resources in hubei province requires the government to consider further tilt, and it is vital to make reasonable management of doctors and medical assistance systems to curb the transmission trendin this work, we evaluate the prevalence of multimorbidity and age-adjusted risk of hospitalization, icu admission and death in the portuguese population from official data, based on a dataset extracted from sinave containing all confirmed cases of covid-19 in portugal by april 28, 2020.this retrospective observational study used data provided by dgs after the required institutional and ethical approvals. the sample population consists of all the portuguese population with sars-cov2 confirmed infection as notified by clinicians by april 28, 2020. a broad range of clinical and demographic variables are present in this dataset. in this study we specifically used age, gender, hospital admission, admission in intensive care unit, mortality and patient's underlying conditions.chronic conditions were provided as a categorical variable on the presence or absence of the following conditions: asthma, malignancy, cardiac disorder (including hypertension), chronic hematological disorder, diabetes, hiv/other immune deficiency, renal disease, liver disease, chronic lung disease, and neuromuscular disorder. we defined multimorbidity as the presence of two or more conditions in the same individual, following the definition used by other authors [6] . addressed outcomes were hospitalization, admission to icu unit and reported death. a composite outcome of any of these events was also analyzed.we used python 3.6 and packages numpy, pandas, seaborn, and scipy in combination with microsoft excel to evaluate and plot the prevalence of multimorbidity. additionally, ibm spss statistics was used for obtaining age-adjusted risk of hospitalisation, icu admission and death.categorical variables were presented as counts and percentages with 95% confidence intervals and comparisons were made using using the χ 2 test. univariate regression analysis of each individual chronic condition was performed adjusting only for age. a multivariate logistic regression was performed adjusting for age and every other chronic condition with significant statistical association on univariate analysis. results were considered significant when p <0,05.the overall sample contained 19,598 patient cases, women being more prevalent (58.92%). among the cases, 16.39% had at least one chronic condition. diabetes was the most commonly reported condition, reported in 35.59% of the patients with any morbidity. table 1 shows the reported prevalence of different chronic conditions in the studied population. multimorbidity, as previously defined, was present in 4.49% of the cases. figure 1 and figure 2 plot the prevalence of multimorbidity by age group for the covid-19 infected general population and hospitalized population, respectively. the prevalence of co-occurring pairs of chronic health conditions, plotted in figure 4 , shows diabetes and neuromuscular disorders as the most common dyad of chronic diseases. 3 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 5 : relationship between the observed and expected prevalence of co-occurring pairs of chronic health conditions. all results are given in percentages. the shaded bar depicts the prevalence of each chronic health condition. in the matrix, the first value for each pair is the observed frequency, while the second (italic) is the expected one after multiplying the respective prevalence of each disorder. chi-square tests were used to determine whether observed frequencies were significantly different from expected frequencies. all p-values were inferior to 5%.) lbp low back pain, hta hypertension, ubp upper back pain, ui urinary incontinence, copd chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, ckd chronic kidney disease, chd coronary heart disease, mi previous myocardial infarction, and lc liver cirrhosis of hospitalization. however, only cardiac conditions, diabetes, hiv, chronic kidney disease, and chronic respiratory diseases are associated with more severe cases requiring icu admission. these results are in line with previous reports where chronic diseases are associated with poorer outcomes [3, 7] . although the strength of association differs between diseases, every additional morbidity leads to an increased risk of the composite outcome of hospitalization, icu admission and mortality.multimorbidity was previously studied in the general portuguese population in 2014 by laires et al., using data from the fifth national health interview survey (inquérito nacional de saúde, ins) [6] . prevalence of multimorbidity on the laires at al. study can be compared with our data. although only individuals aged 25-79 were included in that study, this constitutes a robust sample for morbidity prevalence in portugal. we can observe in figure 1 to figure 3 a rise in chronic health conditions with increasing age as expected. however, multimorbidity is much less prevalent in our study population (4.49% vs 43.9%). since the beginning of this pandemic there has been significant public awareness regarding the higher risk of older people with comorbidities. this may have induced efforts to protect and isolate this population. the findings of this study could thus confirm the positive effect of such measures, given the younger and healthier population in the covid-19 dataset. the discrepancy may however be related to different reporting methods. for instance, the maximum number of reported simultaneous morbidities in the covid-19 infected population was only 5 disorders, which is half of the maximum number of morbidities found in the ins population (10 disorders). since the total number of conditions between both datasets is not so different (covid-19: 10 diseases; ins: 13 diseases), a possible explanation for the higher number of co-occurring conditions in the ins population can be the combination of self-diagnoses with the presence of more "subjective" disorders such as: lower and upper back pain, allergies, depression, and urinary incontinence.this study has several limitations. first of all, the cross-sectional nature of the covid-19 dataset makes it impossible to account for incomplete outcomes, since several patients could ultimately be hospitalized or die after the end of observation. reported data on outcomes may therefore be underestimated, so careful interpretation is advised until more data is available. more importantly, despite the fact that no standard set of conditions is established to define multimorbidity, chronic conditions were given on broad groups and there is no specific information on individual conditions. for example, diabetes is given as one group and no distinction is made between type 1 and type 2 diabetes. therefore, measured morbidities may herald heterogeneous groups of diseases with different degrees of severity, which may influence outcomes. future datasets should include more accurate information on chronic conditions another important concern is related to the risk of under-reporting in this dataset, which becomes obvious by analyzing reported cardiac diseases. given that cardiovascular diseases, particularly hypertension, are very prevalent in the portuguese population [8] , the observed prevalence of 0.28% in our study highly suggests that under-reporting may have occurred. we could notice that, surprisingly, cardiovascular diseases are absent from the available list of previous conditions in sinave's reporting page, as seen in figure 6b , which could have contributed to a lower notification of this comorbidity. 5 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint although we acknowledge that this dataset was not primarily designed for research, but rather for public health proceedings and government information, we believe that a better user interface design and a more rational set of chronic conditions could effortlessly improve the quality of recorded data. one important lesson we can learn from this pandemic is the important contribution that quickly gathered relevant clinical data and health information systems, such as sinave, can have in this setting.overall, we consider sinave to be very susceptible to under-reporting, specially regarding multimorbidity. this is due to a confusing and non-practical interface that allows doctors to skip filling some important fields in the entry form. some suggestions to improve future studies regarding multimorbidity, using sinave's data, are:• redesign the reporting form, making data entry more effective and faster. the current user interface could be simplified, while encouraging the input of relevant comorbidity information; • integrate sinave data with the patient's health record or with data from the new trace covid-19 system, to provide richer data relevant to covid-19. this could be a way of implementing the redesigned user interface suggested above; • make it mandatory to input if comorbidities are absent; if present, the filling of the entry form inputs related to comorbidities and the specific chronic conditions should be mandatory. as seen in figure 6 , the list of comorbidities only becomes visible if a previous parameter is filled; • make the entry of all known chronic conditions by healthcare professionals more persuasive;• add cardiovascular diseases to the list of comorbidities.to conclude, findings in our study show that multimorbidity is significantly associated with poor outcomes in covid-19 infection. further data is needed to inform about the strength of this association and about the significance of observed differences in multimorbidity prevalence between infected patients and the general population of portugal. we believe that data collection problems may have occurred and influenced outcome measurement. we also provide recommendations for improving the data collection user interface that could improve quality of health information about the covid-19 infected population, while increasing confidence in sinave data.6 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint 10 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted july 3, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20144378 doi: medrxiv preprint recent studies of the epidemiological characteristics of covid-19 have revealed that severe infection is more likely in people with an existing chronic medical condition.two independent studies of infected populations in wuhan, china found that approximately half the subjects infected with covid-19 had an existing comorbidity [1, 2] . in a study of 1099 patients across mainland china, 38.7% of patients with comorbidities progressed to severe infection [3] . 2020), and in a study of 52 inpatients in wuhan, 67% of patients with comorbidities died [2] . the most common comorbidities reported in these studies were hypertension, diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, chronic obstructive lung disease, and coronary heart disease [1] [2] [3] . other comorbidities such as carcinoma, chronic kidney disease, chronic liver disease, digestive system disease, and nervous system disease have also been reported in patients with covid-19 [1, 2, 4] . a better understanding of the link between these conditions and covid-19 infection is required to inform better treatment and prevention interventions.the molecular mechanism responsible for the increased disease severity in patients with these comorbidities is not fully understood, but previous studies suggest a role for angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [5] . ace2 is a membrane protein required for sars-cov2 to bind and enter cells [6] [7] [8] . after binding, viral entry is facilitated by the activation of the viral spike glycoprotein and cleavage of the c-terminal segment of ace2 by proteases like tmprss2 and furin that are readily expressed in lung tissue [9] [10] [11] . ace2 is only moderately expressed in healthy lung tissue compared to the heart, kidneys, and testes [12] , but staining of lung tissue sections from adults with pulmonary hypertension has revealed increased ace2 protein in the endothelium of pulmonary arteries, compared to healthy controls [13] . ace2 upregulation has also been observed in animal models of liver fibrosis [14] . however, the reason for this upregulation remains unclear, and a link to other covid-19 comorbidities has not been determined.here, we showed that ace2 expression in lung tissue is upregulated by diseases representing comorbidities along with covid-19. we also used systems biology approaches including co-expression analysis, meta-analysis, and network analysis to determine a potential cause of the ace2 upregulation. from this analysis, we found that . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint ace2 expression could be regulated by enzymes that modify histones, including kdm5b. this identification of a common molecular mechanism of increased covid-19 severity in patients with diverse comorbidities could direct the development of interventions to reduce the infection risk and disease severity in this population.relevant scientific literature related to key covid-19 morbidities was retrieved from pubmed. for terms returning more than 100,000 papers ("hypertension," "smoking," and "asthma"), only the most recent 100,000 papers were analyzed. full papers and abstracts were annotated to identify all genes, diseases, and species appearing in the title or abstract using the pubtator central api [15] . this open source tool uses taggerone for disease annotations, gnormplus for gene annotations, and sr4gn for species annotations [15] . the data were filtered to retain only papers containing a human species annotation. next, every possible combination of gene and disease annotation within the title and abstract of each paper was generated. only gene-disease terms with at least four documents supporting it, and those with a proximity less than or equal to the median sentence length of the paper section were retained.gene ids were converted to gene symbols using the biomart r package [16, 17] , and disease ids were converted to disease mesh terms using the entrez programming utilities to query the entrez database provided by the national center for biotechnology information. the data was then further filtered to retain disease mesh terms relevant to reported clinical covid-19 comorbidities [3] . redundant terms were collapsed using fuzzy string matching. the final gene-disease data set was used to generate a network utilizing gephi software where the nodes were genes and diseases, and the edge weight was determined by the number of analyzed papers containing the gene-disease combination [18] .we manually curated gene expression omnibus (geo) repository (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) to find lung and blood transcriptome datasets related to "pulmonary arterial hypertension" (pah), "chronic obstructive pulmonary disease"(copd), "severe acute respiratory syndrome" (sars), "h1n1 influenza", "tuberculosis" and "smoking". author-normalized expression values and metadata from these datasets were downloaded using the geoquery package [19] . we performed differential expression analyses between patients with a disease and the control individuals (see table s1 ) using the limma package [20] . the gene symbol for each probe was obtained from the annotation file [21] . probes that matched the same gene symbol were collapsed by taking the one with the lowest p-value. meta-analysis was performed with the metavolcanor package [22] by combining the p-values using fisher's method.we calculated the false discovery rate (fdr) to identify the differentially expressed genes (fdr < 0.05). for enrichment analyses, we utilized the enrichr tool [23] with the "go biological process 2018" and "bioplanet 2019" databases. we then selected pathways with an adjusted p-value < 0.05. the network was created in cytoscape [24] .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .to identify the genes highly associated with key comorbidities of severe covid-19 [1, 3] , we mined all relevant scientific literature of these human diseases. specifically, over 8,000 abstracts containing the terms "pulmonary hypertension," "chronic obstructive pulmonary disease," "hypertension," "smoking," "pulmonary fibrosis," or "asthma" in the title or abstract were selected (figure 1a ). our text-mining analysis revealed 804 genes highly associated with one or more covid-19 morbidities (figure 1b) . among those genes, 26 were associated with four or more diseases (figure 1c ). although ace2 was known to be related to "cardiovascular diseases", "familial primary pulmonary hypertension", "hypertension, pulmonary", and "hypertension", none of the articles containing this gene-disease association studied how ace2 expression was altered in the lungs of patients with these diseases. text-mining approach to retrieve genes in abstracts associated with six human diseases.the number of genes present in at least four abstracts of a disease is shown in the pie . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint chart. b. the knowledge-based network of covid-19 morbidities. the network shows the diseases (red nodes) and genes (purple nodes) from panel a. the edges represent an association between a disease and a gene. the size of the nodes is proportional to its degree. c. genes associated with four or more covid-19 morbidities.seven lung transcriptome studies of patients with either chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) or pulmonary arterial hypertension (pah), as well as smoking volunteers, compared to individuals who were non-smoking volunteers, were downloaded and used in our meta-analysis (table s1 ). for each study, we performed differential expression analysis between patients and control individuals (table s1 ). by combining the p-values obtained in all the seven comparisons, we were able to identify 1,740 and 938 genes that were, respectively, up-and down-regulated in the disease (figure 2a ). enrichment analysis using these differentially expressed genes revealed several pathways associated with inflammatory processes, metabolism, and er stress. among the pathways enriched with down-regulated genes, there were "vasculogenesis" and "regulation of notch signaling pathway" (figure 2b). the "viral life cycle" pathway, which describes the processes utilized by viruses to ensure survival and to attach and enter the host cells was enriched with up-regulated genes (figure 2b ). ace2 was included in this pathway, as well as 25 other genes (figure 2c ). one of these genes is rab1a. rab gtpases are involved in the replication of many viruses infecting humans [25] , but have not been associated with sars-cov-2 life cycle yet. both tmprss2 gene, which is required for sars-cov-2 cell entry [5] , and furin gene, which cleaves sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein [26] were not differentially expressed in most of the lung transcriptome.however, both genes were highly expressed in lung (data not shown), suggesting that the levels of ace2 may be the limiting factor for viral infection.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint (table s1 ) and to identify the differentially expressed genes (fdr < 0.01). b. pathway enrichment analysis. pathways from the "go biological process 2018" database with adjusted p-value < 0.05 were selected to create the network. the width of edges is proportional to the number of genes shared by two pathways (nodes). the size and color of nodes are proportional to the -log10 adjusted p-value. c. genes from the "viral life cycle" pathway that were up-regulated in human diseases. the colors in the heat map represent the log2 fold-change between patients and control individuals.we then decided to investigate whether ace2 was specifically up-regulated in the lungs of patients having one of these morbidities (figure 3a ). since cancer is also listed as a relevant co-morbidity [3] , we analyzed an rna-seq data of patients with lung . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint adenocarcinoma [27] . ace2 was expressed in 59% of cancer samples and only in 25% of adjacent lung normal samples (figure 3b ). among the samples expressing ace2, the level of the gene was higher in cancer, compared to the adjacent normal lung tissue ( figure 3b ). in another lung rna-seq dataset, we compared ace2 expression between patients with copd and subjects with normal spirometry [28] . again, the expression of ace2 was significantly up-regulated in the disease compared to controls (figure 3c ). in fact, ace2 was significantly up-regulated in 6 out of 7 lung transcriptome studies ( figure   3d -e), suggesting that patients who have copd or pah, and even people who smoke, may have higher chances of developing severe covid-19.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint table s1 .and their regulatory mechanisms [29] . we performed pearson correlation between the expression of ace2 and all other genes in each of the seven lung transcriptome studies (table s1 ), combined the p-values using fisher's method, and applied an fdr correction ( figure 4a ). this approach identified 544 and 173 genes with positive and negative correlation with ace2, respectively (figure 4a) . several of these genes were related to histone modifications, such as hat1, hdac2, kdm5b, among others (figure 4a ). among the positively correlated genes, we found adam10 that regulates ace2 cleavage in human airway epithelia [30] and tlr3 that plays a key role in the innate response to sars-cov or mers-cov infection [31] .pathway enrichment analysis revealed that several of the genes positively associated with ace2 were regulated by kdm5b, and by specific histone acetylation (h3k27ac) and histone methylation (h3k4me1 and h3k4me3) (figure 4b ). in fact, kmd5b demethylates lysine 4 of histone h3 (i.e. h3k4) and is involved in transcriptional regulation and dna repair [32] . we then checked in the roadmap epigenomics project database [33] to see whether ace2 locus contained chip-seq information for these histone markers. in the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint human lung, peaks for h3k4me1 and h3k4me3, as well as h3k27ac, were identified in ace2 locus (figure 4c ), suggesting that ace2 may be epigenetically regulated in the lung. figure 4 . insights of ace2 regulation in the lung. a. genes whose expression is correlated with ace2 in the lung. selected genes that were negatively (blue) or positively (red) correlated with ace2 are highlighted. b. pathway enrichment analysis using the ace2-positively correlated genes. pathways from the "chip-x enrichment analysis" and "epigenomics roadmap" databases with adjusted p-value < 10 -10 were selected. the size of the red circles is proportional to the -log10 adjusted p-value of the enrichment. c.ace2 locus contains marks of histone acetylation and methylation. the plot was modified from the washu epigenome browser using e096 lung. the peaks corresponding to each histone modification and the p-values of the marks are indicated.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprintthe current diabetes pandemic [34] could be worsening the sars-cov-2 pandemic by increasing the comorbidities associated with severe covid-19. as we did not find lung transcriptome samples from patients with type 2 diabetes, we could not directly test whether ace2 expression was increased in patients with diabetes, compared to healthy controls. however, our text-mining approach revealed that il-6 and ins genes were associated with all the diseases we searched. the ins gene encodes the insulin hormone, and insulin is associated with the nad-dependent histone deacetylase sirtuin 1 (sirt1) [35] . we found that sirt1 was up-regulated in the lung of patients with severe covid-19 comorbidities in 4 out 7 studies (data not shown). clarke et al [36] have demonstrated that, under conditions of cell energy stress, sirt1 can epigenetically regulate ace2. others too have shown that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may inhibit the sirt1 deacetylase activity [37] , which in turn could impact ace2 expression.the "viral life cycle" pathway that was enriched with up-regulated genes in patients with severe covid-19 comorbidities contains several genes other than ace2 that can be potentially important for sars-cov-2 cell cycle and invasion/attachment. these include rab1a gene, whose product promotes the replication of vaccinia virus [38] . also, rab1a is important for herpes simplex virus 1 secondary envelopment [39] , and is required for assembly of classical swine fever virus particle [40] . it is possible that sars-cov-2 utilizes rab1a as well.the fact that ace2 gene is located in the x chromosome, and the initial findings showing that older males with comorbidities are more likely to be have severe covid-19 compared to females [1] , indicate that ace2 expression in the lung may be sex-biased.although no significant sexual differences was found in the activity of ace2 in mouse lung [41] , in rats, the levels of ace2 were dramatically reduced with aging in both genders, but with significantly higher ace2 expression in old female rats than male [42] .although the mechanisms by which ace2 is up-regulated in patients with severe covid-19 comorbidities were not addressed, our analysis may shed some light on the subject.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .among the genes whose expression was positively correlated with ace2, we detected genes associated with epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. for instance, hat and hdac modulate chromatin and dna condensation by changing histone acetylation status, thus permitting gene transcription. this could be happening in lung tissue, facilitating ace2 expression, as observed during lung cancer and copd.kdm5b is associated with infection of hepatitis b virus [43] . in breast cancer cells, blockage of kdm5 triggers a robust interferon response that results in resistance to infection by dna and rna viruses [44] . this finding suggests that kdm5 demethylases are potential targets for preventing sars-cov-2 infection.covid-19 may kill between 5.6% and 15.2% of people infected with sars-cov-2 [45] .drug treatments that lower this mortality rate may save many thousands of lives. our systems biology approach offers putative gene targets for treating and preventing severe covid-19 cases.we would like to thank tiago lubiana for his valuable inputs. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint recent studies of the epidemiological characteristics of covid-19 have revealed that severe infection is more likely in people with an existing chronic medical condition.two independent studies of infected populations in wuhan, china found that approximately half the subjects infected with covid-19 had an existing comorbidity [1, 2] . in a study of 1099 patients across mainland china, 38.7% of patients with comorbidities progressed to severe infection [3] . 2020), and in a study of 52 inpatients in wuhan, 67% of patients with comorbidities died [2] . the most common comorbidities reported in these studies were hypertension, diabetes, cerebrovascular disease, chronic obstructive lung disease, and coronary heart disease [1] [2] [3] . other comorbidities such as carcinoma, chronic kidney disease, chronic liver disease, digestive system disease, and nervous system disease have also been reported in patients with covid-19 [1, 2, 4] . a better understanding of the link between these conditions and covid-19 infection is required to inform better treatment and prevention interventions.the molecular mechanism responsible for the increased disease severity in patients with these comorbidities is not fully understood, but previous studies suggest a role for angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [5] . ace2 is a membrane protein required for sars-cov2 to bind and enter cells [6] [7] [8] . after binding, viral entry is facilitated by the activation of the viral spike glycoprotein and cleavage of the c-terminal segment of ace2 by proteases like tmprss2 and furin that are readily expressed in lung tissue [9] [10] [11] . ace2 is only moderately expressed in healthy lung tissue compared to the heart, kidneys, and testes [12] , but staining of lung tissue sections from adults with pulmonary hypertension has revealed increased ace2 protein in the endothelium of pulmonary arteries, compared to healthy controls [13] . ace2 upregulation has also been observed in animal models of liver fibrosis [14] . however, the reason for this upregulation remains unclear, and a link to other covid-19 comorbidities has not been determined.here, we showed that ace2 expression in lung tissue is upregulated by diseases representing comorbidities along with covid-19. we also used systems biology approaches including co-expression analysis, meta-analysis, and network analysis to determine a potential cause of the ace2 upregulation. from this analysis, we found that . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020 this identification of a common molecular mechanism of increased covid-19 severity in patients with diverse comorbidities could direct the development of interventions to reduce the infection risk and disease severity in this population.relevant scientific literature related to key covid-19 morbidities was retrieved from pubmed. for terms returning more than 100,000 papers ("hypertension," "smoking," and "asthma"), only the most recent 100,000 papers were analyzed. full papers and abstracts were annotated to identify all genes, diseases, and species appearing in the title or abstract using the pubtator central api [15] . this open source tool uses taggerone for disease annotations, gnormplus for gene annotations, and sr4gn for species annotations [15] . the data were filtered to retain only papers containing a human species annotation. next, every possible combination of gene and disease annotation within the title and abstract of each paper was generated. only gene-disease terms with at least four documents supporting it, and those with a proximity less than or equal to the median sentence length of the paper section were retained.gene ids were converted to gene symbols using the biomart r package [16, 17] , and disease ids were converted to disease mesh terms using the entrez programming utilities to query the entrez database provided by the national center for biotechnology information. the data was then further filtered to retain disease mesh terms relevant to reported clinical covid-19 comorbidities [3] . redundant terms were collapsed using fuzzy string matching. the final gene-disease data set was used to generate a network utilizing gephi software where the nodes were genes and diseases, and the edge weight was determined by the number of analyzed papers containing the gene-disease combination [18] .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. .we manually curated gene expression omnibus (geo) repository (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) to find lung and blood transcriptome datasets related to "pulmonary arterial hypertension" (pah), "chronic obstructive pulmonary disease"(copd), "severe acute respiratory syndrome" (sars), "h1n1 influenza", "tuberculosis" and "smoking". author-normalized expression values and metadata from these datasets were downloaded using the geoquery package [19] . we performed differential expression analyses between patients with a disease and the control individuals (see table s1 ) using the limma package [20] . the gene symbol for each probe was obtained from the annotation file [21] . probes that matched the same gene symbol were collapsed by taking the one with the lowest p-value. meta-analysis was performed with the metavolcanor package [22] by combining the p-values using fisher's method.we calculated the false discovery rate (fdr) to identify the differentially expressed genes (fdr < 0.05). for enrichment analyses, we utilized the enrichr tool [23] with the "go biological process 2018" and "bioplanet 2019" databases. we then selected pathways with an adjusted p-value < 0.05. the network was created in cytoscape [24] .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. .to identify the genes highly associated with key comorbidities of severe covid-19 [1, 3] , we mined all relevant scientific literature of these human diseases. specifically, over 8,000 abstracts containing the terms "pulmonary hypertension," "chronic obstructive pulmonary disease," "hypertension," "smoking," "pulmonary fibrosis," or "asthma" in the title or abstract were selected (figure 1a ). our text-mining analysis revealed 804 genes highly associated with one or more covid-19 morbidities (figure 1b) . among those genes, 26 were associated with four or more diseases (figure 1c) . although ace2 was known to be related to "cardiovascular diseases", "familial primary pulmonary hypertension", "hypertension, pulmonary", and "hypertension", none of the articles containing this gene-disease association studied how ace2 expression was altered in the lungs of patients with these diseases. text-mining approach to retrieve genes in abstracts associated with six human diseases.the number of genes present in at least four abstracts of a disease is shown in the pie . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (table s1 ). for each study, we performed differential expression analysis between patients and control individuals (table s1 ). by combining the p-values obtained in all the seven comparisons, we were able to identify 1,740 and 938 genes that were, respectively, up-and down-regulated in the disease (figure 2a ). enrichment analysis using these differentially expressed genes revealed several pathways associated with inflammatory processes, metabolism, and er stress. among the pathways enriched with down-regulated genes, there were "vasculogenesis" and "regulation of notch signaling pathway" (figure 2b). the "viral life cycle" pathway, which describes the processes utilized by viruses to ensure survival and to attach and enter the host cells was enriched with up-regulated genes (figure 2b ). ace2 was included in this pathway, as well as 25 other genes (figure 2c ). one of these genes is rab1a. rab gtpases are involved in the replication of many viruses infecting humans [25] , but have not been associated with sars-cov-2 life cycle yet. both tmprss2 gene, which is required for sars-cov-2 cell entry [5] , and furin gene, which cleaves sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein [26] were not differentially expressed in most of the lung transcriptome.however, both genes were highly expressed in lung (data not shown), suggesting that the levels of ace2 may be the limiting factor for viral infection.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (table s1 ) and to identify the differentially expressed genes (fdr < 0.01). b. pathway enrichment analysis. pathways from the "go biological process 2018" database with adjusted p-value < 0.05 were selected to create the network. the width of edges is proportional to the number of genes shared by two pathways (nodes). the size and color of nodes are proportional to the -log10 adjusted p-value. c. genes from the "viral life cycle" pathway that were up-regulated in human diseases. the colors in the heat map represent the log2 fold-change between patients and control individuals.we then decided to investigate whether ace2 was specifically up-regulated in the lungs of patients having one of these morbidities (figure 3a ). since cancer is also listed as a relevant co-morbidity [3] , we analyzed an rna-seq data of patients with lung . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint adenocarcinoma [27] . ace2 was expressed in 59% of cancer samples and only in 25% of adjacent lung normal samples (figure 3b ). among the samples expressing ace2, the level of the gene was higher in cancer, compared to the adjacent normal lung tissue ( figure 3b ). in another lung rna-seq dataset, we compared ace2 expression between patients with copd and subjects with normal spirometry [28] . again, the expression of ace2 was significantly up-regulated in the disease compared to controls (figure 3c ). in fact, ace2 was significantly up-regulated in 6 out of 7 lung transcriptome studies ( figure   3d -e), suggesting that patients who have copd or pah, and even people who smoke, may have higher chances of developing severe covid-19.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020 table s1 .and their regulatory mechanisms [29] . we performed pearson correlation between the expression of ace2 and all other genes in each of the seven lung transcriptome studies (table s1 ), combined the p-values using fisher's method, and applied an fdr correction ( figure 4a ). this approach identified 544 and 173 genes with positive and negative correlation with ace2, respectively (figure 4a) . several of these genes were related to histone modifications, such as hat1, hdac2, kdm5b, among others (figure 4a ). among the positively correlated genes, we found adam10 that regulates ace2 cleavage in human airway epithelia [30] and tlr3 that plays a key role in the innate response to sars-cov or mers-cov infection [31] .pathway enrichment analysis revealed that several of the genes positively associated with ace2 were regulated by kdm5b, and by specific histone acetylation (h3k27ac) and histone methylation (h3k4me1 and h3k4me3) (figure 4b ). in fact, kmd5b demethylates lysine 4 of histone h3 (i.e. h3k4) and is involved in transcriptional regulation and dna repair [32] . we then checked in the roadmap epigenomics project database [33] to see whether ace2 locus contained chip-seq information for these histone markers. in the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint human lung, peaks for h3k4me1 and h3k4me3, as well as h3k27ac, were identified in ace2 locus (figure 4c ), suggesting that ace2 may be epigenetically regulated in the lung. figure 4 . insights of ace2 regulation in the lung. a. genes whose expression is correlated with ace2 in the lung. selected genes that were negatively (blue) or positively (red) correlated with ace2 are highlighted. b. pathway enrichment analysis using the ace2-positively correlated genes. pathways from the "chip-x enrichment analysis" and "epigenomics roadmap" databases with adjusted p-value < 10 -10 were selected. the size of the red circles is proportional to the -log10 adjusted p-value of the enrichment. c.ace2 locus contains marks of histone acetylation and methylation. the plot was modified from the washu epigenome browser using e096 lung. the peaks corresponding to each histone modification and the p-values of the marks are indicated.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprintthe current diabetes pandemic [34] could be worsening the sars-cov-2 pandemic by increasing the comorbidities associated with severe covid-19. as we did not find lung transcriptome samples from patients with type 2 diabetes, we could not directly test whether ace2 expression was increased in patients with diabetes, compared to healthy controls. however, our text-mining approach revealed that il-6 and ins genes were associated with all the diseases we searched. the ins gene encodes the insulin hormone, and insulin is associated with the nad-dependent histone deacetylase sirtuin 1 (sirt1) [35] . we found that sirt1 was up-regulated in the lung of patients with severe covid-19 comorbidities in 4 out 7 studies (data not shown). clarke et al [36] have demonstrated that, under conditions of cell energy stress, sirt1 can epigenetically regulate ace2. others too have shown that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may inhibit the sirt1 deacetylase activity [37] , which in turn could impact ace2 expression.the "viral life cycle" pathway that was enriched with up-regulated genes in patients with severe covid-19 comorbidities contains several genes other than ace2 that can be potentially important for sars-cov-2 cell cycle and invasion/attachment. these include rab1a gene, whose product promotes the replication of vaccinia virus [38] . also, rab1a is important for herpes simplex virus 1 secondary envelopment [39] , and is required for assembly of classical swine fever virus particle [40] . it is possible that sars-cov-2 utilizes rab1a as well.the fact that ace2 gene is located in the x chromosome, and the initial findings showing that older males with comorbidities are more likely to be have severe covid-19 compared to females [1] , indicate that ace2 expression in the lung may be sex-biased.although no significant sexual differences was found in the activity of ace2 in mouse lung [41] , in rats, the levels of ace2 were dramatically reduced with aging in both genders, but with significantly higher ace2 expression in old female rats than male [42] .although the mechanisms by which ace2 is up-regulated in patients with severe covid-19 comorbidities were not addressed, our analysis may shed some light on the subject.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. .among the genes whose expression was positively correlated with ace2, we detected genes associated with epigenetic regulation of gene transcription. for instance, hat and hdac modulate chromatin and dna condensation by changing histone acetylation status, thus permitting gene transcription. this could be happening in lung tissue, facilitating ace2 expression, as observed during lung cancer and copd.kdm5b is associated with infection of hepatitis b virus [43] . in breast cancer cells, blockage of kdm5 triggers a robust interferon response that results in resistance to infection by dna and rna viruses [44] . this finding suggests that kdm5 demethylases are potential targets for preventing sars-cov-2 infection.covid-19 may kill between 5.6% and 15.2% of people infected with sars-cov-2 [45] .drug treatments that lower this mortality rate may save many thousands of lives. our systems biology approach offers putative gene targets for treating and preventing severe covid-19 cases.we would like to thank tiago lubiana for his valuable inputs. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 21.20040261 doi: medrxiv preprint telehealth is the umbrella term which encompasses the five major categories of virtual care with varying levels of reimbursement. mobile health includes provision of public health information through mobile devices. remote patient monitoring includes the use of connected electronic tool to record personal health and medical data. wearable technologies send information directly to the medical record though app platforms and include bluetooth enabled glucose monitoring systems used in endocrinology or home blood pressure monitors. virtual check-ins are patient-initiated, brief communications that connect with patients through the electronic medical records (emr) or a secure platform. telemedicine is a visit with a provider using two-way interactive audio and video so that there is real-time communication between the provider and the patient. there are two main pathways for telemedicine: video visits with a patient who is likely at home; telemedicine clinic with an originating site and distant site. the “originating site” is where the patient is located, and the distant site is where the provider conducting the visit is located.one of the most important things is to set up a private computer workstation with audio-video capability and dual monitors for telemedicine. having the device on a stand allows you to conduct the visit, check the chart and type at the same time during the visit. a dual-screen computer set-up allows for reviewing images and charting during the telehealth visits. a digital clock to keep track of the length of telemedicine visit may be helpful for billing. large health systems have the capability to provide hipaa compliant video visits from within the emr. examples include epic and cerner. if this capability has not been implemented or if you work in a smaller practice, stand alone hipaa compliant telemedicine solutions exist. these include doxy.me, google g suite hangouts meet, gotomeeting, intouch health, mend, mundaii, skype for business, swymed, updox, vsee, zoom for healthcare. these secured platforms may be used by providers in their private office to perform telemedicine visits.epic emr allows for easy to use video visit platform for patients through the patients mychart application, or it may be called by your hospitals name. providers may use haiku on the phone or cantu on a tablet. performing a telemedicine visit in epic is simple and can be done by two methods. the first method entails going into the providers schedule and selecting the appropriate chart. the telemedicine icon is found on the bottom of the screen and selected. the second method is by going into the notifications section of the epic app. if the patient has entered their video visit the notification can be selected and the provider is taken into the patient’s chart and the appropriate video visit. if the patient has entered the visit there will be a green display when the patient’s video is live, and they are ready. the provider should wait until the patient is in the virtual waiting first to avoid patients hearing conversations with other physicians or nursing staff about potentially private health information.an additional feature of the epic platform is for image capture while in the video visit. this is performed using the using the camera icon displayed at the bottom of the visit interaction screen. epic can then automatically import images captured for the encounter into a note by using the smart phase images. this is a systems-based phrase and will insert all images from that encounter into the note. these images can be placed in the chart as part of the physical exam. finally, the epic platform allows the camera flip option. this allows the provider to show patients computed tomography (ct), ultrasound, or x-ray images for the visit.certain patients are particularly suited to a telemedicine visit. these include postoperative patients having an unremarkable and uncomplicated convalescence. chronic vascular patients who need surveillance with or without vascular imaging represent another group that can frequently be managed remotely. established patience exhibiting a new complaint can be initially evaluated with a virtual visit and triaged towards an office visit, hospitalization, or delay visit. new referral patients can be evaluated initially through telehealth in order to determine whether they need to be seen immediately, urgently or they can be delayed as well until the risks of the viral pandemic have diminished. disadvantages include the inability to perform an in-person physical exam (pulse exam, wound probing, etc.) or perform any procedures (wound debridement, drainage, suture removal, etc.).the goals of incorporating telemedicine into the community vascular surgeon’s practice are to keep the physical office waiting room as empty as possible but to keep the virtual waiting room full. it is also to keep the surgeons, providers and other staff working and on the payroll. telemedicine allows the vascular surgery practice to maintain a revenue stream to support these aspirations.after choosing a telemedicine platform, obtaining the necessary hardware is critical, which includes a computer desktop or laptop, microphone, and camera. some physicians may use a smart phone primarily or as a backup. the practice will need to have a standardized script regarding telemedicine and a workflow process (figure 1 ). the patient will also require access to the appropriate computer hardware setup or a smart phone. the appointment schedules are then evaluated well in advance and the appropriate patients are selected for a possible telemedicine visit. they are then contacted and offered the opportunity for a telemedicine visit if they have the necessary devices. if they provide their consent and have the appropriate equipment their visit is then flagged in the office scheduling software as a telemedicine visit. if an imaging study is required, this is to be scheduled in advance of the visit if possible. if not, it can be scheduled to follow the visit with another telemedicine visit to discuss the results. before starting telemedicine, it is important to coordinate with the back-office or billing company. this will be necessary to identify which payors are not reimbursing for telemedicine as well as to make sure that these patients visits are appropriately flagged in the system so that the correct modifier can be attached.as the largest integrated national healthcare delivery system in the u.s, the veterans administration (va) provides care for nearly 9 million veterans by 180,000 medical professionals. the va uses the veterans health information systems and technology architecture (vista) based computerized patient record system (cprs) as its ehr system. cprs has neither secure messaging nor video-conferencing features built directly into the graphical user interface (gui). however, the office of connected care was established in 2016 with the mission to extend access to care beyond the traditional office visit, including myhealthyvet patient portal, va telehealth services and va mobile applications. scaling these foundational programs has been instrumental in response to the increased demands during the current covid-19 pandemic. the myhealthyvet patient portal provides asynchronous secure messaging from within the patient health record (phr) where the patient can also review results and schedule appointments. home video visits are conducted through the va video connect (vvc) system. because vvc is a web-based app, it does not require patients to register into a portal to launch. only apple ios devices such as iphones and ipads require downloading of a mobile application. patients simply tap the hyperlink in their appointment email which launches a browser to initiate the video visit. since the covid-19 pandemic, the number telemedicine visits has increased nearly 200-fold in visn 21 and were essential to maintaining patient care while minimizing patient clinic and hospital visitations.a digital health revolution is fueled by an increase in the prevalence of both smartphones and connected devices. a valuable digital health use case is for post-operative surgical site infection (ssi) monitoring. ssis have been reported to be 8% or higher in vascular surgery patients and a significant cause for readmissions.8 applications to proactively engage patients at home prior to their follow-up visit to assess post-operative wound status can be implemented. these are typically asynchronous store and forward communication solutions which including photos or videos. hcpcs code g2010 is used for a virtual check-in when a recorded video and/or photo is submitted by an established patient. this requires an interpretation and a follow-up communication within 24 hours. the encounter may not be originating from a related e/m service provided within the previous 7 days and may not lead to an e/m service within 24 hours following the virtual check-in.remote management of chronic conditions may improve health outcomes and lower costs. programs to manage hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and congestive heart failure are well-established in certain health systems. established patients with a well-defined diagnosis are asked to purchase a connected device, such as a bluetooth connected blood pressure cuff for a digital hypertension program to measure their blood pressure at home. this data automatically syncs to the electronic medical record via the patient’s smartphone for the mid-level provider or pharmacist to review and make medication changes. ochsner health system’s digital hypertension program achieved target blood pressure control in 71% of its digital-medicine program versus 31% of the usual-care patients at 90 days.9 remote monitoring allows for more frequent patient check-ins with the intent of more rapid achievement of treatment goals and prevention of complications. an added benefit is for health coaches to leverage these programs to address behavioral health by providing health education on smoking cessation, nutrition, and exercise.peripheral artery disease (pad) is poised for remote monitoring, particularly in the early stages when patients suffer from claudication. studies to clinically validate sensors in smartphones and smartwatches in patients with pad have been conducted to help set the foundation for remote tracking.10 despite supervised exercise therapy (set) being a grade 1 and level a recommendation in svs guidelines for claudicants, utilization is quite poor.11 one solution would be to address this with a smartphone delivered home based supervised exercise therapy program to schedule exercise sessions, measure effort and report compliance while providing pad, smoking cessation, diet and exercise education with the support of health coaches. remote monitoring programs are a form of telehealth and have the advantage of continuing to be effective during periods of covid-19 lockdown.the workflow for a regular office visit from referral to billing consists of multiple levels and is comparable to the workflow for telehealth visits. the complexity, however, can cause problems during conversion of a scheduled office visit to a telehealth visit. the number of potential pitfalls is even higher if the conversion process must occur rapidly, as was the case at the beginning of the covid-19 era. while many challenges depend on the utilized telehealth platform, and the necessary prerequisites both on patient and provider side, the presence of an infrastructure and experience with telehealth at the health system cannot be overstated.while all steps are logical, implementing the conversion of regular office visits to remote visits depend largely on the close interaction between provider, medical assistant, and scheduler. the larger obstacles such as restrictions of other departments involved in our patient care, must be considered and the vascular provider will have to make the decision on whether the test or diagnostic imaging is necessary or can be deferred. lastly, the individual provider’s experience, understanding of and bias toward the telemedicine approach must be considered. training in person or via training videos is essential to provide the necessary understanding of the process, including scheduling, documentation of and billing for the telehealth. in general, while the conversion process to telemedicine during a short period is challenging, the workflow issues can be overcome with adequate training and close collaboration of all involved parties. best practice would be to schedule traditional in-person visits and telemedicine visits as separate blocks for efficiency. the setup and workflow for each is very different. in addition, telemedicine patients tend to be on time because the 15-minute block locks out after the time is upas many challenges as the covid 19 era poses, it is also a chance for vascular surgeons to adopt and establish an additional modality of patient care, that is not only highly appreciated by the patients but also safe and effective without compromising quality of care.to perform telemedicine, physicians must be licensed in one the states [figure 2 ]. interstate medical licensure compact (imlc) is an agreement between 29 states, the district of columbia and the territory of guam. under this agreement, licensed physicians can qualify to practice medicine across state lines within the compact if they meet the agreed upon eligibility requirements.12 approximately 80% of physicians meet the criteria for licensure through the imlc. during the pandemic, cms has waived the interstate licensing restriction allowing physicians to practice across state lines.center for medicare and medicaid services (cms) has approved cpt codes for telehealth in 2018 [table i ]. for new patients, use cpt codes 99201-99205 and for established patients, use cpt codes 99211-99215. some requires you to add point of service pos 02 for telehealth medicare and modifier 95 for commercial payers. for 2020, patient-initiated online digital evaluation and management service provided by qualified physician and non-physician health care professional [table ii ]. medicare payment for the telephone evaluation and management visits (cpt codes 99441-99443) is equivalent to the medicare payment for office/outpatient visits with established patients effective march 1, 2020. cms made major changes to telehealth with over 80 new telehealth codes added, changes in place of service and fee schedule payment, allowing physician supervision to be done virtually, and allowing both new and established patients for virtual check-in.13 regardless of coverage, receiving and providing telehealth medicine is not prohibited. rather, the controversy lies in its reimbursement and coverage. large commercial insurers, such as aetna, bluecross blue shield, cigna, humana, unitedhealthcare and more are moving to expand telehealth coverage. some states have telemedicine parity laws mandating equal reimbursement for telemedicine and in-person care by commercial payers. cms has lifted medicare restrictions on the use of telehealth services during the covid-19 emergency. here are the six key changes:•effective for services starting march 6, 2020 and for the duration of the covid-19 public health emergency, medicare will make payment for medicare telehealth services furnished to patients in broader circumstances.•these visits are considered the same as in-person visits and are paid at the same rate as regular, in-person visits.•medicare will make payment for professional services furnished to beneficiaries in all areas of the country in all settings.•while they must generally travel to or be located in certain types of originating sites such as a physician’s office, skilled nursing facility or hospital for the visit, medicare will make payment for telehealth services furnished to beneficiaries in any healthcare facility and in their home.•the medicare coinsurance and deductible would generally apply to these services. however, the hhs office of inspector general (oig) is providing flexibility for healthcare providers to reduce or waive cost-sharing for telehealth visits paid by federal healthcare programs.•to the extent the 1135 waiver requires an established relationship, hhs will not conduct audits to ensure that such a prior relationship existed for claims submitted during this public health emergency. at these virtual town hall meetings, the panelists learned from each other about their vascular practices, protocols, and preferences through this difficult time. during the pandemic, the use of telemedicine has grown exponentially at many institutions and vascular surgery practices around the country. our next challenge will be deciding on how to best deploy those limited resources to take care of vascular patients once surgery restrictions are lifted. while stay-at-home orders have slowed the spread of the virus and flattened the curve, the threat of viral infection will continue until we develop and administer a vaccine. as states ease restrictions, the country will likely experience further regional spikes and waves of infection. although the risk of dying from covid-19 may be low in healthy patients, vascular patients are a vulnerable population due to their co-morbidities and advanced age. next step in evidence-based practice would focus on patient-reported satisfaction and clinical outcomes using telemedicine for the management of vascular disease via comparative effectiveness studies. continuing telemedicine, where appropriate, minimizes viral exposure risk and offers convenience benefits for patients. during these unprecedented times, we encourage everyone to keep open communications and share our best practices.death certification requires the same effort and dedication as all reports by doctors during their patients’ lifetimes. physicians must follow the basic instructions to complete a death certificate correctly, taking special care to fill in the sequence of causes of death. in the case of a pandemic, completion of the death certificate falls to the primary care physician and therefore administration must publish instructions based on international recommendations. it should be established as soon as possible the report of certificates to report deaths telematically. meanwhile this is not possible, in a pandemic procedures should be put in place to enable the immediate reporting of deaths to the health authorities.death certification in covid-19 cases in spain/ la certificación de la defunción de casos de covid-19 en españala certificación de la defunción es un acto médico en el que el profesional debe poner el mismo esfuerzo y dedicación que en el resto de los informes elaborados en vida del paciente. para su correcta cumplimentación el facultativo debe seguir las instrucciones básicas, poniendo especial cuidado en rellenar adecuadamente la secuencia de causas de muerte. en casos de pandemia, la cumplimentación del certificado de defunción corresponde a la medicina asistencial y para poder hacerlo, los organismos oficiales deben publicar instrucciones basadas en recomendaciones internacionales. debe establecerse, cuanto antes, la posibilidad de comunicación telemática de las defunciones. mientras eso no sea posible tienen que establecerse procedimientos que permitan en situación de pandemia, comunicar de forma inmediata la mortalidad a las autoridades sanitarias.abstract:.death certification requires the same effort and dedication as all reports by doctors during their patients' lifetimes. the physician must follow the basic instructions to complete a death certificate correctly, taking special care to fill in the sequence of causes of death. in the case of a pandemic, completion of the death certificate falls to the primary care physician and therefore the official bodies must publish instructions based on international recommendations. it should be established as soon as possible whether it is possible to report deaths telematically. while this is not possible, in a pandemic procedures should be put in place to enable the immediate reporting of deaths to the health authorities.keywords: death certificate; pandemic; mortality; covid-19el conocimiento documentado de la propia historia social y de los individuos que la conforman es característico de las culturas desarrolladas. uno de los factores que influyen en ese conocimiento social es la existencia de registros. los registros de nacimiento y de defunción son buenos instrumentos para conocer nuestra historia social. en españa encontramos documentos de registros de este tipo que datan del siglo xvi preservados en las parroquias junto con las partidas de bautismo. con el tiempo la inscripción se hizo también al margen de las iglesias. fue el estado de massachusetts el primer lugar en mantener registros de defunción en los tribunales de justicia (1639) (1). la certificación médica de defunción apareció en el último tercio del siglo xix por varios motivos.por un lado, la mayor proximidad asistencial del médico al moribundo en el ámbito urbano junto con la fundamentación científica de la higiene pública, que en gran parte se apoyó en el desarrollo de la estadística sanitaria y de la prevención pública. esto también dio lugar a nuevas legislaciones y códigos civiles y al origen de los registros civiles. además, la incorporación de la estadística sanitaria llevó a la internacionalización de la prevención de la enfermedad. a fines del siglo xix casi todos los países europeos tenían sistemas centralizados de registros de mortalidad.en 1871, tras varios intentos, se logró la puesta en marcha del registro civil (rc) en españa (2) .este avance vino precedido por un periodo de transición, que supuso la implantación de un j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f registro parcial provincial para grandes y medianas poblaciones en el año 1841. la ley exigía a todos los municipios la creación de un rc en el que se debían inscribir los datos referentes al estado civil de todos los españoles (nacimientos, matrimonios, defunciones, etc.) al margen de sus creencias. un siglo más tarde, en 1957, se constató la necesidad de actualizar y renovar la ley entonces vigente adaptándola a las necesidades de la época, dando lugar a la ley de 8 de según el reglamento que desarrolla la ley del rc, debe cumplimentar el cmd-bed "el facultativo que haya asistido al difunto en su última enfermedad o cualquier otro que reconozca el cadáver" (7). el código de deontología médica (cd) (8) regula el compromiso de certificar la muerte señalando que "aunque el médico que haya tenido la mayor carga asistencial sobre el paciente es el que tiene la mayor responsabilidad ética de cumplimentar el certificado de defunción en todos sus apartados, no es deontológicamente aceptable rehuir el compromiso de certificarla cuando se produce si se ha presenciado la misma, se conoce al paciente o se tiene a disposición la historia clínica". en el reverso del primer impreso del cmd-bed encontramos unas "instrucciones básicas de certificación" (figura 1) que establece la oms para seguir a la hora de cumplimentar el certificado. cuando se trata de muertes violentas o sospechosas de criminalidad no procede la firma del cmd-bed derivándose estas muertes a investigación judicial (9) . el procedimiento general de manejo y notificación de los fallecimientos se recoge en la figura 2.el cmd-bed es un documento médico-legal en el que el profesional debe poner el mismo esfuerzo y dedicación que en el resto de los informes elaborados en vida del paciente. clínica y éticamente se puede firmar un certificado con criterios de presunción si el desenlace es posible y hay compatibilidad entre la información sobre las circunstancias del fallecimiento y su patobiografía, no siendo aceptable, en cambio, no firmarlo escudándose en un posible delito de falsedad que recoge el código penal. en nuestra experiencia y la de otros autores se confirma que difícilmente se perseguirá a un médico que, de buena fe y previa exploración del paciente, certifique como natural una muerte que no lo sea, (10) siendo un deber ético la cumplimentación del cmd-bed. en esta situación se prioriza el ahorro de sufrimiento a los familiares, por delante de las dudas legales no razonables, humanizando el trato en unas circunstancias de padecimiento emocional tan intensas (11) .desde su publicación en 2009 el cmd-bed ha sufrido alguna modificación. en la primera versión del cmd-bed las hoy llamadas "causas intermedias" se denominaban también "causas antecedentes". tras menos de dos años, el ine comprobó que se estaba cumplimentando equivocadamente dicha variable y elaboró un documento que hizo llegar a los médicos a través de los cm (12). en él se recogía que "muchos médicos han interpretado este campo como antecedentes clínicos y no como debería entenderse, es decir, anotar en las [llamadas] causas antecedentes aquellos procesos que siendo debidos a la causa inicial produjeron la causa inmediata de muerte". recientemente se han modificado incorporando código qr y recogiendo el número de colegiación de nueve cifras, estableciendo las casillas de forma independiente para su adecuada cumplimentación.la correcta cumplimentación del cmd-bed tiene importantes consecuencias desde el punto de vista de política sanitaria. en base a ellos el ine extrae de estos documentos las causas de defunción con los que genera las estadísticas oficiales de mortalidad. según los resultados obtenidos se toman medidas de prevención y se destinarán los recursos necesarios para afrontar las necesidades existentes mediante la implementación de políticas sanitarias. no cumplimentar adecuadamente las causas de muerte (figura 3) puede tener una gran importancia desde el punto de vista epidemiológico (13) derivando, como consecuencia de esto, en una mala organización de los recursos destinados a la salud tanto en la investigación de enfermedades como en la implantación de políticas preventivas.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f existe poca experiencia en nuestro medio en relación a la certificación de fallecimientos durante las epidemias. se entiende que, si se producen múltiples fallecimientos, los procedimientos de actuación podrían ser semejantes a los de situaciones de catástrofe. como sostienen barbería et al (14) las catástrofes constituyen un problema de salud pública al ser susceptibles de incrementar la morbilidad y mortalidad y disminuir la calidad de vida. las epidemias cumplen evidentemente estas condiciones. el papel de la certificación de las causas de la muerte en el caso de grandes catástrofes corresponde a la medicina forense (15) y el de la certificación en epidemias corresponde a la medicina asistencial, (16) pero la comparación puede ser útil en el establecimiento de procedimientos para el manejo de cadáveres y la certificación de la muerte en casos de múltiples fallecimientos en epidemias (17) .quizá el único ejemplo que tenemos en españa de epidemias con múltiples fallecimientos y con registros de los mismos es la pandemia de gripe de 1918. su estallido generó múltiples estudios científicos, análisis estadísticos y una fuerte reacción de la prensa a partir de mayo de 1918. fue una experiencia terrible para la sociedad que generó múltiples medidas para combatirla, por parte de los gobiernos, y respuestas extraordinarias por parte de los profesionales de la salud y de la población en general. los estudios sobre la pandemia de gripe de 1918 han comprendido no sólo el análisis de los datos de morbi-mortalidad, que son muy importantes en si mismos, sino que también ha llevado a una comprensión de la epidemia más allá de las cifras.para poder evaluar las repercusiones que la epidemia tuvo sobre la mortalidad contamos con la información contenida en los movimientos naturales de población elaborados por el ine y con los boletines mensuales de demografía sanitaria que confeccionaba el ministerio de la gobernación. estos datos, sin embargo, son insuficientes para descender a detalles. por ejemplo, los relacionados con los distritos de las ciudades. porras (18) ha estudiado la estadística demográfica que confeccionaba anualmente el servicio de estadística del ayuntamiento de madrid, así como los resúmenes generales anuales de esas estadísticas demográficas. el cruce de esos datos con los fondos del rc y los libros de defunción correspondientes a los años 1918 y 1919, ha permitido determinar con detalle la evolución de la morbi-mortalidad de la pandemia en españa (19) .sin embargo, ayer, como hoy, las cifras de mortalidad cambiaban según los criterios que se aplicaban, así por ejemplo, en el caso de madrid, las tasas brutas de mortalidad general y específica de 1918 y 1919 que se obtenían a partir de los datos del rc y de los resúmenes generales anuales de las estadísticas demográficas del ayuntamiento de madrid eran muy diferentes, ya que civilmente las muertes se consignaron en el distrito correspondiente a su j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f lugar de fallecimiento, mientras que el ayuntamiento elaboró sus estadísticas a partir de los datos de los cementerios, donde las muertes se anotaban en el distrito en el que se residía y no en el que se moría. es un ejemplo de la complejidad de los estudios de morbimortalidad históricos (18, 20) recomendaciones nacionales e internacionales sobre la certificación médica de la defunción en relación al covid-19.el 29 de marzo de 2020, el cgcom emitió un comunicado en el que, de acuerdo con las definiciones propuestas por la oms, la vocalía nacional de administraciones públicas informaba acerca del procedimiento a seguir en la certificación de las defunciones durante la actual epidemia de covid-19 (16) . el documento señala que las muertes producidas en una epidemia son muertes naturales. no hace falta comunicar al ámbito médico-legal o judicial el fallecimiento. la intervención judicial del médico forense se limitará a los casos de muerte violenta o en los que exista clara sospecha de criminalidad. en esos casos en los que la investigación de la muerte corresponde al ámbito medico-legal, el hecho de presentar una pcr sars-cov-2 positiva indica un dato de interés epidemiológico, que quizá deba tenerse en cuenta como factor agravante si la muerte se produce de forma diferida al hecho traumático, pero esa posible concausa corresponde analizarla al profesional forense. en el resto de los casos, la certificación de la muerte corresponde a los médicos asistenciales con independencia de que trabajen en un ámbito público o privado, en la misma línea de lo recogido en otros países de nuestro entorno (21, 22) . si previamente señalábamos que ante el fallecimiento de una persona se debe priorizar el ahorro de sufrimiento a los familiares, por delante de las dudas legales no razonables a la hora de la certificación, humanizando el trato en unas circunstancias de padecimiento emocional tan intensas (11) , en circunstancias como las vividas en esta pandemia este principio se hace mas necesario que nunca.el documento del cgcom establecía dos escenarios a la hora de certificar muertes covid-19. el primero se refería a aquellos en los que no existe confirmación analítica, pero hay clínica compatible con la enfermedad. en estas circunstancias se recomendaba certificar como covid-19 no confirmado o sospecha de infección por coronavirus como causa fundamental. y como causa inmediata se proponía usar "fallo multiorgánico", "distrés respiratorio" o "insuficiencia respiratoria aguda", señalando que podrán reflejarse causas intermedias si las hubiera o se conocieran como "neumonía" "sepsis" o "coagulopatía". el segundo escenario es aquel en el que los casos de covid 19 se han confirmado mediante test de laboratorio. en esos casos, la causa fundamental deberá ser covid-19 confirmado.para cualquiera de los escenarios anteriores, un tema importante es cómo se registra la comorbilidad de los pacientes fallecidos por covid-19 (23, 24) . el documento de la omc señala que en el apartado otros procesos deberán recogerse las patologías o comorbilidades que conllevan un mayor riesgo de desarrollar enfermedad grave si existieran: "enfermedades cardiovasculares" "hipertensión arterial" o "diabetes".en ocasiones se planea la disyuntiva de morir por covid-19 o morir con covid-19, pudiendo resultar complejo determinar si es la enfermedad covid-19 la causante del proceso de la muerte o lo es una patología previa. aquí sólo cabe la reflexión del facultativo que firma el certificado a la vista de los datos de la evolución clínica del paciente fallecido, lo que puede requerir un estudio profundo de su historial médico. en todo caso, el contenido de los cmd-bed es valorado con posterioridad por los profesionales de los registros de mortalidad, permitiendo modificaciones de la causa fundamental tras el estudio de la historia clínica y la comunicación, en su caso, con el profesional que en su momento hubiera certificado el fallecimiento.el documento del cgcom se basaba en la guía internacional de la oms para la certificación del covid-19 que posteriormente se ha modificado en una publicación del 16 de abril de 2020, que recoge ejemplos para la certificación de muertes no covid-19 (25).en cuanto a la codificación de las muertes, la oms establece el código u07.1 para los fallecimientos por covid-19 confirmados mediante estudio analítico y u07.2 para los fallecimientos sin test confirmatorios en los que el diagnostico se basa en criterios clínicos y/o epidemiológicos de covid-19 (probable o sospechoso) (26) .a los efectos de toma de decisiones define y diferencia casos "sospechosos" o "probables", este documento define, en los que sobreviven a la enfermedad, como caso "probable": mientras no exista comunicación telemática puede ser útil establecer procedimientos excepcionales como el que se ha establecido en castilla la mancha (33) . otras propuestas, como la participación de los institutos de medicina legal y ciencias forenses (imlcf) en sistemas específicos de vigilancia de la mortalidad, permitiría conocer en tiempo real los fallecimientos y sus causas en circunstancias tan excepcionales como las vividas. esta participación se sustenta en la supervisión de los cmd-bed que realizan los médicos forenses en funciones de médicos del rc en algunos imlcf en españa. este cpmetido, generalmente circunscrito a los grandes municipios, podría ampliarse al control de los cmd-bed recibidos en todas las oficinas de rc de esa comunidad. así, los imlcf trasladarían diariamente la información de los cmd-bed a los servicios de salud pública de cada comunidad. esta participación, que se ha llevado a cabo de manera exitosa en castilla y león, aportaría un gran valor añadido a los circuitos de notificación habituales.desde el punto de vista práctico, debemos poder contar con suficientes certificados de defunción, certificados a los que se tiene acceso en los com provinciales. ante una situación de pandemia y especialmente con medidas de confinamiento, se deben prever mecanismos de remisión rápidos y sencillos entre los com y los servicios funerarios y/o asistenciales.como conclusión señalamos que la cumplimentación del cmd-bed es un acto médico trascendente, que requiere una valoración integral de la patobiografía del paciente, y que ayuda a humanizar el trato a las familias en circunstancias de padecimiento emocional intensas. se debe mejorar los métodos de comunicación de la mortalidad estableciendo la posibilidad de certificación telemática. en circunstancias de epidemias y pandemias es necesario que se emitan recomendaciones claras sobre la certificación por parte de organismos oficiales y establecer, si no es posible la comunicación telemática, circuitos más ágiles que permitan conocer la mortalidad en tiempo real. for patients with life-threatening or severely debilitating disease, the wait for approval is simply too long, and can both abolish hope for those who diseases will be quickly fatal, and lead to sustained or even permanent disability for those whose diseases linger but are without effective proven therapies.spurred by patient advocacy during the early days of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids) epidemic in the late 1980s, and facilitated by subsequent legislative efforts over the next 20 years, regulatory initiatives permit the fda to release drugs for use in individual patients through expanded access (ea) inds (4, 5) , in many cases allowing emergency treatment with nonapproved drugs within hours of application, and nonemergency treatment within an average of 4 days (6) . further, most states have enacted so-called "right to try" legislation, permitting "compassionate use" of investigational drugs by individual patients through applications directly to the manufacturer (6) .it should be noted that although the terms "compassionate use" or "preapproval access" are often used informally to refer to the use of an investigational drug to treat a patient outside of a clinical trial, these terms are not defined or described in fda regulations, which simply refer to expanded access to investigational drugs.the call for ea is not limited to individual patients.advocacy organizations have pressed for groups of patients with rare and/or "orphan" diseases, for example, to be able to access promising new therapies prior to their approval. indeed, social media is increasingly becoming a consumer/patient advocacy tool for implementing fda regulatory changes and promoting access to investigational therapeutics (7) .in addition, once a drug has completed phase 3 testing and is awaiting approval, patients who have benefited from in-trial treatments may want continued therapy, and such use requires some form of "bridging approval" from the fda to allow potentially large groups of patients to continue treatment while final fda approval is pending.a previous review discussed individual patient emergency and nonemergency access to investigational drugs (6) . this review will focus on fda ea for intermediate-sized groups of patients (the "intermediate-sized ind") and ea for entire classes of patients (the "widespread treatment use" ind), as well as emergency release of investigational drugs and biologics for use in public health emergencies.releasing investigational new drugs to individual patients who are facing certain death or disability seems to be a relatively uncomplicated decision, but allowing ea to entire groups of patients for treatment with an investigational new drug presents more complex regulatory, logistical, and ethical challenges for scientists, commercial entities, and the fda. the current regulatory process from ind filing to drug approval has evolved and includes not only the fda's historical primary mission of ensuring patient safety, but also, since the latter half of the 20th century, the newer mission of ensuring that marketed drugs are actually efficacious for their advertised/approved use. ea for a single patient may not present much of a challenge to the assertion that a drug's benefits outweigh the risks, because as presumably the patient requesting compassionate use faces an otherwise dismal clinical future, taking even significant risks with a new drug still presents potential benefits to a patient without other options.early in a drug's regulatory pathway, however, it is not usually possible to ensure that a drug has a reasonable risk/benefit ratio for all patients, including those in the early stages of disease.drug companies face bigger issues when the seeker of ea is a group of patients or an entire class of patients.before marketing, manufacture of the drug for clinical studies is nearly an "all cost" proposition for the commercial entity; the drug cannot be marketed to cover its costs. thus, companies generally only manufacture sufficient quantities (plus a small margin) to cover the requirements of clinical studies, rather than devote resources to manufacturing large quantities of a drug which has a <10% chance of ever making it to market (1, 2) . the fda approval process begins with the filing of an investigational new drug (ind). making the drug available to groups or classes of patients who might then deplete the supply of drug for clinical studies could compromise the very research that would more completely disclose a drug's risks and benefits; thus, it could possibly impede full market approval that would make the drug more widely available.companies have also expressed concern about how data from such "compassionate use" may be applied in the approval process. for cmv infection (9) . later studies also showed that ganciclovir patients were living longer (10).the fda refused approval of ganciclovir for treatment of cmv retinitis, because they had no animal studies for that use, nor significant human placebocontrolled trials on which to base a marketing application. many questioned whether the use of ganciclovir was wise, or safe (11, 12) . but, because of ganciclovir's known efficacy, it became paradoxically impossible to carry out human controlled trials, because such trials are only ethically justifiable if investigators are honestly uncertain about whether net positive benefits over placebo exists (13) . furthermore, neither patients nor doctors were willing to risk assignment to placebo and further loss of eyesight after the results were published.syntex then sought approval to study ganciclovir for treatment of cmv colitis, knowing that once marketing approval of the drug was obtained, fda rules would allow "off-label" use for retinitis (14) . at this time, ea of nonapproved drugs for treatment of more than 1 patient at a time is achievable only through the fda, in contrast with access for individual patients, which technically can be legally obtained without the fda by applying to the manufacturer directly (6) . as with individual ea inds, specific conditions for group patient access apply: 1) the patients must have a serious or immediately life-threatening disease or condition with no comparable therapy or satisfactory alternative therapy;2) the potential benefit must justify the potential risks of the treatment; and 3) providing the treatment must not compromise or interfere with the ongoing fda drug development program, such as by critically depleting a limited supply of investigational drug that is also needed for an ongoing study or a future study that is in the planning stages (4).an "immediately life-threatening condition or disease" is defined by the fda as "a stage of disease in which there is reasonable likelihood that death will occur within a matter of months or in which premature death is likely without early treatment." a serious disease or condition is defined as being "associated with morbidity that has substantial impact on day-to-day functioning." furthermore, while short-lived or self-limited morbidity will usually not be a sufficient qualifying condition, the morbidity "need not be irreversible, provided it is persistent or recurrent." the fda states that whether a condition is serious or not "is a matter of clinical judgment, based on its impact on such factors as survival, day-to-day functioning, or the likelihood that the disease, if left untreated, will progress from a less severe condition to a more serious one" (15) . and other animal species such as cats, armadillos, guinea pigs, swine and ferrets in which thalidomide had been tested, teratogenic effects had been induced only occasionally" (18) . in fact, when human birth defects began to appear in the offspring of women who had ingested thalidomide during pregnancy as a sedative and to treat nausea, researchers pointed out that thalidomide had failed to demonstrate teratogenicity in rats, and at first insisted that thalidomide could not be the culprit.in germany, where the drug was first developed, thalidomide was held to be so safe that no prescription was required for its use, it was advertised for use in pregnant women (19) , and the drug company distributed free samples to its factory employees (18, 19) . given the most severe rating for drugs that contribute to fetal deformities, and for drugs whose risks prioritizing those who should receive treatment, such as women and children (36) . the fact that the treatment was made available to 2 u.s. citizens and not to africans, who comprised most of its victims, engendered anger over the social justice of such decisions, providing, as enserink (35) points out, a tragic validation to the satirical yet somewhat prophetic paper that had appeared in the onion only weeks before titled "experts: ebola vaccine at least 50 white people away" (37) . as of now, 12 products have been approved under the animal rule, 7 of which were issued quickly after the guidance was published ( table 3 there is a reasonably well-understood pathophysiological mechanism of the toxicity of the toxic substance and its prevention or substantial reduction by the product.the effect is demonstrated in more than 1 animal species expected to react with a response predictive for humans, unless the effect is demonstrated in a single animal species that represents a sufficiently well-characterized animal model for predicting the response in humans.the animal study endpoint is clearly related to the desired benefit in humans, generally the enhancement of survival or prevention of major morbidity.the data or information on the kinetics and pharmacodynamics of the product or other relevant data or information, in animals and humans, allows selection of an effective dose in humans. veränderungskrise: hierbei handelt es sich um krisen, die durch schlecht gemanagte veränderungen (z. b. fusionen) hervorgerufen werden können. ein gutes "change-management" gehört für jedes unternehmen zum pflichtprogrammin der vergangenheit bzw. gegenwart haben sich folgende branchen als besonders krisenanfällig gezeigt:gesundheit/pharma chemie lebensmittel energie fleischerzeugung versicherungen/banken luftfahrt automobil aufgrund der globalisierung und schnelllebigkeit unserer industriegesellschaft kann eine unternehmenskrise aber auch jede andere branche jederzeit treffen.die ursachen und wechselwirkungen, die zu einer unternehmenskrise führen können, sind komplex und lassen sich in der regel auf die summe verschiedener interner und externer ereignisse und entwicklungen zurückführen. unternehmenskrisen können entstehen durch: zahlreiche beispiele aus der vergangenheit haben aufgezeigt, dass ereignisse mit krisenpotenzial erst durch die medien zu krisen gemacht wurden. nur wenige unternehmen verfügen jedoch über professionelle pläne, die auch den aspekt der krisenkommunikation berücksichtigen. fehler bei der kommunikation können ein kritisches ereignis drastisch verschlimmern. primäres ziel der krisenkommunikation ist die aufklärung der öffentlichkeit und der medien und der direkt betroffenen gruppen bezüglich der krise. des weiteren versucht das unternehmen, der öffentlichkeit und den medien zu vermitteln, dass es alles mögliche unternimmt, um größere schäden abzuwenden und die situation wieder unter kontrolle zu bekommen (abb. 10.4).öffentlichkeitsarbeit während der krise:information wird sofort und ohne verzögerung weitergeben innerhalb der ersten zwei stunden eine pressekonferenz einberufen und das sofort ankündigen informationsstrom nicht abbrechen lassen ( gerade die erste information der medien und somit der öffentlichkeit innerhalb der ersten stunde benötigt eine möglichst hohe effizienz und effektivität. kommunikationsmaßnahmen bzw. -instrument müssen perfekt aufeinander abgestimmt eingesetzt werden. alleine daraus ergibt sich, dass die krisenkommunikation im vorfeld proaktiv vorbereitet werden muss. oft ist es sinnvoll, sich dafür mit profis in verbindung zu setzen. eine möglichkeit der optimalen abstimmung der einzelnen instrumente ist die orientierung an den sechs krisen-w's:was ist passiert und was wird unternommen? wer wird informiert bzw. einbezogen? wie kann das vertrauen erhalten bzw. wiedererlangt werden? wann wird die öffentlichkeit informiert? warum kam es zur krise? wo wird stellung genommen? i tipp eine effektive und effiziente krisenkommunikation ist unbedingt erforderlich und sollte im vorfeld von profis vorbereitet werden!leider reicht es nicht mehr aus, nur finanztechnische kennzahlen zur früherkennung von unternehmenskrisen heranzuziehen. immer mehr unternehmen realisieren, dass die traditionelle krisenprävention den gestiegenen ansprüchen nicht mehr genügt, wie auch zahlreiche studien belegen. angesichts der härter werdenden wettbewerbsbedingungen macht es sinn, auch mehr aktivitäten in die "technische" krisenprävention zu investieren. hierzu gehören insbesondere das durchspielen von "worst-case"-szenarien, das aufzeigen von bottle necks in der produktion, die kontinuierliche durchführung angemessener instandhaltungsmaßnahmen sowie die einführung eines issue profiling für arbeitsmittel. in diesem zusammenhang muss das zentrale präventionsinstrument "gefährdungsbeurteilung" gemäß arbeitsschutzgesetz (arbschg), betriebssicherheitsverordnung (betrsichv) und weiterer verordnungen besser von den unternehmen angenommen und genutzt werden. hier geht es noch um potenzielle krisen. in dieser phase befindet sich das unternehmen noch im normalzustand und es gibt noch keine in den unternehmensintern zu bestimmenden kennzahlen wahrnehmbaren krisensymptome. die zentrale aufgabe des antizipativen krisenmanagements ist die gedankliche vorbereitung auf mögliche krisen. man muss hier den mut haben das undenkbare zu denken. sehr häufig ist hier im vorfeld ein geeignetes "issues management" hilfreich.das präventive krisenmanagement bezieht sich auf die zweite phase des krisenprozesses, der latenten unternehmenskrise. die krisensymptome sind teilweise noch verdeckt, die kennzahlen liefern aber bereits den erhärteten verdacht, dass bereits eine gefährdung der erfolgspotenziale vorliegt.die krise ist bereits eingetreten und das unternehmen ist sich dessen auch bewusst. sie ist aber noch beherrschbar. die zentrale aufgabe ist die erfolgreiche zurückschlagung und die daraus folgende bewältigung der unternehmenskrise.dies ist die letzte phase, die krise nicht mehr beherrschbar und führt zur katastrophe. es kann zu einer möglichen liquidation des unternehmens kommen.tipp alle organisationseinheiten eines unternehmens haben die erforderlichen maßnahmen zu ergreifen, um den eintritt einer krise zu verhindern (krisenprävention) bzw. beim eintreten einer krise negative auswirkungen für das unternehmen so weit wie möglich einzugrenzen! eines der instrumente des antizipatives krisenmanagements ist das "issues management" dies ist bereits seit den 80er jahren des vorherigen jahrhunderts in den usa ein wichtiges management-thema und findet seit ende der 90er jahre im europäischen raum ebenfalls anwendung.diese bezeichnung "issue" entstammt dem angelsächsischen sprachraum. eine wörtliche übersetzung ins deutsche wäre "thema, angelegenheit etc.", darunter versteht man in diesem zusammenhang insbesondere ein thema öffentlichen interesses mit hohem konfliktpotenzial. issues management dient als früherkennungssystem für schwache signale aus dem unternehmensumfelds.der "vater" des konzepts, der amerikanische pr-berater william howard chase, definiert issues-management um 1976 herum wie folgt:issues management is the capacity to understand, mobilize, coordinate and direct all strategic and policy planning functions and all public affairs/public relations skills toward achievement of one objective: meaningful participation in creation of public policy that affects personal and institutional destiny.durch das "issues management" hat ein unternehmen oder organisation also die möglichkeit, schnell, flexibel und vor allem sensibel auf jede nachricht und entwicklung zu reagieren, die für die identität und wahrnehmung der unternehmensmarke wichtig ist und bei nichtbeachtung krisenpotenzial entwickeln kann.das issue management lässt sich dabei in fünf phasen unterteilen:"scanning": die identifikation von issues als grundlegende und somit fast schon wichtigste phase "issues monitoring": analyse und beobachtung der öffentlichen meinung und medien "strategic issue diagnosis": die strategische prüfung und einstufung "message formating": wahl der grundlegenden reaktion/antwort auf strategische issues. hierbei kann noch mal zwischen einem proaktivem und reaktivem vorgehen unterschieden werden "incorporation into strategic plan": integration in die strategische planungissues durchlaufen im öffentliche fokus einen lebenszyklus: je weiter das issue in seinem lebenszyklus voranschreitet, desto geringer wird gleichzeitig die einflussmöglichkeit des betroffenen unternehmens. in den usa gilt das issues management mittlerweile als selbstverständlichkeit, in deutschland hingegen hinkt man dieser entwicklung noch hinterher. über geeignete und im notfall auch sofort zur verfügung stehende dokumentationen (verfahrenanweisungen, notfallpläne, gefahren-abwehr-pläne (gap)), einer entsprechend ausgelegten infrastruktur, spezifischer instrumente und auch mit hilfe von personelle ressourcen muss ein notfallmanagementsystem in den das krisenmanagement implementiert und manifestiert werden. elektronische, softwaregesteuerte notfallmanagementsysteme können den mitarbeitern helfen schnell zu reagieren. es muss aber unbedingt beachtet werden, das die it von der energieversorgung abhängig und diese im notfall ausfallen kann! das notfallmanagement muss den mitarbeitern also auch in ausgedruckter version zur verfügung stehen.um auf notfälle vorbereitet zu sein, empfehlen sich regelmäßige notfallübungen und räumungsübungen. diese können neben dem sicherstellen des prinzipiellen funktionierens des notfallmanagements auch erkenntnisse liefern, welche optimierungspotenziale noch ungenutzt sind. dabei sollten die übungsszenarien so realitätsnah wie möglich geplant und durchgeführt werden, um alle parameter des notfallplans zu überprüfen -die funktionalität und effektivität von organisatorischen, personellen und materiellen vorkehrungen aber auch die qualifikationen des einsatz-und hilfspersonals.ein typisches notfallszenario ist ein großbrand im betrieb.anlagen und gebäude können nach einem brandschaden mit mehr oder weniger großem aufwand instand gesetzt, zerstörte betriebs-und arbeitsmittel neu beschafft werden. die beeinträchtigung der gesundheit oder gar der verlust von menschlichem leben durch den brand und seine nebenwirkungen wiegen dagegen ungleich schwerer als der sachschaden.nach angaben des gesamtverbandes der deutschen versicherungswirtschaft e. v. ergibt sich für großschäden in der industriellen sachversicherung folgende statistik der brandschäden für die jahre 1980 bis 2003 (tab. 10.1).in der obigen aufstellung wurden nur schäden mit einem schadenaufwand von mindestens 500.000 c (bis 2001 1 mio. dm) berücksichtigt. zwar ist die anzahl der großschadensereignisse tendenziell rückläufig, jedoch stieg im gleichen zeitraum die durchschnittliche schadenssumme deutlich an. sachschäden durch brände wurden in der vergangenheit zwar seltener, dafür aber auch deutlich teurer. aus praktischen erwägungen sollten alle oben aufgeführten eventuell auftretenden gefährdungen separat aufgelistet und bewertet werden.die anforderungen an die struktur der flucht-und rettungswege sowie der dazugehörigen pläne ergeben sich aus der technischen regel für arbeitsstätten (asr) a2.3 "fluchtwege und notausgänge, flucht-und rettungsplan" vom 16. august 2007 und sind meistens (sollten) bereits in der planungsphase von architekten und genehmigungsbehörden berücksichtigt worden.grundsätzlich ist immer dann eine sicherheitsbeleuchtung vorzusehen, wenn das arbeitsstättenrecht oder das baurecht diese vorschreiben. darüber hinaus kann die gefährdungsbeurteilung weitere anwendungsfälle sowohl für die sicherheitsbeleuchtung als auch bodennahe sicherheitsleitsysteme ergeben. bei möglicher verrauchung ist im allgemeinen ein bodennahes sicherheitsleitsystem erforderlich. dieses kann grundsätzlich entweder elektrisch oder auch lang nachleuchtend ausgeführt werden. die gefährdungsermittlung kann auch ergeben, dass kombinationen unterschiedlicher sicherheitsleitsysteme erforderlich sind.im allgemeinen kann davon ausgegangen werden, dass bei hoher personenbelegungsdichte der einsatz eines elektrisch betriebenen systems vorteilhaft ist. bei geringer personenbelegungsdichte kann ein lang nachleuchtendes system ausreichen.die anforderungen an sicherheitsleitsysteme ergeben sich für den landbereich aus der normenreihe din 67 510 (1-4) "deutsche industrie norm für langnachleuchtende pigmente und produkte", bgv a 8 "sicherheits-und gesundheitsschutzkennzeichnung am arbeitsplatz" und bgr 216 "optische sicherheitsleitsysteme".folgende anforderungen müssen von einem sicherheitsleitsystem grundsätzlich erfüllt werden:zuverlässig -"funktioniert" auch bei stromausfall sichtbar -auch bei starker verqualmung deutlich erkennbar und auch nach vielen stunden noch zu erkennen lückenlos -durchgehende markierung bis zum nächstgelegenen notausgang insbesondere in sonderbauten mit einer vielzahl von personen ist in der regel ein zweiter baulicher rettungsweg erforderlich. die rettung einer vielzahl von personen über das rettungsgerät der feuerwehr ist nicht in angemessener zeit möglich.um die sich im gebäude befindlichen personen in die lage zu versetzen, sich schnell und sicher orientieren zu können, müssen flucht-und rettungspläne erstellt werden, die eine möglichst einfache darstellung der baulichen gegebenheiten sowie eine unproblematische lesbarkeit aufweisen. grundlage der flucht-und rettungspläne ist die arbeitsstättenverordnung (arbstättv).auch wenn es derzeit nicht direkt gesetzlich vorgeschrieben ist, hat sich in der praxis die bestellung von brandschutzbeauftragten bewährt. der brandschutzbeauftragte sollte eine mehrjährige praxis im vorbeugenden brandschutz besitzen und/oder eine ausreichende ausbildung im vorbeugenden brandschutz haben. vergleichbar den fachkräften für arbeitssicherheit sollte der brandschutzbeauftragte unmittelbar der leitung des werkes oder betriebes unterstellt sein, für dessen brandschutz er zuständig ist. zu allen den brandschutz betreffenden fragen des unternehmens -auch bei der planung -sollte er gehört werden.zu seinen aufgaben und pflichten gehört das erkennen von gefahren sowie ihre beurteilung. er hat dafür zu sorgen, dass sie beseitigt und schäden möglichst gering gehalten werden. unter den bedingungen, die bei einem brand herrschen, kann aus unbedenklichen stoffen, gelagerten gegenständen, arbeitsmitteln (z. b. kopierer) oder bauteilen eine vielfalt an verbrennungsprodukten und rückständen entstehen, deren gefahrenpotenzial nur sehr schwierig einzuschätzen ist. mit den daraus folgenden anforderungen an den umweltschutz, die sicherheit und den gesundheitsschutz der personen, die die sanierungsarbeiten an den brandstellen durchführen, befasst sich die gdv-richtlinien zur brandschadensanierung -vds 2357 (05). die vds schadenverhütung ist ein unternehmen des gesamtverbandes der deutschen versicherungswirtschaft (gdv). die richtlinien vds 2357 wurde im oktober 2007 neu strukturiert und grundlegend überarbeitet. sie berücksichtigen die vorgehensweisen und schutzkonzepte der gefahrstoff-und biostoffverordnung sowie der zugeordneten technischen regeln zur gefährdungsbeurteilung (trgs 400 "gefährdungsbeurteilung für tätigkeiten mit gefahrstoffen", trba 400 "handlungsanleitung zur gefährdungsbeurteilung und für die unterrichtung der beschäftigten bei tätigkeiten mit biologischen arbeitsstoffen", etc.) und die festlegung von schutzmaßnahmen. zusätzlich berücksichtigen die richtlinien die aufgaben und verantwortlichkeiten, die sich aus der baustellen-verordnung und der bgr 128 "arbeiten in kontaminierten bereichen" ergeben. demnach entspricht die richtlinien vds 2357 (05) einer der ersten schritte ist die unverzügliche meldung des schadenfalles an den zuständigen versicherer. insbesondere bei bränden mit höherem gefahrenpotenzial kann dies entscheidenden einfluss auf die gesamte schadenabwicklung haben. diese frühzeitige meldung des schadenfalles versetzt den versicherer in die lage, rechtzeitig zu reagieren und dadurch u. a. sicherzustellen, dass eine rasche und qualifizierte beurteilung der schadensituation vor ort durch den versicherer veranlasst werden kann (abb. 10.9).vor beginn der sanierungsarbeiten sind unterschiedliche bewertungen vorzunehmen und entscheidungen zu treffen. in der regel hat der betroffene hierzu professionelle hilfe wie etwa durch den versicherer, durch sachverständige oder sanierungsunternehmen nötig. nur mit dieser hilfe kann das unternehmen schnellstmöglich wieder die produktion aufnehmen und den verlust von vertrauen und einen imageschaden verhindern. letztendlich könnte dies auch zum verlust der kunden und somit der wirtschaftlichen grundlage führen.auf basis der erstbegehung durch die o. a. experten erfolgt die einteilung der brandstelle in die gefahrenbereiche. in allen betrieben und auf baustellen muss erste-hilfe-material bereitgehalten werden. geeignetes erste-hilfe-material ist z. b. im kleinen verbandkasten nach din 13157 sowie im großen verbandkasten nach din 13169 enthalten. in abhängigkeit von der betriebsart und zahl der versicherten gelten für die ausstattung mit verbandkästen die in der folgenden tabelle aufgeführten richtwerte.die verbandkästen sollen auf die arbeitsstätten so verteilt sein, dass sie von ständigen arbeitsplätzen höchstens 100 m wegstrecke oder höchstens eine geschosshöhe entfernt sind. sie sollen überall dort aufbewahrt werden, wo die arbeitsbedingungen dies erfordern. im zuge der globalisierung verstärken immer mehr unternehmen ihr auslandsgeschäft. die zahl der auslandseinsätze der mitarbeiter nimmt ständig zu. jedoch werden die risiken, die damit verbunden sind, häufig einfach ausgeblendet. es wird zu oft leichtfertig mit dem höchsten gut eines unternehmens, den mitarbeitern, umgegangen, obwohl die risiken ständig zunehmen. unternehmen, die mitarbeiter ins ausland entsenden, müssen regionsabhängig stets mit naturereignissen wie erdbeben, seuchen wie sars, vogelgrippe oder dengue-fieber, terror und kriminellen akten wie bombenanschlägen oder entführungen rechnen. erstaunlich sei auch, dass unternehmen sich häufig nur um das visum und die schutzimpfungen des entsendungspersonals kümmern, nicht aber um eine umfassende sicherheitsvorsorge. dabei umfasst ein gutes basis-schutzpaket weitaus mehr aspekte. die richtige personalauswahl vor der entsendung, die arbeitsmedizinische vorsorgeuntersuchung incl. reisemedizinischer beratung, die einweisung in das jeweilige land und dessen landesspezifischen gefahren, die unterstützung bei der unterkunftssuche, die auswahl geeigneter kontaktpersonen vor ort und eine gesicherte ansprechbarkeit der unternehmens rund um die uhr müssen unbedingt berücksichtigt werden. für den ernstfall sind jedoch noch zu wenig unternehmen professionell vorbereitet. sie verlassen sich offensichtlich nur auf die geschicke des außenministeriums.die pandemie-planung hat inzwischen auch viele betriebe erreicht. für die weltgesundheitsorganisation ist der ausbruch einer grippe-pandemie nur eine frage der zeit. experten rechnen damit, dass in diesem fall rund 30 % der arbeitnehmer ausfallen. eine pandemie ist eine weltumspannende epidemie. erste pandemien sind bereits seit der antoninischen pest (ca. 165-167 n. chr.) tatsächlich belegt. neben einer durch influenzaviren verursachten pandemie zählt z. b. auch aids zu dieser kategorie, das (seit 1980) bisher etwa 25 mio. todesopfer forderte. im 20. jahrhundert ereigneten sich drei influenzapandemien: die "spanische grippe" 1918-1920 (bis zu 50 mio. tote), die "asiatische grippe" 1957 (ca. 1 mio. tote) und die "hong kong grippe" 1968 mit etwa 700.000 toten.basis einer rationalen planung ist ein gutes verständnis der saisonalen, aviären und pandemischen influenza. die trennung dieser entitäten ist wichtig, gerade weil sie in der öffentlichkeit nicht immer klar vollzogen wird. seit 1978 zirkulieren viren zweier influenza a subtypen (h1 und h3) sowie des typs b in der menschlichen bevölkerung und rufen die saisonale grippe hervor. der anteil der virustypen bzw. subtypen an den influenza-erkrankungen schwankt von jahr zu jahr, die saison 2005/06 war z. b. von influenza b-viren dominiert und relativ schwach, während in der saison 2004/05 influenza a/h3n2-viren vorherrschten und eine viel stärkere (und für das gesundheitssystem folgenreichere) grippewelle verursachten. typischerweise baut sich eine saisonale welle, häufig im süden beginnend, in wenigen wochen auf, bevor ganz deutschland erfasst ist.die hierbei handele es sich um optimistische schätzungen, da man hierbei von einer pathogenität der "honk kong-grippe" ausgegangen ist und nicht von der höheren pathogenität der "spanischen grippe".welcher betrieb kann einen so hohen ausfall im bereich human ressources verkraften? wie viele betriebe haben sich darauf vorbereitet? wer denkt auch an die angehörigen seiner mitarbeiter? kein familienvater wird in dieser situation mit seinen gedanken im betrieb sein wenn er überhaupt zur arbeit kommt (siehe anlage 2). abb. 10.10 chancenpotenziale bei unternehmenskrisen. (pachurka und siegmann 2007) (bcp)) ist als "geschäftsaufrechterhaltungs-und -fortsetzungsplanung" bestandteil des risikomanagements und indirekt aus dem kontrag abzuleiten (keitsch 2004) . hiefür sind präventiv im rahmen des bcm betriebsaufrechterhaltungs-und -fortsetzungsprozeduren zu entwickeln und zu trainieren um die unternehmenswerte proaktiv zu schützen.im bereich des bcm gibt es einen internationalen standard, den iso/pas 22399:2007-12 "societal security -guideline for incident preparedness and operational continuity management" (sicherheit und schutz des gemeinwesens -leitfaden für planung, vorbereitung und operationelle kontinuität), der einige hilfestellungen bietet (abb. 10.11).viele der betriebsprozesse erstrecken sich entlang der logistischen wertschöpfungskette (supply chain): die besonderen eigenschaften des (gesamt-)systems "supply chain" ergeben sich dabei aus dem spezifischen dynamischen zusammenwirken der lieferkettenglieder.der begriff des "supply chain management (scm)" wurde anfang der 80er jahre des vergangenen jahrhunderts in den usa geprägt. hier entstand der gedanke der integration von verschiedenen unternehmensaktivitäten. in den 90er jahren rückte der begriff vermehrt in den bereich der logistik. aus der perspektive des scm folgt die logistik einem prozessorientierten ansatz. übersetzen lässt sich scm mit dem management von versorgungsketten, lieferketten bzw. wertschöpfungsketten. daran wird sofort erkennbar, welches krisenpotenzial hier zu finden ist. durch das "issues management" hat ein unternehmen oder organisation also die möglichkeit, schnell, flexibel und vor allem sensibel auf jede nachricht und entwicklung zu reagieren, die für die identität und wahrnehmung der unternehmensmarke wichtig ist und bei nichtbeachtung krisenpotenzial entwickeln kann.das issue management lässt sich dabei in fünf phasen unterteilen:"scanning": die identifikation von issues als grundlegende und somit fast schon wichtigste phase "issues monitoring": analyse und beobachtung der öffentlichen meinung und medien (dazu zählen mittlerweile natürlich auch die "social media") "strategic issue diagnosis": die strategische prüfung und einstufung "message formating": wahl der grundlegenden reaktion/antwort auf strategische issues. hierbei kann noch mal zwischen einem proaktivem und reaktivem vorgehen unterschieden werden "incorporation into strategic plan": integration in die strategische planungissues durchlaufen im öffentliche fokus einen lebenszyklus: je weiter das issue in seinem lebenszyklus voranschreitet, desto geringer wird gleichzeitig die einflussmöglichkeit des betroffenen unternehmens. in den usa gilt das issues management mittlerweile als selbstverständlichkeit, in deutschland hingegen hinkt man dieser entwicklung noch hinterher.im zeitalter des internets bieten spezialisierte firmen z. t. bereits ein professionelles "online-monitoring" an. sie durchsuchen dabei regelmäßig im auftrag ihres kunden das internet nach bestimmten begriffen und begriffskombinationen, die in den interessenbereich des kunden fallen und können so frühzeitig auf entwicklungen mit krisenpotenzial hinweisen.nach angaben des pr-trendmonitor september 2010 (faktenkontor gmbh) führten 50 bis 60 % der pressestellen bzw. agenturen bereits ein regelmäßiges webmonitoring für ihre unternehmen bzw. kunden durch. die gleiche studie ergab, dass die pressestellen und agenturen die "social media allgemein" als aktuelle top-no.-1-herausforderung auch für sich selbst ansahen.auch kleine und mittlere unternehmen sollten zumindest die regionalen medien und fachzeitschriften ihrer branche regelmäßig beobachten. es ist kein großer aufwand sich von einem mitarbeiter des unternehmens einen wöchentlichen pressespiegel zusammenzustellen zu lassen zu allen relevanten themen, die das unternehmen betreffen.heutzutage hat fast jedes unternehmen eine eigene internetpräsenz (abb. 10.13). viele nutzen diese präsenzen auch, um in krisensituationen schnell reagieren zu können. krisen laufen fast immer unter einem enormen zeitdruck ab. unternehmen sollten daher schon im "normalzustand" im rahmen ihrer krisenprävention z. b. so genannte "dark-sites" vorbereiten (abb. 10.14).hierbei handelt es sich um webseiten mit hintergrundinformationen über das unternehmen und seine produkte, die im krisenfall freigeschaltet werden. der wert solcher "dark sites" ergibt sich aus unterschiedlichen aspekten. einerseits können sich journalisten, anwohner und die öffentlichkeit unmittelbar über die ereignisse informieren, andererseits dokumentiert das unternehmen durch die schnelle reaktion im internet, dass es die ereignisse ernst nimmt. der verdacht, etwas würde verharmlost und vertuscht, kommt somit gar nicht erst auf. auch bekommen die journalisten "futter", sie brauchen sich keine informationen ausdenken, sondern können auf fertige texte und bilder zurückgreifen."klassiker" wie die suchmaschine "google" beschreiten in der krisenkommunikation neue interaktive wege: nach dem verheerenden erdbeben in japan wurden etliche menschen vermisst und mit dem "person finder" konnte vielen geholfen werden, informationen über den aufenthaltsort oder gesundheitszustand der vermissten in erfahrung zu bringen (http://google.org/personfinder/global/home.html). dieses beispiel zeigt, welche innovativen möglichkeiten sich auch im katastrophenschutz durch die neuen anwendungen bieten.zwischenfälle, die betriebsabläufe stören oder unternehmen schädigen, treten häufig auf. notfälle ereignen sich seltener, katastrophen sind die ausnahme. außergewöhnliche ereignisse können ein unternehmen jederzeit treffen. sie können plötzlich eintreten, oder sich langsam anbahnen. man kann sich von ihnen überraschen lassen, oder man kann glauben, darauf vorbereitet zu sein. die auswirkungen können in beiden fällen verheerend sein.viele unternehmen sind auf unerwartete ereignisse nicht ausreichend vorbereitet. beim eintritt eines ernstfalls sind nicht nur technische anlagen und die funktionsfähigkeit des unternehmens bedroht sondern auch das leben von menschen. zwischenfälle, notfälle und katastrophen wie zum beispiel naturereignisse, sabotageakte oder terroranschläge treten in unterschiedlicher ausprägung, zu jeder tages-und nachtzeit sowie meist vollkommen unerwartet auf. nicht immer kann man alle ursachen vorhersehen, wohl aber deren folgen für das unternehmen. die auswirkungen von notfällen und katastrophen können für unternehmen erheblich sein und im schlimmsten fall zu einer existenzbedrohenden krise führen. ein krisenmanagement ist optimal, um sich und seine mitarbeiter bereits im vorfeld auf solch außergewöhnliche situationen vorzubereiten. ziel ist es, ausfallwahrscheinlichkeiten zu reduzieren und handlungsfähigkeiten zu gewährleisten. the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic challenged program leaders, as stewards of trainee well-being and the educational mission, 1 to respond rapidly to changes in healthcare delivery, protect trainee safety, and transform educational activities. the threat of infection, insufficient personal protective equipment (ppe), shelter-in-place and physical distancing measures, and the barrage of (sometimes conflicting) information disrupted personal and professional life. face-to-face encounters with patients, ambulatory visits, and elective procedures were limited requiring adoption of telemedicine. some trainees were removed from clinical service while others were deployed to care for adult patients. the pandemic demanded that we, as program leaders, prioritize and address myriad threats to our trainees' well-being.using a well-being framework allows program leadership to systematically address trainee well-being needs. in this paper, we adapt maslow's needs framework to systematically address trainee well-being during the covid-19 pandemic. 2, 3 transforming education to effectively respond to trainee well-being needs requires leadership. we use kotter's 8 step change management model as an example of a framework to effectively lead change. 4maslow identified 5 fundamental human needs: physiological, safety, belonging, esteem, and selfactualization. 2 we modified maslow's framework to identify the needs of trainees during the covid-19 pandemic ( table 1) . table 1 shows examples of potential interventions to meet trainee well-being needs on the program, institution, and extra-institutional level.we defined physiologic needs during the covid-19 pandemic to include food, sleep, physical health, mental health, and childcare.the accreditation council for graduate medical education (acgme) requires access to food while on duty. 5 food service closures, physical distancing and infection control measures, time constraints, and expense may limit trainee access to food. provide information to trainees about community provided meals, hospital-sponsored grocery stores, and volunteer networks and advocate for meals for trainees on duty and gift cards for food delivery services.the acgme recognized the importance of adequate rest to protect trainees and patients when it preserved the work hour requirements even for institutions granted stage 3 pandemic status. 6 monitor trainee access to adequate rest, including call rooms and respite lodging.trainees are exposed to and at risk of covid-19 illness and death. 7 screening and rapid access to covid-19 testing for trainees is critical to minimize infection to co-workers and patients. high quality clinical care, isolation policies, and return to work criteria must be provided to trainees with covid-19.track trainee exposures, testing and illness status, communicate the need to leave work at the first signs of illness to minimize the risk to others, and ensure adequate backup plans.trainees are at greater risk of depression, anxiety, insomnia, and distress during the covid-19 pandemic. 8 program leaders play a critical role in monitoring trainees and ensuring access to mental health services (e.g., on-call telehealth mental health providers, employee and family assistance programs, stress and resilience town halls). schedule debriefing of teams, frequent check-ins, and mindfulness activities to help support trainee mental health.school and childcare closings have added to trainee stress. provide trainees with information about state-and institution-supported childcare options. consider flexible scheduling, when possible (e.g., a parenting or newborn elective).threats to safety include sequelae related directly to covid-19 infection as well as loss of routine and stability.concerns about adequate access to ppe are widespread and often exacerbated by conflicting policies and information. 9,10 program leaders and institutions must provide both adequate ppe and training 6 and be notified of any deviations. applying high reliability principles to infection control on an institutional level are critical.accommodating high-risk individuals is important, but challenging, because criteria outlined by the centers for disease control and prevention or institution may not be clear. while pregnancy has not been listed as a risk factor, many program leaders are hesitant to expose their pregnant trainees to covid-19 patients. responses can vary between total removal from face-to-face clinical care to transfer to lower risk environments (e.g. newborn intensive care unit), and may be mandatory or voluntary.the risk of infection that trainees pose to their loved ones and families is an important concern. 9 ensure trainees have access to information about short-and long-term housing for health care workers who have been exposed to or are ill with covid-19, disinfection protocols, showering facilities, and extra scrubs.financial stress on trainees may be compounded by worries about compensation if they fall ill, additional childcare and other expenses, spouses' loss of income or post-graduate positions falling through. be sensitive to financial stressors and provide guidance and resources.shifting schedules, including uncertainty about covering adult patients, challenges trainees' sense of safety. provide, when possible, short-and long-term schedules, including vacations and staffing for covid-19 surges. in this regard, chief residents have played a critical, and often heroic, role during this pandemic.social distancing and cancellation of regular activities create isolation from colleagues, families, and friends which contributes to anxiety and can threaten trainee well-being. 9, 10, 11, 12 social support from program institutions, departments, and programs have adopted virtual technology, email updates, and websites to connect. program leaders have developed web-based group-based learning activities, town halls and meetings, social activities such as games, competitions, and happy hours, and journaling as ways to enhance connection. consider creative ways to create a community for incoming interns in the face of physical distancing.engagement with family and friends is important for trainee wellness. 11, 12 assess this factor as part of trainee check-ins. consider making video-communications (e.g., zoom, cisco webex) more available to trainees to help them connect with families and friends.suspension of program activities, physical distancing, and isolation may limit opportunities for achievement and recognizing accomplishments necessary for building self-esteem.physicians are being recognized world-wide for their dedication and sacrifices. however, those who have not cared for many covid-19 patients may not feel they have earned recognition. be deliberate about incorporating shout-outs, expressions of gratitude, and tokens like gift certificates for trainees and advocate for extra compensation and other recognition from hospitals or departments. encourage expressions of gratitude by trainees to help support well-being. recognizing accomplishments of graduating trainees is challenging but consider personalized gifts and ceremonies that are virtual, comply with physical distancing, or that are rescheduled when rules are relaxed.being sidelined can impact personal and professional identities of trainees, which can be mitigated by engaging trainees in alternative meaningful activities (e.g., clinical, advocacy, scholarship). for those caring for adult patients, adequate supervision and training are key in supporting self-efficacy.collaborate with program leaders in internal medicine, combined medicine-pediatrics, and family medicine to optimize trainee learning climate. training and scripts can help support trainees in communicating with adult patients and their families.maslow defines self-actualization as the "desire for self-fulfillment….to become everything that one is capable of becoming." 2 the pandemic challenged traditional modes of education, but also offered opportunity to innovate. both acgme and american board of pediatrics (abp) responded by waiving some curricular requirements, especially for graduating trainees. however, program leaders are still responsible to ensure proficiency despite abbreviated training. trainees have lost opportunities to network locally and nationally and participate in experiences that might be formative for their career choices. association of pediatric program directors (appd) and council of pediatric subspecialties (cops) provide networking opportunities. in addition, consider developing virtual career mentoring and creating additional opportunities for trainees. ensure adequate mentorship and help trainees build their curriculum vitae (e.g., including abstracts accepted but not presented at national meetings).development of new curricula to address changing educational and healthcare landscapes (e.g., distance learning and mentoring, telehealth) have the potential to positively transform trainee experience.kotter's 8 step change management framework can offer guidance on how to effectively lead change during the covid-19 pandemic: establish a sense of urgency, form a powerful guiding coalition, create a vision, communicate the vision, empower others to act on the vision, plan for and create short-term wins, consolidate improvement and produce more change, and institutionalize new approaches ( table   2 ). 4 while kotter presents his steps as linear, many steps can be iteratively modified.the covid-19 pandemic upends traditional medical education, creating challenges to direct in-person patient care, supervision, and education. clarifying the importance and immensity of these challenges to all stakeholders, both educators and learners, is an important first step. a swot (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats) analysis may help establish a sense of urgency and identify next steps.in addition to program leadership, decide which additional stakeholders should be included. consider including both those making larger clinical (chair) and educational decisions (designated institutionalofficial, vice chair of education), front-line faculty and trainees, and individuals with technical expertise (e.g., in information technology and telemedicine). make it clear to members of the guiding coalition the role they will have in the transformation effort, whether to brainstorm suggestions, develop policies, convince others, and/or model or enact changes.create a shared vision to direct the educational change effort by prioritizing multiple potentially conflicting goals, such as keeping trainees safe, delivering excellent patient care, and educating our next generation of pediatricians. delineate strategies, such as leveraging telemedicine and tele-education, in order to meet set goals.communicate frequently and regularly, utilizing multiple communication modalities. consider consolidating information from multiple sources into a central, on line site and tailoring information to the audience to avoid information overload. acknowledge that plans will change as situations change.consider how to communicate changing information, including being transparent about why changes were made to help stakeholders understand and accept changes.many individuals and institutions recognize the unprecedented disruption in trainee's lives from covid-19 and want to help. provide them with a clear vision and plan for how they could intervene to improve trainee well-being and education. if your vision and strategy include expanding telemedicine and tele-education opportunities, empower faculty to innovate to engage learners remotely. consider ways to minimize obstacles to change, such as providing faculty development in telemedicine and how to actively engage an audience using tele-education. empower faculty to experiment and creatively engage learners. reiterate that 'mistakes' pave the road to success.empower your guiding coalition to experiment and model the way for others. for example, consider scheduling faculty who are most willing to experiment with novel tele-education modalities to lead resident didactics initially. work one-on-one with faculty to ensure success delivering interactive educational conferences utilizing audience-response or virtual small group sessions. recognize faculty who effectively utilize novel ways to engage learners with tele-education.build on momentum created with short-term wins to create further change. consider sharing best practices of how your faculty have engaged with learners remotely. advocate within your institution for changes which could broadly improve the lives of local trainees, such as extra money on meal cards, child care assistance, a larger temporary physician workspace to allow for physical distancing, or temporary housing. advocate within national organizations such as appd and cops for flexibility for programs and trainees to meet acgme, abp, and liaison committee on medical education requirements in light of disruption of education due to covid-19.articulate the relationship between new behaviors and success. for example, consider sharing feedback with all faculty about positive learner responses to specific techniques used to engage learners in distance learning. consider building plans for succession by developing new leaders, such as developing faculty champions for tele-education or telemedicine.using a framework such as maslow's hierarchy allows program leaders to systematically address trainee's needs during and post covid-19. using kotter's framework for leading change allows program leaders to effectively implement changes required to meet trainees' needs. additionally, program leaders can take this opportunity to pause and re-evaluate what is essential during training and how we can continue to improve our education. it is possible that we find that some of the systems of education we develop during the covid-19 pandemic, such as telehealth, tele-education, and ways to stay connected during this era of required physical distancing may be important to continue and expand upon post-covid19. insulin-dependent (type i) diabetes mellitus (iddm) is a metabolic disorder resulting from the lack of endogenous insulin secretion. this is due to a disease process caused by the disappearance of the insulin-producing f3 cells from the pancreatic islets of langerhans (reviewed by gepts and lecompte, 1985) . human iddm and laboratory animal experimental diabetes mellitus are thought to be the result of both genetic and epigenetic components. the genetic component consists of at least one gene in the major histocompatability complex (mhc) that contributes to susceptibility to the disease. for the disease to develop, some epigenetictriggering event must also occur. experimentally, this triggering event can be mimicked by either pharmacologic or infectious agents, including several viruses. the pharmacologic agents are thought to be toxic to the 8 cells, whereas the pathway of disease induction by the viral agents is unknown. evidence has been mounting that iddm has an autoimmune pathogenesis (reviewed by rossini et al., 1985; eisenbarth, 1988) .mhc class ii molecules, normally expressed on the surface of b lymphocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells, play a central role in the immune response by presenting antigen to t helper (tn) cells. the presence of the class ii molecules may be sufficient for antigen presentation in vitro; fibroblasts transfected with the appropriate class ii genes and lipid bilayers incorporating purified class ii molecules can present antigen and activate appropriate t cell responses (malissen et al., 1984; norcross et al., 1984; watts et al., 1984; walden et al., 1985) . whether the class ii molecules are sufficient for th activation in vivo has not been resolved (unanue, 1984) . the class ii genes lie within the i-a and i-e subregions of the h-21 region in mice and within the hla-d region in man and encode heterodimeric molecules composed of a 34 kd a chain and a 28 kd 6 chain.the ectopic expression of class ii mhc molecules on nonimmune cell types has been documented in a variety of autoimmune states (reviewed by pujol-borrell et al., 1986b) . class ii mhc molecules have been found on pancreatic 8 cells taken from newly diagnosed patients with iddm (bottazzo et al., 1985; foulis and farquharson, 1986; foulis et al., 1987) . while the significance of this is unknown, it has been speculated that the class ii expression could cause presentation of self antigens, resulting in immune mediated destruction of the tissue. although the cause of the aberrant class ii expression is not known, it is noteworthy that the lymphokine interferon gamma (ifn-?i) can induce class ii expression on a wide variety of cell types in vitro (reviewed by rosa and fellous, 1984) . however, it is unclear whether ifn-y alone can induce class ii expression on p cells of cultured islets (campbell et al., 1985; campbell et al., 1986; pujocborrell et al., 1986a; wright et al., 1986; pujol-borrell et al., 1987) . ifn-?/ is produced by the host in response to viral and bacterial infections. as opposed to the other interferons, ifn-r is apparently a product only of t lymphocytes and natural killer (nk) cells, possesses unique immunomodulatory properties, and can also affect nonlymphoid tissues.an intriguing potential pathway for autoimmune endocrine disorders has recently been proposed (bottazzo et al., 1983) . briefly, local viral infection or other environmental factors would lead the activation of t cells and subsequent local production of ifn-y. the ifn-y may then induce the expression of class ii mhc molecules not only on normal antigen-presenting cells, but also on local epithelial cells, such as the pancreatic 8 cells. such expression could cause the p cell to act as an antigen-presenting cell, which may then present autoantigens to the host immune system and initiate an autoimmune response.we sought to examine the relevance of these concepts by determining whether the expression of ifn-y or class ii mhc molecules by the pancreatic 8 cells in a laboratory animal would lead to iddm. to investigate these questions, we derived novel transgenic mouse lines designed to direct pancreatic 8 cells to express class ii mhc molecules or ifn-r. in both cases, a clinical diabetic state was produced.of transgenic animals in order to derive transgenic mice expressing class ii mhc molecules or ifn-?/ in the pancreatic 8 cells, we constructed recombinant dna plasmids that joined the potential controlling sequences of the human insulin gene to the plasmids consist of coding region from the az, a$ or ifn-y genes fused with the 5' flanking region of the human insulin gene. the sequences from the human insulin gene include the entire first noncoding exon, followed by the first intron, and 15 bp of the second exon extending to one base before the initiator atg codon of the insulin gene (see plnspro). in pln-sproaa, the terminator portion of the construct is contributed by the 3' untranslated region (noncoding) from the ai gene. in the plnsproab construct, the introcytoplasmic and 3' untranslated region are again contributed by fusion with the a; sequences. this substitution does not affect the a$ amino acid sequence since the two haplotypes are identical in this region. the plnsprolfn-y construct includes terminator sequences from the hepatitis virus b gene. the mouse class ii mhc a, and ag genes, and to the mouse ifn-y gene ( figure 1 ). to maximize the potential for tissue-specific expression, a relatively large upstream portion (1867 bp of 5' sequences) of the human insulin gene promoter was used. it has previously been shown in transgenic mice that 660 bp of 5' sequences of the rat insulin ii gene was sufficient to direct tissue-specific expression of a transgene (hanahan, 1985) . the complete human insulin gene similarly leads to tissue-specific expression in transgenic mice (bucchini et al., 1986; selden et al., 1986) . the human insulin transcription start site and the complete untranslated first exon and part of the second exon of the human insulin gene were included in the construction. this promoter cassette ends immediately prior to the insulin translation start site, and was fused to the mouse genes in regions after their normal transcription start sites but before translation initiation. since t cel,ls must recognize foreign antigen in association with self class ii molecules, the class ii genes used to make the fusion genes were from the same mouse strain as the zygotes used to make the transgenic mice; thus the class ii genes were az and a$, and the zygotes were balb/c (h-2d).for the microinjection to create transgenic animals, linearized dna molecules, separated from plasmid sequences, were injected into mouse zygotes. the in-sulin-a,, and insulinae chimeric genes were injected separately into inbred balblc zygotes. in the insulin-a, experiment, 528 zygotes were implanted into pseudopregnant females. of the 50 mice born, 4 proved to be transgenie when analyzed by southern hybridization, and the transgene copy numbers were estimated by comparison to the endogenous gene: 443-11 (3-5 copies per haploid complement), 449-2 (3-5 copies), 451-l (3 copies), and 443-5 (10 copies). in the insulin-ab experiment, implantation of 409 zygotes yielded 63 mice, 2 of which proved to be transgenic (474-13 [s-lo copies] and 466-5 [20 copies]). for the insulin-ifn-y experiment, a total of 254 zygotes of varying genotype were implanted into pseudopregnant females. sixty-three mice were born and their dna analyzed by southern hybridization.three mice proved to be transgenic, two of which were cd-l x balb/c fl hybrids: (461-2 (3-5 copies) and 462-4 (3-5 copies), the other was derived from a cd-l x cd-l cross: 454-4 (10 copies). all three have been backcrossed to inbred balblc mice, and have subsequently segregated their transgene to a fraction of their progeny.analysis of the insulin class ii transgenic animals none of the founder transgenic insulin-a, or insulin-aa mice exhibited obvious phenotypic differences from controls. however, when founder a, (443-11) and ab (474-13) females are indicated by circles, males by squares, and animals where sex was not determined by triangles. solid black shading denotes the animals that carry the ab gene. gray shading denotes animals that carry the a, gene. a dot indicates animals that were not analyzed. the second generation animals (l-7) were sacrificed 16 days after birth for pancreatic rna analysis and not analyzed by blood or urine glucose for diabetes mellitus.mice were crossed, some of the offspring (at approximately 8 weeks of age) appeared inactive, had a "huddled" posture, distended abdomens, polydipsea, and polyuria. dipstick (chemstrip, boehringer mannheim) testing of urine from these mice revealed glycosuria (2%-50/o glucose) and hyperglycemia (greater than 400 mg/dl, usually 600-1000 mg/dl). a subcutaneous insulin regimen (o-4 units/day ultra-lente insulin, lilly) was begun to control the clinically apparent diabetes mellitus, based on minimizing the glycosuria, and the animals' health improved in approximately 2 weeks. prior to insulin treatment, blood glucose levels of the diabetic mice remained above 400 mg/dl (up to 1000 mg/dl); with insulin treatment, blood glucose levels were approximately 150-350 mg/dl. similar results have been obtained mating founder a, (449-2) with ab (474-13) mice. this phenotype segregated only with the in-b.a.-l dp heritance of both the insulin-a, and the insulin-ab transgenes ( figure 2 ). pancreatic rna was extracted from mice carrying neither transgene, the insulin-a, transgene, the insulin-ad transgene, or both transgenes. when these rnas were analyzed by northern blotting with a probe specific for the transgenes, it was evident that both the a, and as transgenes were expressed in a tissue-specific manner in the transgenic animals. in animals with both transgenes, both transcripts were seen ( figure 3 ). in all other tissues analyzed, no expression could be detected (data not shown). to demonstrate that mrna derived from the transgenes was translated and to further localize the tissue specificity of expression, cryostat sections of young (1 month) diabetic and control pancreata were examined after treatment with a monoclonal antibody that reacts with a mouse b.-s-"/p diabetic mouse. when compared to a typical normal islet (a), cells within islets shown in(b), (c). and (d) are less uniform in size, type, number, and distribution. islets from older diabetic mice are subjectively smaller. mononuclear inflammatory cells, such as those in (d) (arrows) are occasionally present. (b) insulin antigen expression in a normal balm mouse and in an insulin-ajab transgenic diabetic mouse was assessed using the avidinbiotin immunoperoxidase method with dab as achromogen.(e) darkly staining islet of langerhans from a normal balb/c mouse. (f) faintly staining islet from an insulin-ajag, 6 week old diabetic mouse. the diabetic mice revealed them to be composed of a morphologically heterogeneous group of cells clearly contrasting with the homogeneous cells forming islets of agematched controls (see figures 5a-5d) . cells in islets from 6 week or 2 month old transgenic mice were typically degranulated, had pleomorphic nuclei that stained with variable intensity, and were unevenly distributed ( figures  5c and 5d ). changes were less pronounced in younger mice (figure 5b ). there was generally an increased number of nuclei within affected islets, some of which may represent nuclei of collapsed 6 cells or infiltrating inflammatory cells. necrotic debris and mononuclear inflammatory cells were infrequently present in islets from 6 and 8 week old transgenic mice (figures 5c and 5d) . immunoperoxidase studies using antibodies to human insulin demonstrated reduced staining of the islet cells in diabetic transgenie mice. in 2 month old diabetic mice, the intensity of staining was dramatically reduced in comparison with controls, and the percentage of faintly staining cells within various islets ranges from less than 10% to approximately 50% compared with islets from age-matched controls in which greater than 80% of the islet cells stain intensely for insulin antigen (figures 5e and 5f ). similar results were obtained when aldehyde fuchsin stain was used to demonstrate 6 cells. quantitative morphometrics were not performed in this study; however, examination of step-sectioned pancreases from 1 or 2 month old diabetic mice revealed islets clearly smaller and less numerous than those in controls.transgenic animals one of the three founder insulin ifny transgenic animals, 461-2, appeared inactive at 10 weeks of age and abdominal distention, polydipsea, and polyuria were noted. the mouse had glycosuria (20/o-5%) and the serum was lipemic. a subcutaneous insulin regimen, similar to that used for the diabetic transgenic insulin-a,,, ap transgenic mice, was begun and the animal's health improved. this animal transmitted its transgene to approximately 25% (20/76) of its offspring; all of the transgenic offspring developed glycosuria (20/o-5%) and hyperglycemia (greater than 400 mg/dl, up to 1000 mg/dl) beginning at approximately 6 to 10 weeks of age. the second transgenic founder, 462-4, never suffered from glycosuria, and blood glucose measurement did not exceed 260 mg/dl. at 5 months of age it died of unknown causes and no further analysis could be performed. this animal transmitted its transgene to approximately 30% of its offspring and 5 of the 14 transgenie offspring developed glycosuria and hyperglycemia (to the same degree as the 461-2 line) by approximately 20 weeks of age. the third transgenic animal, 454-4, has not shown glycosuria or hyperglycemia in its 8 months of life. this animal transmitted its transgene to approximately 50% of its offspring, and these have not developed either glycosuria or hyperglycemia. all of the diabetic offspring have been treated with insulin regimens with resultant improved health.pancreata from diabetic transgenic mice harboring the ifn-y gene were characterized histologically by variable accumulations of inflammatory cells within the parenchyma. these cells were predominantly lymphocytes and macrophages, although plasma cells and neutrophils were occasionally recognized. pancreatic lesions tended to be less severe in younger mice and progress with age. lesions in mildly affected, generally neonatal mice, consisted of interstitial edema accompanied by small clusters of lymphocytes between acini, surrounding islets, and small vessels ( figure sa) . in more severely affected mice there is substantial obliteration of islet as well as acinar structures by lymphocytic and histiocytic accumulations (figures 6b and 6~ ). primary insulitis (inflammation confined to the islets) was not an obvious feature in these mice; however, interstitial inflammatory cells commonly surrounded and infiltrated islets. pancreata from older diabetic mice sustained on exogenous insulin had focally extensive areas of fibrosis interspersed with clusters of inflammatory cells (figure 6d ). lmmunoperoxidase studies of inflamed pancreata demonstrated a marked reduction in numbers and staining intensity of islet cells labeled with antibody to human insulin (figures 6e and 6f) . immunoperoxidase studies utilizing a monoclonal antibody against i-a antigens (bhattacharya et al., 1981; davignon et al., 1981) revealed diffuse light to moderate staining of acinar tissue, islets, and epithelial cells lining the ducts (data not shown).we studied transgenic mice harboring fusion genes between the human insulin 5' regulatory region and the ifn-y gene and class ii mhc genes. the two diseases produced in the transgenic mice are pathologically distinct.in the doubly transgenic mice expressing both aa and a8 class ii sequences, the pancreatic 8 cells largely disappear from the islets of langerhans by the time the animals are 2 months old. this loss of cells is specific to the islets and does not notably affect the acinar tissue of the pancreas. in older transgenic diabetic mice, the islets resemble the pseudoatrophic islets seen in human iddm. overt diabetes in these mice (at least up to 3 months of age) only occurs in those transgenic mice that have inherited a copy of each of the ins-a, and ins-ab genes. the conclusion is that the diabetes is caused by and is dependent on the expression of both these genes.we have shown that the pancreata of the ins-a, and ins-a0 transgenic mice contain mrna molecules derived from the transgenes. we have also directly demonstrated the presence of class ii molecules within the islets of langerhans of the doubly transgenic mice. it is possible that just the expression of the class ii molecules in the doubly heterozygous class ii mice could be deleterious to the f3 cells, causing their eventual demise. injury of cells due to expression of class ii molecules has never been reported in transfection experiments (reviewed by germain and malissen 1986) or in the induction of class ii expression in 6 cells in vitro (wright et al., 1986; pujol-borell et al., 1987) . transgenic mice in which the pancreatic 8 however, we have noticed an intermittent, mild hyperglycemia in some of the a, transgenic (singly heterozygous) mice from the 443-11 line, with blood glucose values averaging approximately 180-200 mgldl in comparison with as transgenie mice or control mice, which were 120-150 mg/dl (data not shown). we cannot account for this at present. it may be pertinent that in a line of transgenic mice carrying a class ii mhc e, transgene, abnormal constitutive expression of the endogenous es gene was observed (yamamura et al., 1985) . a similar phenomenon might apply here, and further investigation of this line should eluci-date the cause of the hyperglycemia.it is also possible that the expression of class ii molecules affects the insulin producing function of the 6 cells without killing them, resulting in diabetes. loss of differentiation in 8 cells without cell death has been observed in virally initiated diabetes (tishon and oldstone, 1987) .our results also indicate the possibility that the 8 cells could present antigen to th cells, thus initiating an autoimmune reaction. new immunological responsiveness has been demonstrated in transgenic mice through the introduction of an i-e gene (le meur et al., 1985; pinkert et al., 1985; yamamura et al., 1985) . activation of an autoimmune response by presentation of presumably self antigens by the 6 cells implies a failure in self recognition (tolerance). nonresponsiveness to self antigens is thought to involve the deletion or suppression of clones of t cells that recognize self antigens. it is possible that t cell clones reactive to components of nonimmune cells are not suppressed or deleted since these molecules are not normally seen by the host immune system. thus, in non-immune cells the expression of class ii molecules may lead to the presentation of self antigens to which the host immune system is naive, resulting in the activation of an autoimmune response. alternatively, the extreme overexpression of class ii molecules in the 8 cells of these mice might lead to the bypass of tolerance by adventitious antigen presentation, since in transfected fibroblasts the level of class ii expression is correlated with antigen presenting capacity (lechler et al., 1985) .the data presented in this communication do not directly address the question of whether the 8 cell destruction in the ins-ia transgenic mice is a consequence of an autoimmune response. experiments in progress examining the response to pancreatic grafts in these ins-ia mice and characterizing mice with mhc class i and an "irrelevant" protein inserted into the 8 cell membrane will begin to address this question.the possibility also exists that antigen being presented by 8 cells is a foreign antigen derived from a virus (see suzumura et al., 1986 ). an extensive search for serological evidence by viral infection in diabetic and nondiabetic mice did not reveal the presence of antibodies against any virus known to be associated with diabetes, although antibodies against mouse hepatitis virus were detected in both diabetic and nondiabetic mice.relevant to this work are studies involving patients with autoimmune thyroid disorders. thyroid follicular cells from such patients have been shown to aberrantly express class ii mhc molecules (hanafusa et al., 1983) . these cells have the capacity to present foreign antigen to t cells in vitro (londei et al., 1984) . in addition, infiltrating t cells autoreactive to host thyroid cells have been isolated and cloned from diseased thyroid glands (londei et al., 1985) . the diabetes in the ar/ad transgenic mice could occur as a result of analogous processes. however, the apparent paucity of inflammatory cells in the islets is curious. in human iddm, although insulitis is thought likely to be present frequently during the initial stages of the disease, it is often not detected, perhaps because of its transient and nonuniform nature (gepts and lecompte, 1985) . examination of younger, prediabetic mice, specific cell labeling studies, and electron microscopic analysis will help define the mechanism of 8 cell destruction. the few scattered inflammatory cells observed within the islets of these mice could be producing factors that are directly or indirectly toxic to 8 cells. recent studies have suggested exquisite sensitivity of 8 cells to oxygen free radicals that are induced by lymphokines (nomikos et al., 1986; tsumimoto et al., 1986; prowse et al., 1986) . the sparse amount of islet inflammation present in the current study may be sufficient to kill the 8 cells in these islets in this manner.in the ifn-y model, the 8 cells also disappear from the transgenic pancreas. however, in this case it is concomitant with a progressive inflammatory process that appears to be focused on the islets but involves the entire pancreas. the active inflammatory lesion in younger mice consists primarily of chronic inflammatory cells of the type seen in response to viral infections and in autoimmune diseases. interestingly, the pathology is also reminiscent of that seen in transplant graft rejection of the acute cellu-lar type (robbins et al., 1984) . the mechanism by which the inflammation is initiated, however, is unknown.in diabetic mice, the ifn-y could bedirectly inducing the expression of class ii molecules that would present self antigens to the host immune system as described above for the a,/a, transgenic mice. if ifn-r were acting solely by inducing the expression of class ii molecules, then we might expect the histology of the ifn-y transgenic diabetic mice to resemble that of the ajab transgenic diabetic mice. as this is clearly not the case, the ifn-y must be participating in other cellular processes as well. interferon-y is known to induce increased pancreatic class i mhc molecule expression in vitro (campbell et al., 1985; campbell et al., 1986; pujol-borrell et al., 1986a) . increase class i mhc expression is seen in the islets of newly diagnosed diabetics (bottazzo et al., 1985; foulis et al., 1987) . one component of 8 cell destruction may involve cytotoxic t lymphocytes that recognize class i mhc molecules in conjunction with antigen. additionally, because of the large inflammatory infiltrate, other lymphokines may be produced and contribute to the pathology. leukocytes secrete tumor necrosis factor, which acts as a chemoattractant for polymorphonuclear neutrophils (figari et al., 1987) . interleukin-1 has been implicated in vitro as a causative factor in 8 cell damage (bendtzen et al., 1986) , and the related proteins, tumor necrosis factor and lymphotoxin, have been shown to synergize with ifn-y in vitro to cause class ii expression by 8 cells (pujol-borrell et al., 1987) . the ifn-y transgenic mice demonstrate the deleterious cascade of effects that are initiated by local production of ifn-y in vivo, and may therefore provide an animal model for study of virus-caused, interferon-mediated inflammation.the incomplete penetrance of the diabetic phenotype in the 462-4 derived transgenic progeny is not readily understandable. since these progeny are the second backcross of the cd1 (outbred) line to balb/c, there will be much genetic nonequivalence between these progeny. it is possible that the variability in genetic background contributes to the penetrance of the transgene.it has recently been reported that in both the nonobese diabetic (nod) mouse model and in human iddm, an amino acid residue change (specifically, the absence of aspartic acid at residue 57) in the mouse i-ap or its human correlate hla-dqp chain is highly correlated with the propensity to develop iddm (acha-orbea and mcdevitt, 1987; todd et al., 1987) . the introduced a, chain and the recipient balb/c mice in the present experiment are of the same haplotype (h-2d) and contain aspartic acid at residue 57 of a0 (choi et al., 1983; malissen et al., 1983) . thus the allelic amino acid difference, while clearly significant, may not be necessary for the development of diabetes.human iddm represents a heterogeneous group of disease syndromes with a common final pathologic expression. diverse mechanisms likely play a role in the development of iddm. these experiments were designed to bypass the initiating insult in addition to the genetic predisposition to the disease, thereby separating and isolating several individual steps in a proposed pathway for autoimmune reaction generation. to do so, identifiable genetic perturbations were made which led to diabetes. localized class ii mhc expression causes a depletion of p cells; whereas ifn-7, which may lead to aberrant class ii expression, causes cell depletion associated with an inflammatory disease process. neither created a pathological phenocopy of what is thought to be the general progression of disease in human iddm, although each recapitulated parts of the damage noted.studies with transgenic mice may lead to a deciphering of the mechanisms of autoimmune disease. the respective roles of adventitious class ii mhc expression, selfantigen presentation, lack of tolerance to self-antigens, and local production of lymphokines can now be assessed in vivo.plasmid containing an insulin promoter cassette was made by isolating in two steps a 1.9 kb earnhi-ncol fragment from the human insulin b allele gene (ullrich et al., 1980; ullrich et al., 1982) , blunt-ending the ncol site with sl nuclease, and inserting it into a bamhi-hincll cleaved pucll8 vector to yield plnspro. in the remaining constructions, all restriction enzyme cleavage sites utilized for cloning were made blunt-ended with the klenow fragment of dna polymerase i except where noted. to derive plnspro aa, plnspro was cleaved at its unique sphl site and a 7 kb bamhl fragment containing the a$ coding sequence fused to the 3' untranslated region to the agk 3' sequences (kindly provided by dr. e. choi, university of cincinnati, unpublished data) was inserted at this site. plnsproap was derived by cleaving a recombinant plasmid (kindly provided by dr. e. choi, unpublished data) containing the a$5' untranslated and coding region fused in the intracytoplasmic domain with the ai 3'sequences with ecorl and isolated a 5.4 kb restriction fragment containing the majority of the gene. the amino acid sequence of the a: and the a; proteins are identical in the cytoplasmic region, thus the presence of these sequences in our construct does not alter the syngeneic nature of this experiment.in order to remove 5' atg potential start codons, this restriction fragment was treated for varying amounts of time with bal31 nuclease and inserted into a hincli cleaved pucl18 plasmid (without klenow treatment). restriction and sequence analysis was performed on recombinant clones, and a clone containing 48 bp of sequence 5'to the atg translation initiator of the a0 protein sequence was chosen. this plasmid was cleaved at its unique xbal site and the bamhi-sphl insulin promoter fragment inserted. this was cleaved with xhol and sphl and the large restriction fragment, containing the plasmid and 5' sequences, was ligated (without klenow treatment) to the 2.9 kb xhol-sphl restriction fragment containing 3'sequences from the original a0 plasmid. to derive plnsprolfn-y, a recombinant plasmid containing the genomic murine ifn-y gene (gray and goeddel, 1983) fused with the hepatitis b 3' untranslated sequence (kpn-sstll) was cleaved with pvull to remove 5' sequences, and the bamhi-sphl insulin promoter fragment from plnspro was inserted in their place.of transgenic mice restriction fragments of the above plasmids, free of plasmid sequences, were isolated from low melting temperature agarose gels by nal-glass bead extraction (geneclean, 810101). dna was further purified free of contaminants by ultracentrifugation. four week old balb/c or cd-l (outbred, closed stock) female mice were superovulated by injecting intraperitoneally (i.p.) 5 u of gonadotropin from pregnant mare serum 48 hr prior to injecting 5 u of human chorionic gonadotropin.female mice were then mated with balb/c or cd-1 proven breeder male mice.the next day, one-cell stage embryos were flushed from the oviducts of the mated female mice with m3 medium (quinn et al., 1982) . the eggs were freed of cumulus cells and zona pellucida by hyaluronidase treatment.the male pronuclei of the fertilized eggs were microinjected with approximately 2 picoliters of dna at a concentration of 1 nglpl. the injected, fertilized eggs were then transferred into the ampullae of half-day pseudopregnant recipient cd-l female mice to complete their development.when the litters were 4 weeks old, l-2 cm of their tails were cut. dna was extracted from the tail segments for southern blot analysis.dna and rna blots five to ten micrograms of genomic dna from the tails were restricted with ncol (ifn-y), bglll (a,), or hincll (ag). the dna was electrophoresed on 0.8% agarose gels and transferred to nylon membranes (zetaprobe).hybridization with radiolabeled random-primed probes was performed with restriction fragments of the ifn-y cdna (gray and goeddel, 1983) , the genomic a,d gene, or the a; cdna (estess et al., 1986) .northern analysis was of rna isolated from the pancreata and other tissues of nontransgenic and transgenic mice. rna was extracted from the tissues by the guanidine hcl/ethanol procedure (chirgwin et al., 1979) , electrophoresed through a 1% agarose, 6% formaldehyde gel, transferred to a nylon membrane, and hybridized to either a 50 base oligonucleotide complementary to the first untranslated exon of the human insulin gene, the a, gene, or the ap cdna. following three 20 min washes in 0.1% sds, 0.1 x ssc at 65oc (42oc with the 50 base oligonucleotide probe), the filters were exposed to a kodak xar film with an intensifying screen at -70°c for 5 days.determination urine glucose percentages were determined by dipstick analysis (chemstick, boehringer manheim) of spontaneously expressed urine. random blood glucose determinations were made on whole blood using the accucheck ii (boehringer manheim) or on serum or plasma by standard enzymatic methods. mice were considered diabetic when urine glucose was 2%-5% and the nonfasting blood glucose was greater than 400 mgldl for 3 consecutive days. normal (nontransgenic) mice never showed glycosuria, and had blood glucose concentrations of approximately 100-200 mg/dl.analysis tissues and fetuses were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24 hr, dehydrated in s-29 dehydrant (technicon corp.), cleared in toluene, and infiltrated with paraffin. three micron sections were cut on a reichert-jung 2040 microtome, picked up on poly-l-lysine coated slides, and dried in a 37% oven overnight.sections were deparaffinized in three changes of toluene, and rehydrated through graded alcohols to distilled water. the sections were then blocked for endogenous peroxidase activity with hydrogen peroxide-methanol, endogenous biotin with avidin-biotin blocking kit (vector laboratories) and endogenous immunoglobulin binding, and then stained for insulin with antibody to human insulin using the avidin-biotin peroxidase method (vector laboratories) with dab as the chromagen. negative controls were no primary antibody, nonimmune serum, and control tissue. positive controls of both human and mouse pancreas were also used.sections were also cut at 3 microns and stained with a haematoxylin and eosin stain for viewing morphogenic evaluation. selected sections were stained with aldehyde-fuchsin stain to detect b cells. approximately three to four sections were initially evaluated from each pancreas. several pancreata were also chosen for complete step-sectioning (3 sections every 50 microns). additional sections were evaluated when islets were not found on initial sections.for analysis of i-a antigen expression, 10 micron cryostat sections were fixed in acetone for 5 min at -20°c, blocked for endogenous peroxidase activity, and stained for i-a antigens with monoclonal antibody tib120 (gift from drs. robertson parkman and maxwell cooper) using the avidin-biotin peroxidase method (vector laboratories).n. s is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the muscular dystrophy association.we wish to thank laura martin for animal care assistance and carol morita for graphics. we are extremely grateful for expert technical assistance of philip hollingshead. we thank drs. ed choi, hugh mcdevitt, axel ullrich, and pat gray for the dna clones used in this study and drs. robertson parkman and maxwell cooper for the monoclonal antibody reactive with ia antigens. we would also like to thank drs. kevin lafferty, douglas hanahan, and howard fox for helpful discussion.n. s. thanks dr. howard fox for invaluable contributions during this work.the costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. this article must therefore be hereby marked "advertisement" in accordance with 18 u.s.c. section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. november 30, 1987; revised february 8, 1988 bei der be treu ung von kin dern wer den vom in ten siv me di zi ner aber nicht nur spe zi el le kennt nis se in je nen be rei chen ge for dert, die in der aus bil dung zum kin der arzt üb li cher wei se ab ge deckt wer den, son dern auch er fah rung in z. t. an de ren di ag nos ti schen und in ter ven tio nel len tech ni ken und im »kinds ge rech ten« einsatz der sel ben.aber nicht nur der »kinds ge rech te« an satz im sin ne von tech ni ken spielt eine zent ra le rol le, son dern auch der ein be zug des täg li chen ge wohn ten um fel des des kin des. die in ten siv medi zi ni sche be treu ung des kri tisch kran ken und evtl. vi tal be drohten kin des muss des halb die fa mi lie im mer ein be zie hen. die se muss im rah men ei ner kri sen si tua ti on, die in meh re ren pha sen ab lau fen kann, oft zu sätz lich be treut wer den. die ein zel nen phasen sind: 4 in tia le schock-und angst pha se, wel che fa mi li en an ge hö rige pa ra ly sie ren kann; 4 pha se der ab leh nung, häu fig be glei tet von wut ge füh len, selbst vor wür fen und selbst schuld zu wei sun gen; 4 pha se der ak zep tanz, evtl. mit auf kom men den ge füh len der hilf lo sig keit und/oder ei nem rück zug bzw. ei ner ab kapse lung; 4 je nach out co me eine trau er pha se.eine er folg rei che kri sen in ter ven ti on be dingt als ers tes das erken nen ei ner el ter li chen stress si tua ti on und ih rer be dürf nis se und in der fol ge eine spe zi fi sche be treu ung, wel che oft nur als team ar beit mit psy cho lo gen, so zi al ar bei tern und be treu en dem pfle ge per so nal zu be wäl ti gen ist. eine of fe ne und ehr li che kommu ni ka ti on, kor rek te in for ma ti on über be vor ste hen de un ter suchun gen und er ho be ne be fun de so wie der täg li che kon takt und die dis kus si on mit den el tern in ver ständ li cher spra che sind jedoch die grund stei ne in je der si tu a ti on.ethi sche ent schei dun gen sind fast täg lich zu tref fen. ein pati en ten wil le steht, ab ge se hen von we ni gen aus nah men, nie zur ver fü gung, ein mut maß li cher »best in te rest« ist meist schwer zu eru ie ren, da der »best in te rest« des kin des nicht un be dingt mit dem »best in te rest« sei ner el tern über ein stim men muss. häu fig er hält da her die dis kus si on um die zu er war ten de le bens qua li tät eine zent ra le rol le, ob wohl die ser be griff sehr ver schie den ausge legt wer den kann und teil wei se, je nach so zio öko no mi schem um feld, ver schie de ne qua li täts maß stä be zur ent schei dungs hil fe an ge wen det wer den müs sen.be son der hei ten des kin des und de ren kon se quen zen für die be treu ungbeim klein kind ist die kör per ober flä che im ver gleich zum körper ge wicht re la tiv groß. die ses ver hält nis ist beim säug ling am aus ge präg tes ten, wel cher durch einen gro ßen kopf und ein großes ab do men, aber einen klei nen tho rax und klei ne ex tre mi täten ge kenn zeich net ist. die se pro por tio na len un ter schie de zum er wach se nen wir ken sich in ver schie de nen be lan gen aus, z. b. : 4 wär me ab ga be, 4 ab schät zung der aus deh nung von ver bren nun gen, 4 do sie rung von me di ka men ten.4 ei ner ten denz zur tho ra x dis tor si on mit ein wärts be we gung des rip pentho rax wäh rend der in spi ra ti ons pha se (= sichtba re in ter kos ta le ein zie hun gen als zei chen der atem not) bei er höh ter atem ar beit; des halb muss das zwerch fell zu sätz li che ar beit über neh men, um den dro hen den lun genvo lu men ver lust wettz u ma chen -dies re sul tiert in pa ra doxen tho ra ko ab do mi na len be we gungs mus tern wäh rend der at mung und ei ner in adä quat ho hen atem ar beit [9] mit ent spre chend ho hem er mü dungs ri si ko; 4 tiefer »out ward-re coil« des tho rax auf grund sei ner elas tischen ei gen schaf ten mit er höh ter ten denz zur at e lek ta senbil dung am ende der ex spi ra ti ons pha se (. abb. 84.3); beim neu ge bo re nen und säug ling ist so mit die »clo sing ca pa ci ty« grö ßer als die funk tio nel le re si du al ka pa zi tät -um die ser kol laps ten denz ent ge gen zu wir ken, hal ten das neu ge bo re ne und der säug ling ihre funk tio nel le re si du al ka pa zi tät dy na-misch re la tiv hoch, mit glot tis ver schluss (ge ne ra ti on ei nes in t rin si schen peep) am ende der ex spi ra ti ons pha se.kli ni sche kon se quen zen für die be at mung 5 eine ge rin ge schleim hautschwel lung kann be reits zu ho hen re sis ten zen der atem we ge füh ren und ver langt eine stark er höh te atem ar beit. 5 ver mehr te atem an stren gun gen füh ren zu ein zie hungen (sub ko stal, in ter ko stal und xi phoi dal) so wie zu ver mehr ter dia phrag ma ti scher ak ti vi tät (pa ra do xe tho ra ko ab do mi na le atem be we gun gen); dies sind klas si sche kli ni sche zei chen ei nes atem not syn droms beim klein kind und müs sen früh zei tig er kannt wer den (7 kap. 84.4 ). 5 bauch la ge sta bi li siert den tho rax teil wei se und ist deshalb beim kind mit atem not zei chen zu ver su chen. 5 ver tei lungs stö run gen (we gen at e lek ta sen bil dung) mit tie fen po 2 -wer ten kön nen schon früh im ver lauf ei ner er kran kung der atem we ge auf tre ten.prak ti sche kon se quen zen für den in ten siv me di zi ner 5 eine in tu ba ti on er höht dras tisch die atem wegs wi derstän de, ver hin dert aber auch die phy sio lo gisch in t rin sische peep-ge ne rie rung, d. h. dass in tu bier te säug lin ge (ins be son de re neu ge bo re ne) im mer be at met wer den müs sen (dru ckun ter stüt zung mit ent spre chend sensi blem trig ger sys tem). eben falls muss ein mi ni ma ler peep von 3-5 cm h 2 o ge wählt wer den. cave: kei ne klein kin der be at mung ohne peep! 5 ein kon ti nu ier li cher po si ti ver atem wegs druck (cpap) kann die oxy ge na ti on durch er hö hung der funk tionel len re si du al ka pa zi tät deut lich ver bes sern so wie die atem ar beit re du zie ren. bei säug lin gen (bis zum 1. le bens jahr) eig nen sich die na sa len cpap-sys te me mit klei nen na sen tu ben, wel che auch in der neo na to logie üb lich sind, bei klein kin dern wer den na sen mas ken oder ge sichts mas ken mit mög lichst klei nem to traumvo lu men zur cpap-ap pli ka ti on vor ge zo gen.be at mungs sys te me zur hand be at mung. ge ne rell soll ten be atmungs sys te me für kin der einen mög lichst klei nen to traum aufwei sen. für die ma nu el le be at mung eig nen sich des halb halb offe ne an äs the sie sys te me ohne rück at mungs ven ti le (mo di fi zer tes jack son-rees-sys tem oder map le son c; . abb. 84.4) am bes ten . abb. 84.2. pä di at ri sche en dotra che al tu ben mit cuff ver schie de ner herstel ler mar ken. be ach te, dass im ver gleich zur schwar zen mar ke (teil des tu bus, der ab höhe der stimm bän der en dotra che al zu lie gen hat; 1) die meis ten cuffs sich über die er laub te dis tanz von der tu buss pit ze aus dehnen und so mit in den be reich der stimm bän der zu lie gen kom men. die cuffs der tu ben 2 und 3 deh nen sich bis in den la rynx aus; bei kor rek tur der tu bus po si ti on ent spre chend den schwar zen mar ken kom men sie zu tief zu lie gen, mit dem ri si ko ei ner ein sei ti gen in tu ba ti on. tu bus 5 hat kei ne tie fen mar kie rung als in tu ba ti ons hil fe, und der lan ge cuff birgt das ri si ko, sich in den be reich der stimm bän der aus zu deh nen. ein zig tu bus 4 weist ein ana to misch kor rek tes de sign mit kor rek ter cuff grö ße und -plat zie rung so wie ei ner kor rek ten tie fen mar kie rung auf (bild mit frdl. ge neh mi gung von m. weiss und a. ger ber, kin der an äs the sie ab tei lung, kin der spi tal zü rich). und sind sehr ver brei tet. bei de sind sog. non-re brea thing-syste me, wo bei bei un sach ge mäßem ge brauch ein »re brea thing« der aus at mungs ga se auft re ten kann. der kon ti nu ier li che frischgas zu fl uss am t-stück dient wäh rend der ex spi ra ti ons pha se zur aus wa schung des gleich zei tig als in spi ra ti ons-und ex spira ti onss chen kel die nen den cir cuit. die frisch gas zu fuhr (100% sau er stoff ) muss des halb ge nü gend hoch sein und soll als grundre gel dem 2-fa chen des mi nu ten vo lu mens ent spre chen; dies verhin dert auch eine ein mi schung von raum luft wäh rend der in spira ti on. aus tech ni schen grün den ist aber der gas fl uss in die sen t-stück-sys te men li mi tiert zwi schen mi ni mal 3 l/min und maxi mal 10 l/min (die an wen dung bei ei nem kör per ge wicht über 20-25 kg ist des halb nicht zu emp feh len).als al ter na ti ve exi si tie ren self-in fla ting-sys te me mit exspi ra ti ons ven til, wel che für den un ge üb ten leich ter zu ge brauchen sind, aber ohne re ser voir höchs tens eine o 2 -kon zent rati on von 40% er lau ben! mit re ser voir wird eine o 2 -kon zentra ti on von 100% er reicht. bei neu ge bo re nen und säug lin gen sind beu tel mit ei nem in halt von 0,5 l aus rei chend, bei kleinkin dern mit ei nem in halt von 1 l, ab ei nem kör per ge wicht von 15 kg mit ei nem in halt von 2 l. für wei te re de tail lier te an gaben über die se sys te me sei auf ein schlä gi ge an äs the sie fach bücher ver wie sen.mas ken be at mung. eine kor rek te tech nik er laubt prak tisch im mer eine adä qua te be at mung mit der mas ke. ei ni ge wei te re aspek te sind da bei zu be ach ten : 4 ma te ri al: wei che, durch sich ti ge si li kon mas ke oder mas ke mit luft kis sen (mög lichst kein »leak«). ein sau er stoff fluss von 4-6 l/min ist aus rei chend und ver min dert das ri si ko un be ab sich tigt ho her atem wegs drücke oder ei ner übermä ßi gen in suf fla ti on des ma gens (aspi ra ti ons ri si ko!). die kleinst mög li che mas ke wird be vor zugt (to traum). 4 po si ti on: den kopf nur leicht nach hin ten stre cken, un ter kiefer nach oben drücken (neu ge bo re nes in neu tral stel lung). bei ei ner ex tre men re trofle xi on des kopf es kommt es zur ob struk ti on der obe ren luft we ge. 4 mas ken hand ha bung: die mas ke wird mit der lin ken hand mit dau men und zei ge fin ger ge hal ten. der mit tel fin ger liegt auf der man di bu la und er mög licht es, die se hoch zuhe ben. cave: ex ter ne kom pres si on der atem we ge mit tels druck auf die hals weich tei le! 4 hilfs mit tel: oro pha ryn ge ale oder na so pha ryn ge ale tu ben sind oft zur be he bung ei ner atem we gob struk ti on (zu rückfal len de zun ge) nütz lich. 4 be at mung: wenn mög lich, soll te syn chron bei noch er halte ner, aber in suf fi zi en ter spon tan at mung be at met wer den, d. h. es ist ge nau zu be obach ten, wann das kind ein-und wann es aus at met. ! cave pro po fol, ein hypnotikum, wird re gel mä ßig im ope ra ti onssaal für die kurz zeit an äs the sie ein ge setzt und be währt sich eben falls auf der in ten sivsta ti on wäh rend kurz ein griffen. auf grund von be rich te ten schwe ren kom pli ka tio nen beim klein kind ist je doch nach wie vor von ei ner dau er seda ti on mit propofol ab zu ra ten [30] .be at mung mit be at mungs ge rä ten. mo der ne be at mungs ge rä te für er wach se ne sind für den ein satz beim kind und klein kind grund sätz lich un ter fol gen den be din gun gen ge eig net: 4 ein ge nü gend sen si bles trig ger sys tem (fluss-oder drucktrig ge rung) und ein mög lichst klei nes to traum vo lu men sind zu be ach ten. ge ne rell ist eine ti dal vo lu men mes sung (fluss mes ser) mög lichst nahe am en dotra chea len tu bus konnek tor vor zu zie hen [3, 5] . für säug lin ge und neu ge bo re ne sind be at mungs ge rä te mit kon ti nu ier li chem flow vor zu ziehen. dies er laubt es, die trig ger sys te me emp find li cher zu ge stal ten, cpap am be at mungs ge rät ohne all zu star ke er höhung der atem ar beit zu er mög li chen und schlauch sys te me kon ti nu ier lich zu »flus hen« um eine co 2 -ak ku mu la ti on im y-stück (to traum vo lu men) mög lichst zu ver hin dern. 4 ob wohl in der pä di at ri schen und neu ge bo re nen in ten sivpfle ge seit jah ren vor wie gend druck kon trol liert be at met wird, spricht nichts ge gen eine vo lu men kon trol lier te be at mung. ak tu ell wer den zu neh mend druck re gu lier te, volu men kon trol lier te be at mungs mo di ein ge setzt und als sog. selbst ent wöh nungs mo di ge prie sen. nebst dem ef fekt, dass der in ten siv me di zi ner mit die sem be at mungs mo dus eine sen kung des spit zen-bzw. pla teau drucks bei un ver än der tem ti dal vo lu men bei bes se rung der lun gen krank heit (ver bes serung der com plian ce des re spi ra to ri schen sys tems) be obachten kann und sich so be wusst wird, dass an eine ex tu ba ti on ge dacht wer den kann, gibt es kei ne do ku men tier ten vor tei le die ses be at mungs mo dus im ver gleich zur klas si schen druck-oder vo lu men kon trol lier ten be at mung. 4 as sis tier te be at mungs for men sind auch beim kind zu be vorzu gen. al ler dings kön nen pro b le me mit zu sen si bel ein gestell ten trig ger sys te men bei tu bus lecka ge oder was serak kumu la ti on im ex spi ra to ri schen schen kel des schlauch sys tems auf tre ten. die se kon di tio nen kön nen ein »au tot rig ge ring« mit fol gen der hy per ven ti la ti on des pa ti en ten ver ur sa chen. 4 be züg lich der op ti ma len »lun gen po tek ti ven« ti dal vo lu mina und peep ein stel lun gen gel ten die glei chen richt li ni en wie bei der er wach se nen be at mung. als al ter na ti ve zur ar te ri el len blut gas ana ly se,  wel che aus tech ni schen grün den beim klein kind nicht im mer  mög lich ist, kann bei gu ter pe ri phe rer durch blu tung eine ka pillä re blutent nah me durch ge führt wer den. bei neu ge bo re nem  und säug ling er folgt dies nach sorg fäl ti ger hy perämi sie rung mit punk ti on an der in ne ren oder äu ße ren fer sen kan te, beim kleinkind mit tels punk ti on an der fin ger spit ze. die in ter pre ta ti on (ins be son de re des po 2 -wer tes) muss je doch mit ge wis ser vorsicht er fol gen, da die se wer te bei schlech ter pe ri phe rer durchblu tung und ge rin gem herz mi nu ten vo lu men eher den zen tral venö sen wer ten ent spre chen.puls oxy me trie. die puls oxy me trie er laubt eine gute kon ti nu ier liche über wa chung der ar te ri el len o 2 -sät ti gung und ab schät zung des pao 2 un ter hin zu zie hung der sau er stoff dis so zia ti ons kur ve. nicht zu ver ges sen sind da bei je doch die ein fl üs se von fe ta lem hä mo glo bin, pa tho lo gi schen hä mo glo bi nen (hä mo glo bi no pathi en) und ei ner evtl. vor lie gen den anä mie. puls oxy me trisch be stimm te sät ti gungs wer te <70% sind nicht im mer zu ver läs sig und soll ten mit tels oxy met risch ge mes se ner o 2 -sät ti gung kontrol liert wer den.i der ein satz der puls oxy me trie kann beim kind durch bewe gungs ar te fak te und/oder eine pe ri phe re min der durchblu tung li mi tiert sein. co 2 -mo ni to ring. grund sätz lich ste hen 2 nicht-in va si ve metho den zum co 2 -mo ni to ring zur ver fü gung: die trans ku ta ne mes sung des co 2 -par ti al drucks (ptcco 2 ) und die en dex spira to ri sche co 2 -kon zent ra ti on. der ptcco 2 kor re liert recht gut und prak tisch un ab hän gig von der pe ri phe ren durch blutung mit den ar te ri el len wer ten. dies er laubt nach er folg ter »ka li brie rung« mit ei ner ar te ri ell oder ka pil lär ent nom men blut gas ana ly se zu min dest eine gute nicht-in va si ve tren d überwa chung. die en dex spi ra to ri sche co 2 -kon zent ra ti on er laubt dies eben falls, die wer te kor re lie ren aber nur be dingt mit den ar teri el len wer ten in ab hän gig keit von ana to mi schem und funk tionel lem to traum. we gen der ver grö ße rung des to traums wur de die se me tho de bei klein kin dern und säug lin gen mit klei nem atem zug vo lu men re la tiv be schränkt an ge wen det. neue re mainstream-sen so ren wei sen je doch heut zu ta ge klei ne to traum vo lumi na von nur 1 ml auf, die me tho de wird der zeit für die in ten sivpfle ge des neu ge bo re nen ree va lu iert [31] .mi ni ma les zu satz mo ni to ring wäh rend me cha ni scher be atmung. prin zi pi ell ist ein mi ni ma les mo ni to ring der be at mungspa ra me ter am be at mungs ge rät not wen dig. als ab so lu tes mi nimum soll te die fluss-zeit-kur ve dau ernd über wacht wer den, um bei den re la tiv ho hen atem fre quen zen den aufb au ei nes in der re gel un er wünsch ten in t rin si schen peep früh zei tig er kennen zu kön nen (. abb. 84.5).be son der hei ten im neu ge bo re nenund säug lings al ter wäh rend der tran si ti on des fe ta len kreis laufs, d. h. nach ab fall des lun gen ge fäß wi der stands und er folg ter er hö hung des pul mona len blut flus ses mit kon se ku ti ver er hö hung der links ven tri kulä ren vor last, schließt sich das in traau ri ku lä re fo ra men ova le, was zu ei ner se pa rie rung des lun gen-vom sys tem kreis lauf führt -un ter der vo raus set zung, dass sich der duc tus ar te rio sus un ter dem ein fluss des ho hen lo ka len p a o 2 -wer tes und der abfal len den plas ma kon zen tra ti on von pros tag lan din e 2 eben falls ge schlos sen hat.mit die ser se pa rie rung des sys te mi schen kreis laufs er höht sich der pe ri phe re ge fäß wi der stand und so mit die nach last für den mus ku lär we nig aus ge bil de ten lin ken ven tri kel, wel cher we gen der noch be ste hen den prä do mi nanz des rech ten »hy pertro phen« ven tri kels eine fla che, noch nicht kon zen tri sche form auf weist. dies führt dazu, dass der sys te mi sche ven tri kel, welcher nach um stel lung des kreis laufs sei ne pump leis tung na he zu ver dop peln muss, im neu ge bo re nen-und frü hen säug lings al ter noch we nig com pli ant ist und sich des halb schlecht an vor last verän de run gen an pas sen kann. der herz mus kel weist zu dem eine li mi tier te ino tro pe re ser ve auf, und zwar we gen des noch ho hen an teils nicht kon trak ti ler ele men te.dies be deu tet, dass das myo kard des neu ge bo re nen an der gren ze sei ner ka pa zi tät ar bei tet. eine nach last er hö hung (zunah me des sys tem wi der stands) kann des halb schnell zu ei ner ver min de rung des herz mi nu ten vo lu mens füh ren. das herz minu ten vo lu men muss dem zu fol ge mit tels fre quenz stei ge rung erhöht wer den; die ser ef fekt ist aber li mi tiert. mit dem wachs tum ad ap tiert sich das herz des klein kin des an die neu en fül lungsver hält nis se, und der lin ke ven tri kel nimmt zu neh mend eine kon zen tri sche form an.als prak ti sche kon se quen zen er ge ben sich bei neu ge bo renem und säug ling: 4 die vor last re ser ve ist stär ker li mi tiert als beim er wach senen. 4 eine nach last er hö hung wird auf grund der ver min der tenin o tro pie re ser ve und der ver min der ten ven tri ku lä ren complian ce schlech ter to le riert. 4 eine ver min der te ven tri ku lä re com plian ce lässt den in traven tri ku lä ren druck schon bei ge rin ger vo lu men be las tung schnell an stei gen, d. h. hö he re fül lungs drücke müs sen er reicht und oft to le riert wer den, um eine adä qua te ven tri kulä re fül lung zu er rei chen. blut druck wer te va ri ie ren mit dem al ter des kin des. al ter ss pe zifi sche norm wert ta bel len sind des halb zur adä qua ten in ter pre tati on des ge mes se nen blut druck wer tes hilf reich [27] . die nicht-in va si ve blut druck mes sung ist bei neu ge bo re nem und säug ling mit der üb li chen aus kul ta to ri schen me tho de nach kor sa kow äu ßerst schwie rig oder gar un mög lich. os zil lo me trische blut druck mess ge rä te mit ver wen dung ei ner kor rek ten manschet ten grö ße er lau ben aber eine meist zu ver läs si ge mes sung, der blut druck wird aber im all ge mei nen im ver gleich mit in vasiv ge mes se nen wer ten eher leicht über schätzt. ar te ri el le ka the ter wer den auf pä di at ri schen in ten sivsta tionen häu fig ein ge setzt. we gen der klei nen ka the ter grö ße kann ein »dum ping« der puls druck kur ve be ste hen, in die sem fall kann nur der mit tel druck als zu ver läs si ge pa ra me ter ver wen det wer den. bei der wahl des zu punk tie ren den ge fäßes müs sen . abb. 84.5. flow-zeit-kur ve. die lin ke kurve zeigt eine flow-ter mi na ti on vor er neu ter in spi ra ti on, wäh rend der ex spi ra ti ons-flow in der rech ten kur ve vor er neu ter in spi ra ti on nicht die null li nie er reicht ge fäß miss bil dun gen (z. b. ko ark ta ti on der aor ta) oder ei nem zu stand nach er folg tem ge fäß chir ur gi schem ein griff im rahmen eins pal lia ti ven ein griffs bei kon ge ni ta ler herz miss bil dung (z. b. bla lock-taus sig-shunt zwi schen a. sub cla via und pul monal ar te rie bei kri ti scher pul mo nals te no se oder -atre sie) rechnung ge tra gen wer den. klas si sche punk ti ons stel len sind die aa. ra dia lis, fe mo ra lis oder dor sa lis pe dis. eben falls eig net sich die a. axil la ris.! cave die a. bra chia lis soll te we gen des un ge nü gen den kol la teral kreis laufs im ell bo gen be reich nicht punk tiert wer den.nor ma le blut druck wer te schlie ßen beim kind einen schock zustand nicht aus, eben falls kann der schock in dex nicht zur de fini ti on ei nes hy po ten si ven schocks her an ge zo gen wer den. ein schock zu stand wird beim kind des halb häu fig erst spät er kannt, wenn es zur aku ten hä mo dy na mi schen de kom pen sa ti on kommt. die se kann sehr ab rupt auf tre ten, weil das bis an hin ge sun de kind einen schock zu stand er staun lich lan ge gut kom pen sie ren kann. aus die sem grund ist es äu ßerst wich tig, einen schock zu stand im noch kom pen sier ten sta di um früh zei tig zu er ken nen. eine küh le pe ri phe rie, eine ver zö ger te re ka pil la ri sie rungszeit (nor mal ma xi mal 3 s), eine leich te ta chy kar die, evtl. auch das vor han den sein ei ner nicht er klär ten ta chyp noe so wie das auf tre ten ei ner ini ti al oft nur we nig aus ge präg ten me ta bo li schen azi do se soll ten als zei chen ei nes noch kom pen sier ten schock zustands früh zei tig er kannt wer den, be vor es zur schnell le bens bedroh li chen de kom pen sa ti on kommt.nor ma le blut druck wer te schlie ßen beim kind einen schock zu stand nicht aus; der schock in dex ist beim kind un brauch bar. ein kom pen sier ter schock zu stand muss frühzei tig er kannt und ag gres siv be han delt wer den. eine küh le pe ri phe rie, ver zö ger te re ka pil la ri sie rung, leich te ta chy kardie und ta chyp noe kön nen auf einen noch kom pen sier ten schock zu stand hin wei sen. das zu sätz li che vor han den sein ei ner me ta bo li schen lak tata zi do se, wenn auch we nig aus ge prägt, ist ein drin gen des alarm zei chen ei ner dro hen den de kom pen sa ti on.herz ge räusche kön nen beim kind, im ge gen satz zum er wachse nen, ins be son de re nach der neu ge bo re nen pe ri ode bis ins vorschulal ter häu fig aus kul tiert wer den; die meis ten sind je doch klinisch un be deu tend (ak zi den tel le herz ge räusche). ein un auf fälli ge anam ne se (kei ne herz feh ler oder kar dio my opa thi en in der fa mi lie, nor ma le pe ri na ta le adap ta ti on, kei ne hin wei se für eine kon ge ni ta le in fek ti on oder einen ma ter nel len me di ka men tenabu sus, feh len de spe zi fi sche oder un spe zi fi sche symp to me ei ner herzin suf fi zi enz, an der wei ti ge feh len de ab nor ma li tä ten/missbil dun gen, kei ne fa mi li äre be las tung mit plötz li chem kind stod, kei ne hin wei se für ein rheu ma ti sches fie ber) und ein nor ma ler kli ni scher sta tus las sen be reits mit größ ter wahr schein lich keit einen struk tu rel len herz feh ler aus schlie ßen.die herzaus kul ta ti on (. abb. 84.6) er folgt stan dard mä ßig an 4 punk ten: 4 tri ku spid al klap pe: 4.-5. in ter ko stal raum am rech ten sternum rand, evtl. aus strah lend in den xi phoi da len be reich;4 pul mo nal klap pe: 2. in ter ko stal raum am lin ken ster numrand, evtl. aus strah lend rich tung kla vi ku la und/oder nach un ten in den 3. -5. in ter ko stal raum pa ras ter nal links; 4 mi tral klap pe: herz spit zen be reich, evtl. mit aus strah lung in den axil lä ren be reich; 4 aor ten klap pe: 2. in ter ko stal raum rechts mit aus strah lung su pras ter nal und in den hals be reich.herz ge räusche wer den nach der in ten si tät (gra du ie rung 1-6; ab grad 4 ist ein prä kor dia les schwir ren pal pa bel), dem zeit li chem auf tre ten im ver hält nis zur herz pha se und der dau er be ur teilt. wich tig ist zu dem eine cha rak te ri sie rung des 2. herz tons (p 2 ), wel cher klas si scher wei se eine kla re atem va ria bi li tät auf wei sen soll te (ge spal ten in der in spi ra ti ons pha se, nicht ge spal ten in der ex spi ra ti ons pha se).grund re geln zur be ur tei lung von herz ge räuschen 5 harm lo se (ak zi den tel le) herz ge räusche sind nie lau ter als 3/6, und ein prä kor dia les schwir ren kann nie palpiert wer den. 5 eine ge räusch än de rung bei la ge wech sel (auf sit zen) spricht für ein ak zi den tel les ge räusch. 5 ein iso lier tes kur zes sy sto li sches ge räusch ist nor ma lerwei se ein aus trei bungs ge räusch. 5 nor ma le herz tö ne (ins be son de re ein atem va ria bler p 2 ) spre chen eher ge gen ein or ga ni sches herz ge räusch. 5 rein di as to li sche oder kon ti nu ier li che di as to li sche herzge räusche sind prin zi pi ell nicht harm los.ne ben den klas si schen zei chen der herzin suf fi zi enz, wel che identisch sind wie beim er wach se ne, muss beim kind nach sog. un spezi fi schen symp to men anam nes tisch und mit tels kli ni scher un tersu chung ge fahn det wer den. klas si sche un spe zi fi sche symp to me, die den kin der arzt an eine herzin suf fi zi enz den ken las sen, sind: 4 er höh te ru he fre quenz (>160/min im säug lings al ter, >120/ min im vor schulal ter), 4 ver zö ger te ka pil lar fül lung, küh le ex tre mi tä ten, evtl. pe riphe re zya no se, 4 ta chy dyspnoe bis or tho pnoe mit den klas si schen zei chen der ate min suf fi zi enz beim kind (in ter-und sub kos ta le einzie hun gen, na sen flü geln), 4 bron choob struk ti on mit ver län ger tem ex spi ri um und exspi ra to ri schem pfei fen (häu fig als asth ma fehl ge deu tet und ent spre chend in adä quat be han delt), 4 trink schwä che, ins be son de re im säug lings al ter, evtl. as so ziiert mit schlech ter ge wichts zu nah me (er höh te atem ar beit bei zu ge rin ger ka lo ri en zu fuhr), 4 schwit zen bei ge rings ter an stren gung (z. b. beim trin ken).ta chy kar di en sind beim kind sel ten, wer den re la tiv gut to le riert und be ste hen häu fig se kun där zur kom pen sa ti on ei nes klei nen herz zeit vo lu mens (. tab. 84.4). eine spe zi fi sche the ra pie ist, au ßer bei vor lie gen ei ner ta chyar rhyth mie (su pra ven tri ku läre oder ven tri ku lä re ta chy kar die, das äu ßerst sel te ne vor hofflat tern oder -flim mern, ta chy kar der kno te n er satz rhyth mus), nicht an ge zeigt. eine schnel le ori en tie rung be züg lich des typs der ta chy kar den herz rhyth mus stö rung (vent ri ku lär oder su praven tri ku lär) er laubt die be ur tei lung des qrs-kom ple xes (qrs >0,1 s?). si nus ar rhyth mi en kön nen beim kind sehr aus ge prägt sein, mit deut li cher re spi ra to ri scher va ria b li tät. bei ab sin ken der herz frequenz in ruhe kann es so gar zur atrio ven tri ku lä ren dis so zia ti on kom men (vor hof-und kam mer fre quenz mit prak tisch glei cher fre quenz, aber von ein an der un ab hän gig) oder zum phä no men ei nes wan dern den schritt ma chers (ein an de rer, tiefer ge le ge ner schritt ma cher im vor hof über nimmt die fre quenz bei tiefer sinus kno ten fre quenz). all die se va ri an ten der si nus ar rhyth mie sind harm los. das ver schwin den der si nus ar rhyth mie bei körper li cher an stren gung oder evtl. nach atro pin-gabe be stä tigt die di ag no se. bra dyar rhyth mi en, mit aus nah me ei nes vor über ge hen den art rio ven tri ku lä ren blocks grad i, der manch mal im schlaf bei ge sun den kin dern be ob ach tet wer den kann, sind noch selte ner, und ein zig ein art rio ven tri ku lä rer block grad iii (komplet ter block), ob iso liert oder in kom bi na ti on mit ei nem kon ge ni ta len herz feh ler, be darf bei auf tre ten von schwindel zu stän den oder syn ko pen, ei ner mitt le ren herz fre quenz <50/min, dem auf tre ten ven tri ku lä rer pau sen >3 s oder dem auf tre ten ven tri ku lä rer ex tra sy sto len oder ei ner ta chy kar die un ter be las tung der ver sor gung mit ei nem art rio ven tri ku lä ren schritt ma cher.i bei neu auf ge tre te ner herz rhyth mus stö rung (ob ta chy kard oder bra dy kard) müs sen, ab ge se hen von der post ope ra tiven pha se nach kor rek tur ei nes kon ge ni ta len herz feh lers, eine myo kar di tis, eine kar dio myo pa thie ver schie de ner ätio lo gie so wie ein herz tu mor aus ge schlos sen wer den.das ex tra zel lu lär vo lu men (ezv) ist beim neu ge bo re nen im vergleich zum er wach se nen dop pelt so groß (40% des to ta len körper was sers beim neu ge bo re nen ge gen über 20% beim er wach senen) und wäh rend der ers ten 12 le bens mo na te ab, um am ende des 1. le bens jah res er wach se nen wer te zu er rei chen. eben falls nimmt der to ta le was ser be stand im ver lauf des 1. le bens jah res ab (80% des kör per ge wichts beim neu ge bo re nen, 60% des körper ge wichts ab dem 2. le bens jahr; . abb. 84.8).der was ser be darf des klein kin des ist, be zo gen auf das kör perge wicht, grö ßer als beim er wach se nen: säug lin ge be nö tigen täg lich 1/6 des kör per ge wichts oder 160 ml/kg kg/tag (»schop pen re gel«), er wach se ne je doch nur etwa 1/24. bei pa ren te r a ler flüs sig keits zu fuhr ist der nor mal be darf mit 120 ml/kg kg/tag beim säug ling deut lich ge rin ger. als grund re gel gilt, dass der pa ren te r a le be darf 2/3 des en te r alen be darfs ent spricht. dies ist bei be rech nung des flüs sig keitsta ges be darfs zu be rück sich ti gen, ins be son de re bei kom bi nierter en te r a ler und pa ren te r a ler flüs sigk keits zu fuhr, z. b. beim nah rungs auf bau (. tab. 84.5).die täg li che was ser auf nah me des men schen re gelt sich nor maler wei se durch das durst ge fühl in ab hän gig keit von plas ma osmo la li tät und -vo lu men. in sen si ble was ser ver lus te über die haut oder den atem trakt sind ab hän gig von ver schie de nen fi xen fakto ren wie kör per ober flä che und haut be schaf fen heit (z. b. im mature epi der mis beim früh ge bo re nen), re spi ra ti on (z. b. ho hes atem mi nu ten vo lu men), kör per tem pe ra tur, um ge bung stem pera tur und -feuch tig keit. sen si ble was ser ver lus te wer den hauptsäch lich über das urin vo lu men kon trol liert, das haupt säch lich durch die se kre ti on von an ti di ure ti schem hor mon (adh) und an ti na tri ure ti schem pep tid (anp) ge re gelt wird. adh wird v. a. bei re du zier tem plas ma vo lu men aus ge schüt tet, anp bei er höhtem ex tra zel lu lär vo lu men. der säug ling hat eine be schränk te kapa zi tät, was ser aus zu schei den, und zwar auf grund noch vor han-. abb. 84.7. ein fa cher the ra pie al go rith mus bei symp to ma ti scher ta chyar rhyth mie. abb. 84.8. ver än de rung der zu sam men set zung der kör per flüs sig keiten mit dem wachs tum de ner rena ler un rei fe. eben falls kön nen beim säug ling re la tiv hohe adh-ba sis wer te ge mes sen wer den.5 es be steht eine er höh te an fäl lig keit für eine de hy dra tati on, und zwar auf grund er höh ter me ta bo li scher rate, ho hen in sen si blen ver lus ten und ei ner ver min der ten fä hig keit, den urin zu kon zen trie ren. 5 eine vo lu men über las tung mit kon se ku ti vem hy po natriämie ri si ko ist eine klas si sche kom pli ka ti on der vo lumen the ra pie beim klein kind. eine ödem bil dung tritt beim in ten siv pa ti en ten eben falls häu fi g auf, ins be sonde re beim in tu bier ten pa ti en ten in fol ge nicht be rücksich ti gung der ver min der ten in sen si blen flüs sig keitsver lus te und bei nicht re strik ti ver flüs sig keits zu fuhr ge mäß den ge nann ten richt li ni en. bei säug ling und klein kind müs sen in der flüs sig keits bi lanz auch sämtli che in tra ve nös ver ab reich ten me di ka men te so wie ve nen-und/oder ar te ri en fl us hs ein ge rech net wer den.die wich tigs ten und am häu figs ten an zu tref fen den elek tro lytstö run gen beim kind sind stö run gen im na tri um haus halt. es wer den des halb hier nur die se be spro chen und an sons ten auf 7 kap. 20 ver wie sen.nat ri um. nat ri um ist das wich tigs te ka ti on des ex tra zel lu lärraums. der täg li che be darf be trägt etwa 2-4 mmol/kg kg. stö run gen des na tri um chlo rid haus halts las sen sich in die dehy dra ta ti on (ex tra zel lu lä rer salz-und was ser ver lust) und die hy perhy dra ta ti on (ex tra zel lu lä rer salz-und was ser über schuss) ein tei len. in bei den si tua tio nen bleibt die ge mes se ne se rum natri um kon zen tra ti on im nor mal be reich, so fern der was ser überschuss dem na tri u m über schuss bzw. der was ser ver lust dem na tri um ver lust ent spricht. bei gleich zei ti gem auft re ten ei ner hy po na triämie oder ei ner hy per na triämie, den häu fi gs ten elektro lyt stö run gen beim kind, ist der was ser haus halt eben falls ge stört. urin un ter su chun gen (urin-spot mit be stim mung des urin na tri um ge halts und der frak ti on des fi l trier ten na tri ums: fnae) kön nen in die sen si tua tio nen wert vol le ätio lo gi sche hinwei se ge ben und ge hö ren zur stan dard un ter su chung bei vor liegen ei nes pa tho lo gi schen se rum na tri um wer tes beim kind. die aus ge schie de ne frak ti on des fi l trier ten na tri ums (fnae) be rechnet sich nach fol gen der for mel (nor mal wert: <1,5%):f na e = clea ran ce na · 100 clea ran ce kr = urin -na · v · plas ma -kr · 100 plas ma -na urin -kr · vi urin na tri um kon zen tra tio nen <25 mmol/l sind ver ein bar mit ei ner re duk ti on des eff ek ti ven zir ku lie ren den vo lumens (prä rena le ur sa che), urin na tri um kon zen tra tio nen >25 mmol/l sind ver ein bar mit ei ner tu bu lä ren dys funkti on, dem ge brauch von di ure ti ka oder ei nem siadh (syn drom der in ad äqua ten adh-se kre ti on; [17] ).hy po na triämie. häu fi ge ur sa chen ei ner hy po na triämie (se rumna tri um wert <135 mmol/l) sind in . tabelle 84.6 zu sam men gestellt. bei ra scher ent wick lung ei ner hy po na triämie, ins be son de re ohne be glei ten de de hy dra ta ti on, be steht ein großes hirn ödem ri siko. re la tiv akut auft re ten de symp to me (spe zi fi sche anam ne se für ein trau ma) -wie kopf schmer zen, übel keit, ze re bra le krampf anfäl le oder koma -sind klas si sche leit sym pto me. bei be stä ti gung ei ner hy po na triämie er üb rigt sich eine kra nia le com pu ter to mogra phie, weil die se nur einen un nö ti gen zeit ver lust dar stellt, eine th e ra pie muss je doch so fort ein ge lei tet wer den.i eine schwe re symp to ma ti sche aku te hy po na triämie (se rum na tri um wert <120 mmol/l) er for dert eine schnel le kor rek tur mit na tri um ga be in form ei ner 3%igen na tri umchlo rid lö sung bis zu ei nem na tri um wert von 125 mmol/l. ab die sem wert wird eine lang sa me kor rek tur wei ter geführt, v. a. mit tels flüs sig keits re strik ti on.bei ei ner chro ni schen hy po na triämie, wel che meist asym pto matisch ver läuft, ist hin ge gen eine schnel le kor rek tur von be ginn an kon train di ziert. in die ser si tu a ti on be steht ein er heb li ches ri si ko, durch die schnel len ext ra-und in tra zel lu lä ren salz-und was ser ver la ge run gen zent ra le pon ti ne hirn lä sio nen (mye li nose) zu pro vo zie ren [26] . so wohl das syn drom der in ad äqua ten adh-se kre ti on (siadh) mit pa tho lo gi scher was ser re ten ti on als auch das syn drom des ze re bra len »salt was ting« (csw) mit hy po na triämie und er höh ter salz aus schei dung kom men im kin desal ter in der ei gent li chen de fi ni ti on nur sehr sel ten vor. als siadh ta xier te stö run gen sind in der re gel ia tro gen durch zu fuhr von zu viel frei em was ser in du ziert [16, 17] 1600-1800 ml/m 2 10-20 kg 40 ml + 2 ml/kg kg (pro kg >10 kg) 1000 ml + 50 ml/kg kg (pro kg >10 kg) 1800 ml/m 2 >20 kg 60 ml + 1 ml/kg kg (pro kg >20 kg) 1500 ml + 20 ml/kg kg (pro kg >20 kg) 1800 ml/m 2 beim neu ge bo re nen bis zum 3. le bens tag so wie beim früh ge bo re nen gel ten be son de re re geln.wer den als sol ches bei vor lie gen der hy po na triämie mit nor malem ex tra zel lu lär vo lu men we gen kreis lau fin du zier ter pa tho lo gischer va so press in se kre ti on fehl in ter pre tiert. die di ag no se ei nes csw ist eine aus schluss dia gno se. in tra ze re bra le lä sio nen so wie eine pa tho lo gi sche nat ri um-und chlo rid aus schei dung müs sen vor lie gen. »phy sio lo gi sche« ur sa chen ei ner er höh ten nat ri umund chlo rid aus schei dung -wie die zu fuhr von zu viel was ser und salz (ex pan dier tes ex tra zel lu lär vo lu men), di ure ti ka the rapie oder ein nie ren ver sa gen mit ho her un rin pro duk ti on (»high out put renal fai lu re«) -müs sen pri mär aus ge schlos sen wer den [24] .i auch beim kind soll ten iso to ni sche koch salz lö sun gen zur vo lu me ner hal tungs the ra pie ein ge setzt wer den. la tro gen in du zier te hy po na triämi en kön nen so weit ge hend ver mieden wer den.hy per na triämie. eine hy per na triämie (na tri um wert >145 mmol/l) ent steht v. a. bei re du zier ter was ser zu fuhr re spek tiv bei er höh tem was ser ver lust. ein er höh ter was ser ver lust wird ins be son de re bei enor men in sen si blen ver lus ten (z. b. beim früh ge bo re nen aufgrund sei ner re la tiv gro ßen kör per ober fl ä che im ver gleich zur kör per mas se, beim ver bren nungs pa ti en ten, beim hoch fe bri len klein kind oder beim kind mit ei nem atem not syn drom) oder bei er höh ten ga stro in tes tina len ver lus ten im rah men ei ner ga stro ente ri tis häu fi g un ter schätzt. ir ri ta bi li tät, le thar gie und koma sind die haupt sym ptome ei ner schnell auf tre ten den hy per na triämie. die se führt zur ver schie bung von kör per was ser vom in tra zel lu lär raum in den ex tra zel lu lär raum, d. h. zur zell schrump fung. dies kann zu einem aku ten schrump fen des hirns füh ren, was scher kräf te im be reich der me nin gen be wirkt und mit ei nem er heb li chen blutungs ri si ko ein her geht. eben falls wur den si nus-ve no sus-thrombo sen und de mye li ni sie ren de lä sio nen be schrie ben.i eine schwe re hy per na triämie (na tri um wert >155 mmol/l) ist beim kind mit ei ner ho hen mor ta li tät und beim neuge bo re nen mit ei nem ver min der ten neu ro lo gi schen out co me (nach hy per na triämi ein du zier ter hirn blu tung) ver bun den.. tabelle 84.6. ur sa chen der hy po na triämie ge samt kör per na tri um ver min dert, hy po to ne de hy dra ta ti on ge samt kör per na tri um nor mal ge samt kör per na tri um er höht, hy po to ne hy perhy dra ta ti on na tri um ver lust grö ßer als was ser ver lust, vo lu men man gelrei ne was ser re ten ti on was ser re ten ti on grö ßer als na tri um re ten ti on, ödem bil dungschwe re aku te und chro ni sche lun gen krank heit herzin suffi zi enz das blut vo lu men ist bei neu ge bo re nen und säug lin gen mit etwa 80 ml/kg kg re la tiv groß (beim neu ge bo re nen kann dies stark va ri ie ren -von 50 bis 100 ml/kg kg, je nach vo lu men der transpla zen ta ren trans fu si on bei ge burt) und sinkt im ver lauf des ersten le bens jah res bis auf 65 ml/kg kg ab. der hä mo glo bin ge halt -nor ma ler wei se bei ge burt we gen der tie fen in tra ute ri nen ar teri el len sau er stoff sät ti gung des fe tus hoch (15-20 g/dl) -sinkt beim säug ling in den ers ten 3 mo na ten bis auf wer te von 8-12 g/ dl (tri me no nan ämie), um dann bis mit te/ende des 1. le bens jahres wie der auf wer te von 10-15 g/dl an zu stei gen (. tab. 84.7).in di ka tio nen. bei vor lie gen ei ner anä mie stellt sich ne ben der fra ge nach der ätio lo gie die fra ge, ob eine blut trans fu si on in diziert ist. beim kri tisch kran ken kind soll dies un ab hän gig vom al ter be ur teilt wer den -ein zig auf der ba sis, ob ein aus rei chendes sau er stoff an ge bot (do 2 ) ge währ leis tet wer den kann. es müssen des halb schwer zu er fas sen de fak to ren, wie die sau er stoff ex-trak ti on und das herz mi nu ten vo lu men, bei die ser ent schei dung be rück sich tigt wer den. in si tua tio nen mit mög li cher wei se kri tischem do 2 (evtl. in di rekt be stä tigt durch das vor han den sein einer me ta bo li schen azi do se bei kli nisch als »adä quat » be ur teil ter pe ri phe rer durch blu tung) soll ten hä mo glo bin kon zen tra tio nen von 12 g/dl an ge strebt wer den; bei pa ti en ten mit zya no ti schem herz feh ler und sau er stoff sät ti gungs wer ten <85% ist ein noch hö he rer hä mo glo bin wert von 15-16 g/dl wün schens wert. bei sonst ge sun den pa ti en ten mit aku tem blut ver lust ist mit ei nem re du zier ten do 2 ab ei nem hä ma to krit (hkt) von 30% (hä moglo bin wert 10 g/dl), bei chro ni scher anä mie ab ei nem hkt von etwa 25% (hä mo glo bin wert 8 g/dl) zu rech nen. eine trans fu si on von ery thro zy ten kon zen tra ten ist je doch mit aus nah me der oben er wähn ten spe zi el len si tua tio nen auch beim kri tisch kran ken pa ti en ten bei ei nem hä mo glo bin wert >8 g/dl kaum ge recht fer tigt. zwei ein fa che trans fu si ons for meln hel fen bei der ab schät zung des trans fu si ons be darfs: 4 6 ml voll blut/kg kg er hö hen den hä mo glo bin wert um 1 g/dl; 4 3 ml ery thro zy ten kon zen trat/kg kg er hö hen den hä mo globin wert um 1 g/dl.aus wahl des blut kom po nen ten pro dukts. im all ge mei nen gelten die glei chen richt li ni en be züg lich der trans fu si ons kom ponen ten the ra pie wie beim er wach se nen: 4 trans fu sio nen von voll blut kon ser ven sind nicht mehr gebräuch lich. 4 ery thro zy ten kon zen tra te soll ten wäh rend der trans fu si on ge fil tert wer den (leu ko zy ten fil ter). 4 bei klei nen kin dern (un ter 10 kg kg) oder bei gro ßen trans fu si ons men gen soll ten die ery thro zy ten kon ser ven min des tens auf raum tem pe ra tur oder hö her er wärmt werden.»fresh fro zen plas ma« (ffp) wird ins be son de re beim klein kind bei ho hen kör per flüs sig keits ver lus ten (z. b. post ope ra ti ve thora xdrai na ge, aszi tes drai na ge) als pro dukt der ers ten wahl einge setzt -ei ner seits zur kom pen sa ti on der flüs sig keits ver lus te, an de rer seits um gleich zei tig die blut ko agu la ti ons fak to ren zu ersetz ten, wel che bei ho hem drai na ge vo lu men eben falls ver lo ren ge hen. da mit kann zu dem, je doch al len falls mit klei nen zu sätz lichen men gen an kon zen trier tem al bu min (lang sam zu in fun dieren, ins be son de re bei säug ling und neu ge bo re nem we gen der ho hen os mo la ri tät der lö sung), der al bu min ge halt auf recht erhal ten wer den. als ziel grö ße ist zur auf recht er hal tung ei nes adäqua ten kol loi dos mo ti schen druckes ein al bu min wert von 30 g/l an zu stre ben. i der ener gie be darf in kcal ist etwa gleich groß wie der wasser be darf in ml.der me ta bo li sche grund um satz nimmt deut lich zu mit der körper tem pe ra tur (+ 10% pro 1°c über 37°c) und un ter stress (trauma, sep sis, post ope ra tiv), nimmt je doch ab un ter se da ti ons-und schmerz the ra pie (5-10%) und bei mus kel pa ra ly se (bis 20%; [28] ). dies sind klas si sche va ria beln beim in ten siv pa ti en ten, die täg lich in er wä gung ge zo gen wer den müs sen. eine sen kung von fie ber bis evtl. zur in duk ti on ei ner hy po ther mie zur sen kung der me ta bo li schen rate und/oder zur re duk ti on des ge we be sauer stoff ver brauchs (vo 2 ) kann in ei ni gen si tua tio nen durch aus ge recht fer tigt sein (z. b. bei ver bren nungs pa ti en ten [13, 32] , oder post ope ra tiv nach herz chir ur gi schem ein griff). ak tu ell evalu ie ren meh re re kon trol lier te ran do mi sier te stu di en den ef fekt ei ner hy po ther mie be hand lung auf den out co me bei kin dern mit schä del-hirn-trau ma oder mit aku ter hy po xisch-ischämischer en ze pha lo pa thie. das kri tisch kran ke kind, wie auch der er wach se ne, be nö tigt we gen des vor han de nen hy per me ta bo lis mus und ei ner ver minder ten ka pa zi tät der sub strat ver wer tung (sub stra toxi da ti on) mit dem ri si ko ei ner sich schnell ent wi ckeln den ka ta bo len stoff wech sel la ge [6] eine er höh te ener gie zu fuhr. op ti mal wäre des halb die täg li che mes sung des to ta len ener gie ver brauchs mittels in di rek ter ka lo ri me trie so wie der stick stof faus schei dung (als mar ker der pro te in oxi da ti on; [16] ). die in di rek te ka lo ri me trie ist je doch um ständ lich und ins be son de re bei in tu bier ten pa ti enten we gen häu fig vor han de ner tu bus lecka ge mit vie len feh lerquel len be haf tet [8] .prak ti sche und prag ma ti sche re geln für die ener gie zu fuhr 5 man rech net mit ei nem um 10-15% er höh ten energie ver brauch bei je dem se dier ten in ten siv pa ti en ten (aus nah me: ver bren nungs pa ti en ten: + 50-100%). 5 das spon tanat men de, nicht se dier te kind mit ei nematem not syn drom ver braucht etwa 20-30% mehr energie. 5 ami no säu ren kön nen nur dann zur pro te in syn the se ge nutzt wer den, wenn ge nü gend ener gie aus nichtprote in hal ti gen quel len zu ge führt wird (d. h. pro 1 g ami no säu ren 20-30 kcal ener gie aus nicht prote in hal tigen quel len). i5 in der re gel wird bei kin dern eine glu ko se zu fuhr von 6-10 mg/kg kg/min gut to le riert, kann aber bei ein geschränk ter glu ko se to le ranz (im rah men ei ner sep sis oder ei nes schwe ren trau mas, post ope ra tiv) zur hy perglyk ämie füh ren. 5 die fett zu fuhr wird schritt wei se von 1-3 g/kg kg/tag in 1-g-schrit ten (beim neu ge bo re nen von 0,5-3 g/kg kg/ tag in 0,5-g-schrit ten) auf ge baut. eine re duk ti on der fett zu fuhr wird im all ge mei nen nur bei vor lie gen ei ner schwe ren sep sis oder ei nes sys te mi schen in flam ma tori schen syn droms (sirs) emp foh len. in der re gel ist es rat sam, bei er höh tem wert des c-re ak ti ven pro te ins die fett zu fuhr auf ma xi mal 1 g/kg kg/tag zu re du zie ren (>10 mg/l). bei lang fris tig not wen di ger son de ner näh rung -z. b. bei neuro ge nen schluck stö run gen, miss bil dun gen des öso pha gus, des magens oder des dar mes so wie bei chro ni schen er näh rungs pro blemen (not wen di ge hy per ka lo ri sche er näh rung, z. b. bei zys ti scher fib rose) -ist eine er näh rung via ga stro sto mie oder je ju no sto mie zu er wä gen. je ju nal son den, wel che chi rur gisch üb li cher wei se in kurz nar ko se ein ge legt wer den, er lau ben die kon ti nu ier li che sondie rung mit re du zier tem ri si ko der aspi ra ti on von ma gen in halt (z. b. bei aus ge präg tem ga stroöso pha ge alem re flux).i beim kind ist bei zu er war ten den en te r a len er näh rungsschwie rig kei ten oder bei ei ner kon train di ka ti on zur en te r a len er näh rung an eine pa ren te r a le er näh rung viel früh zei ti ger zu den ken als beim er wach se nen (beim neu ge bo re nen nach 1-2 ta gen, beim klein kind nach spätes tens 3-4 ta gen).eine pa ren te r a le er näh rung beim klein kind er for dert we gen der ver wen dung oft hoch kon zen trier ter glu ko se lö sun gen (glu ko se >10%) in der re gel einen zen tral ve nö sen zu gang. die prin zi pi en der pa ren te r a len er näh rung sind die glei chen wie beim er wachse nen, al ler dings sind beim kind eine hö he re ka lo ri en-, ei weißund fett zu fuhr not wen dig (. tab. 84.9).in ers ter li nie wer den ben zo dia ze pi ne (mi da zo lam, lo ra zepam) und chlo ral hy drat in der pä di at ri schen in ten siv me di zin ein ge setzt und häu fig mit opia ten zur an al ge sie kom bi niert. mi da zo lam hat eine re la tiv kur ze halb werts zeit und eig net sich des halb in do sen von 0,1-0,2 mg/kg kg/h (max. 0,3 mg/ kg kg/h) zur kon ti nu ier li chen se da ti on mit tels daue rin fu sion und be währt sich auch für die be hand lung von ze re bra len krampf an fäl len (ins be son de re beim sta tus epi lep ti cus). we gen der ak ti ven me ta bo li te mit teil wei se lan ger halb werts zeit besteht ein ge wis ses ri si ko der über se da ti on oder ei ner ge wis sen la tenz (bis 24 h und mehr in ex trem fäl len) zwi schen ab setz ten und er wa chen des kin des, dies ins be son de re beim neu ge bo renen.als al ter na ti ve und ins be son de re zur kurz zeitse da ti on kann chlo ral hy drat in ei ner do sis von 25-50 mg/kg kg einge setzt wer den, und zwar oral, per son de oder rek tal. als uner wünsch te ne ben wir kung, wie ei gent lich bei al len se da ti va, kann zeit wei se ein blut druck ab fall be ob ach tet wer den. mit ei-ner ver län ger ten wir kung ist bei pa ti en ten mit le be r in suf fi zienz zu rech nen.eine bo lus ga be von mi da zo lam kann zu hä mo dy nami scher in sta bi li tät füh ren und soll te des halb beim sep ti schen pa ti en ten, wenn auch im noch kom pen sier ten schock sta di um, nur mit größ ter vor sicht ver wen det werden. post ope ra tiv un mit tel bar nach herz chir ur gi schem ein griff sind bo lus ga ben ob so let [23] . ge ne rell emp fi ehlt es sich, un ab hän gig von der ver wende ten phar ma ko lo gi schen sub stanz, bei der se da ti on des hä mo dy na misch po ten zi ell un sta bi len kin des auf bo lus gaben zu ver zich tendie er ken nung von schmer zen beim klein kind braucht teil weise viel fin ger spit zen ge fühl. ein kind mit schmer zen muss nicht un be dingt un glück lich er schei nen oder wei nen, es kann hin gegen einen gest ress ten, ängst li chen ein druck ver mit teln. ebenfalls ist es ein irr tum zu glau ben, dass ein schla fen des kind kei ne schmer zen ha ben kann. üb li cher wei se müs sen zur er fas sung des schmer zes in di rek te pa ra me ter -wie er höh te herz fre quenz, er höh ter blut druck, un ru he und an de re mehr -her an ge zo gen wer den. hilf reich kön nen sog. »pain sca les« zur er fas sung mögli cher schmer zen sein -nicht nur bei kin dern, die sich noch nicht ver bal aus drücken kön nen, son dern auch bei grö ße ren kindern (. abb. 84.9). vi su ell ge stal te te ska len (ab ge stuft vom trauri gen bis zum lä cheln den ge sicht) be wäh ren sich sehr gut beim an sprech ba ren kind [13] . opioide, ins be son de re mor phin, als daue rin fu si on sind klassi sche schmerz me di ka men te in der pä di at ri schen in ten siv me dizin. bei grö ße ren, in tu bier ten kin dern wer den do sen von 40-80 g/kg kg/h gut ver tra gen, beim in tu bier ten säug ling rei chen oft klei ne re do sen von 10-20 g/kg kg/h. beim grö ße ren, nicht in tu bier ten kind wer den do sen von 40-80 g/kg kg/h nor maler wei se ohne zei chen ei ner atem de pres si on gut ver tra gen, bei nicht be at me ten säug lin gen muss die do sis je doch dras tisch auf <20 g/kg kg/h ge senkt wer den.i fen ta nyl, sei tens der hä mo dy na mik sehr gut ver träg lich, kann als al ter na ti ve ver ab reicht wer den, eine ge wis se zurück hal tung ist je doch we gen be rich te ter aku ter tho ra xri gi di tät nach fen ta nyl-bo lus ga ben beim kind jeg li chen al ters ge recht fer tigt.pro po fol, ein hypnoti kum, wird re gel mä ßig im ope ra ti ons saal für die kurz zeit an äs the sie ein ge setzt und be währt sich eben falls auf der in ten siv pfle ge sta ti on wäh rend kurz ein grif fen. zu neh mend wer den auch in der kin der in ten siv me di zin sco resys te me zur schwe re grad be ur tei lung und zur »out co me pre dicti on«, letzt end lich aber auch zur qua li täts kon trol le ein ge setzt. sco re sys te me, wie apa che-ii oder -iii und saps ii, die zur schwe re grad be ur tei lung beim er wach se nen üb li cher wei se ein gesetzt wer den, oder der tiss-28 als the ra peu ti scher sco re eig nen sich je doch beim kind nicht.das mor ta li täts ri si ko ver hält sich pro por tio nal zur an zahl der ver sa gen den or ga ne: 5 ca. 1% bei ver sa gen ei nes or gans, 5 ca. 10% bei ver sa gen von 2 or ga nen, 5 ca. 50% bei ver sa gen von 3 or ga nen, 5 >75% bei ver sa gen von 4 or ga nen [29] .die se ein fa chen grund re geln be wäh ren sich im kli ni schen all tag, ins be son de re auch als hil fe beim täg li chen el tern gespräch.die de fi ni ti on des or gan ver sa gens be ruht auf phy sio lo gi schen va ria beln, des halb er laubt die er fas sung in di vi du el ler phy sio logi scher pa ra me ter eine ver fei ne rung der ge nann ten re geln. für das kind wur den al ter ss pe zi fi sche mor ta li täts s co res ent wi ckelt, wie der prism-iii (pe dia tric risk of mor ta li ty; [21] ), der pim bzw. neu er dings der pim2 (pe dia tric in dex of mor ta li ty; [25] ), anzu wen den beim kind und beim säug ling ab dem 28. le bens tag, der crib (cli ni cal risk in dex for ba bies) oder der snap (sco re for neo na tal acu te phy sio lo gy), an zu wen den bei neu ge bo re nen mit we ni ger als 1500 g ge burts ge wicht [20] . der tiss-sco re existiert mitt ler wei le in meh re ren ad ap tier ten va ri an ten und kann auch beim kind hilf reich sein, ins be son de re zur be ur tei lung des pfle ge auf wan des und -be darfs ei nes pa ti en ten.mor ta li täts s co res für das kin desal ter 5 prism: da ten er fas sung (18 va ria blen, ma xi ma ler und mi ni ma ler pa tho lo gi scher wert) in ner halb der ers ten 24 h auf der in ten sivsta ti on 5 prism iii: da ten er fas sung (23 va ria blen, ma xi ma ler und mi ni ma ler pa tho lo gi scher wert), in ner halb den ers ten 12-24 h nach auf nah me auf die in ten sivsta ti on [21] nach tei le des prism und des prism iii: kei ne er fas sung vorbe ste hen der grund er kran kun gen, eine teu re li zenz muss ge kauft wer den 5 pim2: er fas sung von phy sio lo gi schen da ten (7 da ten) so wie ka te go ri sie rung in »high risk« oder »low risk« vor be ste hen der er kran kun gen, er ho ben beim ers ten kon takt (oder in ner halb der ers ten stun de nach ers tem kon takt) des in ten siv me di zi ners mit dem pa ti en ten [24] vor tei le des pim: ein fa che da ten er fas sung, vor be ste hen de er kran kun gen wer den er fasst, das pro gramm steht gra tis zur ver fü gung. krank heits bil der spe zi fi sche sco res exis tie ren in großer zahl (z. b. me nin go kok ken sep sis-sco re, päd ia tri scher trau mas co re, lung in ju ry sco re), ihre ver läss lich keit, den best mög lich outco me vor aus zu sa gen, bleibt je doch z. t. frag wür dig.um schnell und ef fi zi ent eine kin der reani ma ti on durch füh ren zu kön nen, müs sen die pa tho phy sio lo gi schen me cha nis men, wel che beim kind zum herz-kreis lauf-still stand füh ren kön nen, be kannt sein.! ist der herz-kreis lauf-still stand ein mal ein ge tre ten, sin ken die chan cen ei ner er folg rei chen re ani ma ti on prak tisch auf null. bei ei nem re ani ma ti ons er folg sind prak tisch in al len fäl len neu ro lo gi sche lang zeit schä den zu be fürch ten [22] .der er ken nung von häu fig un spe zi fi schen symp to men kommt eine große be deu tung zu, der er folg der re ani ma ti on beim kind liegt in der prä ven ti on des herz-kreis lauf-still stands. der pri märe herz still stand als fol ge ei ner herz rhyth mus störung, ein klas si sches er eig nis beim er wach se nen pa ti en ten, ist beim kind äu ßerst sel ten. der se kun däre herz still stand, cha rak teri siert durch eine bra dy kar die, ge folgt vom aku ten si nus s till stand, ist hin ge gen viel häu fi ger und di rek te fol ge ei ner pri mären re spira to ri schen stö rung oder ei nes kreis lauf ver sa gens mit -meist hypo xie be ding ter -in tra zel lu lä rer azi do se. der atem still stand tritt also in der re gel vor dem herz-kreis lauf-still stand auf. die bei den häu figs ten ur sa chen des aku ten atem-herz-kreislauf-still stands beim kind sind: 4 aku te at men in suf fi zi enz, v. a. bei in fek ti on oder aku ter verle gung der obe ren atem we ge, 4 schock zu stand ver schie de ner ätio lo gie, doch meis tens im rah men ei ner sep sis.in bei den si tua tio nen kommt es zu ei nem mög li cher wei se schnell pro gres si ven kom bi nier ten kar dio pul mo na len ver sa gen und letzt end lich zum herz still stand. spe zi fi sche the ra pie maßnah men die ser krank heits bil der wer den in 7 kap. 84.5 in den ent spre chen den ab schnit ten dis ku tiert.kin des ist, eine er folg lo se re ani ma ti on ab zu bre chen.. tabelle 84.10. do sie run gen der ge bräuch lichs ten me di ka men te im rah men der kar dio pul mo na len re ani ma ti on die si che rung der atem we ge ist im mer das obers te und ers te prin zip ei ner er folg ver spre chen den re ani ma ti on beim kind. die rich ti ge tech nik bei mas ken be at mung so wie der ge brauch von hilfs mit teln (oro pha ryn ge aler tu bus) er lau ben in fast al len fäl len, auch bei hoch gra di ger ob struk ti on der obe ren atem we ge (epiglotti tis, krupp-syn drom, la ryn gotra cheo ma la zie, fremd kör pe ra spira ti on), eine aus rei chen de oxy ge na ti on zu ge währ leis ten und zeit zu ge win nen, um den er fah rens ten in tu bie ren zu las sen.mas ke zu be at men.so fern beim hä mo dy na misch in sta bi len kind (auch im noch kom pen sier ten schock zu stand) in ner halb von 2 ver su chen kein in tra ve nö ser zu gang ge legt wer den kann, muss eine in tra os sä rer zu gang ge wählt wer den.die klas si sche punk ti ons stel le für die in tra os sä re in fu si on ist die an te rio me dia le drei ecks flä che des pro xi ma len ti bia-6 schafts (1 cm me di al und 1 cm dis tal der epi phy sen fu ge). es wird eine 13-oder 18-g-na del mit sti lett ver wen det. bei der punk ti on wird ein plötz li ches ein bre chen in den kno chen markraum ver spürt; die na del soll te nun fest sit zen und nicht mehr be weg lich sein. nach ei ner kon trol la spi ra tion (kno chen mark) kann über die sen zu gang eine voll stän dige, schnel le vo lu men reani ma ti on oder me di ka men te nad minis tra ti on ent spre chend ei ner groß ka lib ri gen in tra ve nö sen lei tung durch ge führt wer den. eine re gel mä ßi ge kon trol le der mus ku lä ren ti bia lo ge ist un ab ding bar (cave: ex tra va sa ti ons ri si ko bei ak zi den tel lem durch bre chen der pos te rio ren kor ti ka lis).die do sie run gen der ge bräuch lichs ten me di ka men te im rahmen der kar dio pul mo na len re ani ma ti on sind . tabelle 84.10 zu ent neh men.häu figs te ur sa chen ei ner aku ten all er gi schen re ak ti on sind pencil lin, la tex, kon trast mit tel und spa ni sche nüs se.5 bei zei chen der atem wegs ob struk tion: ad re na lin (10 g/kg kg i.m.), evtl. sal butamol per in ha la ti on; sofern er folg los: in tu ba ti on 5 bei puls lo sig keit: so for ti ge kar dio pul mo na le re ani ma tion, ad re na lin (10 g/kg kg) so wie vo lu men bo lus von 20 ml/kg kg 0,9%ige nacl-lö sung 5 eine all er gie ab klä rung ist nach ei ner ana phy lak ti schen re ak ti on auf je den fall drin gend zu emp feh lenhäu figs te ur sa chen ei nes hy po volä mi schen schocks beim kleinkind sind aku te oder sub a ku te flüs sig keits ver lus te bei de hy drata ti on bzw. nach trau ma oder eine sep sis. eine ver ab rei chung von 100% sau er stoff ist in je dem fall indi ziert, die atem we ge müs sen früh zei tig ge si chert wer den, weil ein evtl. erst spä ter auf tre ten des la rynx ödem die atemwe ge schnell ob stru ie ren kann. eben falls muss nach zei chen ei ner koh len mon oxyd-(co-) oder zya nid ver gif tung be wusst ge sucht wer den. hin weis auf eine co-ver gif tung kann das vor lie gen ei ner ta chyp noe oder ei ner azi do se bei gu ter oxyge na ti on (nor ma le trans ku ta ne sau er stoff sät ti gung) sein. die mes sung des o 2 -sät ti gungs wer tes mit ei nem co-oxy me ter ist ab so lut not wen dig. bei vor lie gen ei ner co-ver gif tung (hbco-wert >15%) ist eine so for ti ge the ra pie mit 100% sauer stoff in di ziert. (die in di ka ti on zur hy per ba ren sau er stoff thera pie wird beim kind re strik tiv ge stellt weil oft schwie rig zu or ga ni sie ren, mit zu vie len ri si ken ver bun den und be züg lich out co me-da ten be wie se ner ma ßen nur ef fekt voll beim ko matö sen pa ti en ten.) das ri si ko ei ner zya nid ver gif tung ist re la tiv groß bei ei ner rau chin to xi ka ti on. eine an ti dot the ra pie soll te des halb schnell, si cher aber bei vor han de ner me ta bo li scher azi do se, ein ge lei tet wer den (hy dro xo co ba la mi ne 50 mg/kg kg in iso to ni scher gluko se lö sung und 4 ml/kg kg na-thio sul fa te 10% als kurz in fu sion über 3 bis 5 min).ein hy po volä mi scher schock zu stand ist das zwei te große ri si ko für einen ver bren nungs pa ti en ten. beim kind mit ei ner re la tiv grö ße ren kör per ober flä che im ver gleich zum er wachse nen ist die ge fahr des vo lu men ver lusts noch aus ge präg ter (. tab. 84.11; 7 kap. 72.1.3). die vo lu men the ra pie be steht aus dem er hal tungs be darf und dem er satz des zu er war ten den flüssig keits ver lusts pro 24 h ge mäß den in fol gen der über sicht auf geführ ten richt li ni en.vo lu men the ra pie bei pä di at ri schen ver bren nungs pa ti en ten die ge nann ten for meln kön nen nur als gro be richt li ni en aufge fasst wer den, da auch hier oder mit an de ren ge bräuch li chen for meln nach wie vor ein großes ri si ko der hy per-oder hypo hydra ta ti on be steht, bei de mit ei nem be trächt li chen mor ta li täts ri siko ver bun den. jede hy dra ta ti ons the ra pie er for dert des halb eine mehr mals täg li che be ur tei lung des hy dra ta ti ons zu stands mit mes sung des zen tra len ve nen drucks, der uri n aus schei dung und wie der hol ten blut gas ana ly sen. als schluss punk te ei ner gu ten hy dra ta ti ons the ra pie sollten, in ab we sen heit ei ner glu kos urie, eine uri n aus schei dung von 0,5-1,0 ml/kg kg/h, ein ba sen de fi zit von we ni ger als -2 und ein sy sto li scher blut druck bei klein kin dern von min des tens 70-90+2 das al ter des pa ti en ten an ge strebt wer den. dop amin in ge rin ger do sie rung (5 g/kg kg/min) soll evtl. früh zei tig einge setzt wer den und scheint ins be son de re beim klein kind einen po si ti ven ef fekt auf die uri n aus schei dung zu ha ben.in ei ner zwei ten pha se (d. h. so bald wie mög lich) ist eine er höh te ka lo ri en zu fuhr vom 1,5-fa chen des me ta bo li schen grund um sat zes mit ei ner reich li chen pro te in zu fuhr von 2,5-3 g/kg kg/tag si cher zu stel len. die er näh rung soll te, wenn immer mög lich, en te r al er fol gen.der ver lus ter satz er folgt in ti al mit kris tal loid lö sun gen und so bald wie mög lich mit »fresh fro zen plas ma« (ffp) und evtl. zu sätz lich mit 20%iger al bu min lö sung -je nach ge mes senem se ru m al bu min wert (ziel grö ße: se ru m al bu min wert etwa 30 g/l).ein chir ur gi sches dé brid ement wird früh zei tig emp foh len.ein er trin ken läuft klas si scher wei se in 2 pha sen ab: 4 das kind sinkt ohne jeg li che ver zweif lungs be we gun gen ab (nicht wie im film nor ma ler wei se ge zeigt) und ohne atem be we gun gen, und zwar we gen des vor han de nen sog. »di ving-re fle xes« (ap noe, bra dy kar die, pe ri phe re va so konstrik ti on; [10] ). 4 atem be we gun gen er fol gen erst nach die ser ers ten pha se bei an stei gen des co 2 -und ab fal len des o 2 -par ti al drucks. die se atem be we gun gen kön nen dann erst se kun där zur was sera spi ra ti on füh ren [14] .ne ben den aus wir kun gen ei ner mög li chen hy po xisch-ischämischen en ze pha lo pa thie ist in der früh pha se nach re ani ma ti on v. a. mit ei nem lun gen ödem zu rech nen, und zwar we gen der ab sorp ti on von was ser in den blut kreis lauf mit er höh tem zir kulie ren den blut vo lu men und er höh tem in tra pul mo na len shunt (auf grund re gio na ler hyp oxie -flüs sig keit in den atem we gen und sur fac tan tin ak ti vie rung, ge folgt von at e lek ta sen bil dung), wel cher zur sys te mi schen hyp oxie führt mit in der fol ge myokar dia ler de pres si on und ei ner pul mo na len hy per ten si on. ein ards kann sich in we ni gen stun den aus bil den.i eine früh zei ti ge re ani ma ti on mit schwer punkt auf der si cher stel lung der atem we ge und lun gen in suffl a ti on ist des halb ent schei dend zur ver bes se rung der prog no se.ak zi den tel le hy po ther mie. die ak zi den tel le hy po ther mie ist de fi niert als ab fall der kör per tem pe ra tur durch äu ßer li che ein wir kung. dies kann auft re ten beim er trin kungs un fall, aber auch bei kör per li cher in ak ti vi tät bei tie fen luft tem pe ra tu ren. die er fas sung der um stän de, wel che zur kör per un ter küh lung ge führt ha ben, ist in der re ani ma ti ons si tu a ti on ent schei dend, ins be son de re wenn der ab bruch ei ner er folg lo sen re ani ma tion dis ku tiert wer den muss. die fra gen, die sich v. a. stel len, sind: 4 ist der herz-kreis lauf-still stand vor dem ab fall der kör pertem pe ra tur auf ge tre ten und so mit die hy po ther mie v. a. eine se kun därer schei nung? die se si tu a ti on ist mit ei ner äu ßerst schlech ten prog no se as so zi iert (d. h. kein neu ro logisch in tak tes über le ben nach er folg rei cher re ani ma ti on zu er war ten). 4 kam es sehr schnell zu ei nem kör per tem pe ra tu r ab fall? dies ist der fall beim er trin kungs un fall in kal tem, ins be son de re flie ßen dem was ser. in tak tes über le ben kann bei schwe rer un ter küh lung (kör per tem pe ra tur <33°c) in die ser si tu a tion be ob ach tet wer den. 4 be steht eine as so zi ier te grund er kran kung (me ta bo li sches oder en do kri no lo gi sches grund lei den, trau ma, in to xi ka tion)?eine re ani ma ti on muss er fol gen, bis zu min dest eine kör pertem pe ra tur von 32°c er reicht wird, nach dem mot to: »no one is dead un less warm and dead.« die kör perer wär mung muss in ei ner ers ten pha se schnell er fol gen, ent we der mit tels ex tra kor po rel lem kreis lauf oder mit war men pe ri to neal spü lun gen, evtl. zu sätz lich mit warm luft gene ra to ren, war men in tra ve nö sen flüs sig keits ga ben und ma genspü lun gen (. abb auf eine re ani ma ti on beim hy po ther men pa ti en ten darf bei ei nem blut g lu ko se spie gel von >20 mmol/l (so fern kei ne glu kose zu ge führt wur de -die se kann we gen pe ri phe rer glu ko sein tole ranz beim hy po ther men pa ti en ten nicht me ta bo li siert wer den) so wie bei ei nem ph-wert <6,5 als aus druck ei ner ir re ver si blen ge we be an o xie ver zich tet wer den. der se rum ka li um spie gel sollte nicht zur ent schei dungs hil fe her an ge zo gen wer den.aku te re spi ra to ri sche pro b le me ge hö ren zu den häu figs ten in dika tio nen für eine ver le gung ei nes kri tisch er krank ten neu ge bore nen oder kin des auf eine in ten sivsta ti on. häu figs te ur sa chen der aku ten re spi ra to ri schen in suf fi zi enz (ari) beim kind sind ful mi nat ver lau fen de ent zünd li che er kran kun gen der obe ren und un te ren atem we ge, wo bei die ge gen über dem er wach senen enor me schleim hautschwel lung in den re la tiv klei ne ren atem we gen eine wich ti ge rol le spielt.> de fi ni ti on der aku ten re spi ra to ri schen in suffi zi enz ( ari)ver sa gen der lun gen funk ti on (auf nah me von o 2 , ab ga be von co 2 ), be dingt durch 4 »lung fai lu re« (ver sa gen der gas lei ten den und gas aus tauschen den struk tu ren), cha rak te ri siert durch ar te ri el le hy poxä mie, 4 »pump fai lu re« (ver sa gen des neu ro mus ku lä ren ap pa rats), cha rak te ri siert durch hy per kap nie und azi dä mie, 4 »lung and pump fai lu re« (glo ba le re spi ra to ri sche in suf fi zienz).i so wohl die früh zei ti ge er ken nung als auch die kor rek tein ei ner ini ti a len pha se des han delns steht im mer das über ge ordne te prin zip der adä qua ten sau er stoff ver sor gung des ge hirns. die grund zü ge der erst maß nah men, ana log zur si tu a ti on beim er wach se nen, be in hal ten so mit die 3 punk te des re ani ma ti ons-abc: 4 frei le gung und sta bi li sa ti on der atem we ge (»air way«), 4 si cher stel lung ei ner adä qua ten at mung (»brea thing«), 4 auf recht er hal tung ei ner adä qua ten hä mo dy na mik (»cir cu lati on«).ein trans port des er krank ten kin des kommt erst in fra ge, nachdem al les un ter nom men wur de, um eine op ti ma le sau er stoffver sor gung des ge hirns si cher zu stel len. stu di en zei gen, dass bis zu 50% al ler kri tisch er krank ten kin der wäh rend des transports auf ir gend ei ne art eine ate mun ter stüt zung be nö ti gen und dass zu sätz li che maß nah men (in tu ba ti on, me cha ni sche be at mung, er hö hung des sau er stoff an ge bots, re fi xa ti on und/ oder re po si ti on ei nes en dotra chea len tu bus) auf dem transport nicht sel ten not wen dig wer den, in den meis ten fäl len aber mit ei ner gu ten vor be rei tung des trans ports und ei ner adä quaten ein schät zung des krank heits ver laufs ver mie den wer den kön nen.kli ni sche zei chen und be ur tei lung des schwe re grads der aku ten re spi ra to ri schen in suffi zi enz eine dro hen de re spi ra to ri sche de kom pen sa ti on beim kind ist in der re gel früh er kenn bar -zu ei nem zeit punkt, an wel chem sich das re spi ra to ri sche sys tem noch in ei nem kom pen sier ten zu stand (nor ma le blut gas wer te) be fin det. das kind prä sen tiert als klas si sches früh zei chen der dro hen den ari ein ab nor ma les atem mus ter, wel ches cha rak te ri siert ist durch das vor lie gen einer ta chyp noe, ei ner bra dyp noe oder kur z en atem pau sen und/ oder zei chen ei ner ver mehr ten atem ar beit (na sen flü geln, in terkos ta le und ju gu lä re ein zie hun gen). an de re wich ti ge zei chen sind das vor han den sein von stöhnen, stri dor und »whee zing«. die se spe zi fisch re spi ra to ri schen zei chen sind oft be glei tet von all ge mei nen (schwit zen etc.), kardio vas ku lä ren (ta chy kar die, pa ra do xer puls etc.) und neu ro lo gischen (som no lenz, agi tiert heit, koma, krämp fe etc.) zei chen, die se müs sen in die kli ni sche be ur tei lung ein be zo gen wer den. ins be son de re das aus maß ei ner er schöp fung we gen er höh ter atem ar beit wird lei der oft un ter schätzt.blut gas ana ly sen kön nen in sol chen si tua tio nen hilf reich sein, wenn auch er kannt wer den muss, dass blut gas re sul ta te nicht ohne be rück sich ti gung des kli ni schen bil des und des sen pa tho ge ne se in ter pre tiert wer den soll ten. so kann z. b. ein norma ler pco 2 -wert im aku ten asth ma an fall das warn zei chen eines dro hen den atem still stan des sein.i ein agi tier tes kind ist oft we ni ger be un ru hi gend als ein ru hi ges kind.. abb. 84.10. al go rith mus zur schnel len ent schei dungs hil fe bei der re ani ma ti on ei nes hy po ther men kin des kli ni sche zei chen der aku ten re spi ra to ri schen in suf fi zi enz (ari)5 ta chyp noe oder bra dyp noe/ap noe 5 na sen flü geln, in spi ra to ri sche ein zie hun gen 5 ver min der te oder feh len de atem ge räusche 5 ta chy kar die/pa ra do xer puls 5 agi tiert heit oder le thar gie/som no lenz blut gas wer te bei aku ter re spi ra to ri scher in suf fi zi enz (ari) 5 po 2 <60 mm hg 5 pco 2 >45 mm hg 5 ph <7,3 bei nor ma len bi kar bo nat wer ten erst maß nah men zur be hand lung der aku ten re spi ra to ri schen in suffi zi enz ( ari)im vor der grund der erst be hand lung re spi ra to ri scher not fäl le im kin desal ter ste hen das si cher stel len frei er atem we ge, die sau er stoff zu fuhr und die wohl do sier te (me di ka men tö se) be ruhi gung. die en dotra chea le in tu ba ti on wird häu fig als ein zi ge lö sung an ge se hen, um eine aku te re spi ra to ri sche in suf fi zi enz rich tig zu be han deln. da bei wird je doch ver ges sen, dass korrekt aus ge führ te erst maß nah men, wie sau er stoff ap pli ka ti on und mas ken be at mung, min des tens so ef fekt voll sind, um das pri märe ziel der adä qua ten sau er stoff ver sor gung des ge hirns si cher zu stel len.sau er stoff the ra pie. o 2 (via na sen ka the ter, mas ke etc.) ist das me di ka ment der 1. wahl zur be hand lung der ari (. tab. 84.12). es gibt kei ne re ani ma ti ons si tu a ti on, in wel cher 100% o 2 kontrain di ziert wäre! zu be ach ten ist je doch, dass die al lei ni ge o 2 -th e ra pie eine al ve o lä re hy po ven ti la ti on (co 2 -re ten ti on) nicht ver bes sern kann.me di ka men te zur in tu ba ti on. in le bens be droh li chen si tua tionen muss die en dotra chea le in tu ba ti on auch ohne me di ka ti on durch ge führt wer den. beim noch an sprech ba ren pa ti en ten sind eine vor sich ti ge, je doch aus rei chen de se da ti on, an al ge sie und mus kel re la xa ti on je doch not wen dig. die ein zi ge aus nah me bildet die si tu a ti on des »diffi cult air way« mit im vo raus zu erah nender schwie ri ger in tu ba ti on (epiglot ti tis, ob struk ti on der obe ren atem we ge, ano ma li en der obe ren atem we ge in klu si ve ma kroglos sie; . tab. 84.13), in wel cher eine in tu ba ti on un ter spon tan atmung (inhalations nar ko se) vor ge zo gen und nur vom er fah rensten durch ge führt wer den soll te.i eine kor rek te mas ken be at mung mit 100% o 2 er laubt auch in kri ti schen si tua tio nen prak tisch im mer, auf hil fe zu war ten.die ab schät zung der schwe re ei nes asth ma an falls er folgt mittels kli ni schem asth mas co re, der in . tabelle 84.14 dar ge stellt ist. einen the ra pie al go rith mus bei aku tem asth ma an fall zeigt . abb. 84.11.nur un ge fähr 1-3% der kin der mit aku tem asth ma an fall müs sen in tu biert und be at met wer den. die in di ka ti on ist sehr vor sich tig zu stel len. we gen der er heb li chen in tu ba ti ons ri si ken (ver schlech te rung des bron cho spas mus, la ryn gospas mus) sollte ein kind im sta tus asth ma ti cus nur vom ge üb ten in tu biert wer den. un ter me cha ni scher be at mung be steht ein er heb li ches ri si ko für ein ba ro trau ma (pneu mo tho rax, pneu mo me dias tinum) we gen schnell er reich ten ho hen atem wegs drücken. eine aus rei chen de se da ti on und die ini ti a le gabe von mus kel re la x anzi en sind des halb ob li gat.die bron chio li tis ist eine klas si sche er kran kung des säug lings, wel che durch eine vi ra le in fek ti on -meist rsv (»re spi ra to ry synci ti al vi rus«), aber auch an de re vi ren -ver ur sacht wird. we gen . tabelle 84. 13 . diff e ren zie rung zwi schen ob struk tio nen der obe ren und un te ren atem we ge ödem-und se kret be ding ter ob struk ti on der klei nen pe ri phe ren atem we ge kommt es v. a. zu ei nem akut ob struk ti ven syn drom mit über blä hungs zei chen im rönt gen bild des tho rax. die klini sche symp to matik ist ge kenn zeich net durch ein ver schie den stark aus ge präg tes aku tes atem not syn drom (ta chyp noe, in terkos ta le ein zie hun gen, na sen flü geln, oft eine deut li che zya no se). ty pi scher wei se tre ten oft ap noen auf und kön nen das ein zi ge früh sym ptom sein.das neu auf tre ten von ap noen in die ser al ter sklas se, v. a. im win ter von ok to ber bis april oder bei po si ti ver anam ne se eines schnup fens in der fa mi lie oder wenn der säug ling den tag in ei nem kin der hort ver bringt, soll te einen rsv-in fekt ver mu ten las sen. die di ag no se wird mit tels an ti gen nachweis im na sen-ra chen-sek ret (se kre ta spi ra ti on mit son de im na sen-ra chen-raum not wen dig) ge stellt. schnell tests ste hen zur ver fü gung.in ha lier ba re bron cho di la ta to ren kön nen bei vor han de nem exspi ra to ri schen »whee zing« ver suchs wei se ein ge setzt wer den, sollten aber bei aus blei ben dem kli ni schem ef fekt nicht wie der holt an ge wen det wer den. pa ra do xe re ak tio nen auf die se the ra pie mit ver schlech te rung der atem not wur den wie der holt be schrieben. bei aus ge präg ter atem not, dro hen der er schöp fung oder vor han de ner hyp oxie ist ein früh zei ti ge cpap-ap pli ka ti on (nasen-cpap mit klei nen na sen tu ben oder ei ner be at mungs mas ke) mit ge nü gend ho hem atem wegs druck von 8-12 cm h 2 o oder al len falls eine nicht-in va si ve druck as sis tier te be at mung (ho her peep-wert von etwa 8-2 cm h 2 o mit nur ge rin ger dru ckun terstüt zung von 5 bis max. 10 cm h 2 o) meist sehr er folg reich und kann eine in tu ba ti on häu fig ver hin dern. schwe re ver laufs for men mit ards sind in der li te ra tur beschrie ben, wer den aber heut zu ta ge mit dem ein satz von we ni ger ag gres si ven be at mungs me tho den kaum mehr be ob ach tet. wie bei je dem atem not syn drom beim kind muss auf eine aus rei chende hy dra ta ti on ge ach tet wer den (120% des er hal tuns be darfs). an ti vi ra le the ra pi en (ri ba vi rin per in ha la tio nem) ha ben sich nicht be währt. die pro phy lak ti sche gabe von mon klo na len anti kör pern (pa li vi zu mab) kann nur bei hoch ri si ko kin dern (säuglin ge un ter 12 mo na ten mit sau er stoff be dürf ti ger chro ni scher lun gen krank heit, evtl. säug lin ge mit kon ge ni ta lem herz vi ti um oder be kann ter im mun de fi zi enz) im ver lauf der ers ten rsv-saison emp foh len wer den.krupp-syn drom/ste no sie ren de la ryn gotrachei tis, epiglot ti tis, tu mor oder miss bil dung der atem we ge, pos tex tu ba ti onss tri dor, la ryn gotra cheo ma la zie.eine ob struk ti on der obe ren luft we ge ist die häu figs te ur sa che ei ner atem not beim klein kind. die dif fe ren zi al dia gno se hängt von der lo ka li sa ti on der ob struk ti on ab (z. b. bei ex tra tho raka ler lo ka li sa ti on in spi ra to ri scher stri dor), an ma nes ti schen an ga ben über die art des auf tre tens (z. b. akut bei fremd körpe ra spi ra ti on oder spas mo di schen krupp, sub akut mit schnell . abb. 84.11. the ra pie al go rith mus bei aku tem asth ma an fall . tabelle 84.14. kli ni scher asth mas co re. (mod. nach [33] ) sco re-be wer tung: 2 -leicht, 4-5 -mit tel schwer bis schwer (blut gas ana ly se, so fern kei ne ver bes se rung un ter the ra pie), 7 -atem ver sa gen.zu neh men der ver schlech te rung bei epiglot ti tis oder ste no sieren der la ryn gotrachei tis oder chro nisch mit zu neh men der verschlech te rung bei miss bil dung der atem we ge) so wie der kli nischen be obach tung (z. b. bel len der hus ten bei spas mo di schem krupp, spei chel fluss und feh len der hus ten bei epiglot ti tis oder stri dor, v. a. bei auf re gung bei be ste hen der la ryn go-oder tracheo ma la zie).i bei aku ter schwe rer atem not mit hyp oxie ist nor ma lerwei se eine in tu ba ti on in di ziert. da bei han delt es sich um eine ri si ko rei che in ter ven ti on, die se soll te im mer vom er fah rens ten durch ge führt wer den.im all ge mei nen emp fiehlt sich eine in tu ba ti on in in ha la ti ons narko se bei er hal te ner spon tan at mung wäh rend der an äs the sie einlei tung alternativ ei ne in tra ve nö se kurz an äs the sie mit propofol. der ein satz von mus kel re la x an zi en (mit aus nah me von kur z wirken dem de po la ri sie ren dem suc ci nyl cho lin) gilt als ge fähr lich und wird da her nicht emp foh len. wich tig ist es, bei even tu ellem miss lin gen der in tu ba ti on den pa ti en ten schnellst mög lich wie der auf wa chen zu las sen und auf hil fe war ten zu kön nen. eine vor über ge hen de druck be at mung mit tels ge sichts mas ke ist bei ob struk ti ven er kran kun gen der obe ren atem we ge auch bei schwers ten for men fast im mer mög lich und er laubt vor über gehend eine adä qua te oxy ge nie rung.epiglot ti tis. dank der hä mo phi lus-imp fung beim säug ling zur me nin gi tisprä ven ti on sieht man in un se ren brei ten gra den prakti sche kei ne epiglot ti ti ser kran kun gen mehr. we gen der ak tu ell ab neh men den durch imp fungs ra te ist je doch mit ei nem wie derauft re ten die ses krank heits bil des in zu kunft zu rech nen. der pati ent mit ei ner epiglot ti tis prä sen tiert ein to xi sches er schei nungsbild, spei chel fl uss, dys pha gie (trin ken ist un mög lich) und ho hes fie ber. hus ten und spre chen wer den we gen der schmer zen vermie den. je der stress in klu si ve wei te rer un ter su chun gen soll ten ver mie den wer den. eine in tu ba ti on ist zur si che rung der atem we ge im mer für 24-48 h not wen dig. die ex tu ba ti on er folgt, so bald eine hör bare tu bus lecka ge vor han den ist. eine in tra ve nö se an ti bio ti sche the ra pie über 10 tage wird mit ei nem ce pha los po rin der 3. gene ra ti on so fort ein ge lei tet und spä ter ge mäß der re sis tenz la ge ad ap tiert.krupp-syn drom. ein spas mo di sches krupp-syn drom (nach alter no men kla tur auch pseu do-krupp ge nannt) so wie eine bakte ri el le ste no sie ren de la ryn gotra cheo ma la zie (äu ßerst sel ten) be gin nen ty pi scher wei se mit ei nem leich ten in fekt der obe ren luft we ge, häu fi g mit rhi ni tis, leich tem hus ten (bel len der charak ter) und hei se rer stim me. die th e ra pie ba siert auf o 2 -gabe, kalt luft -und/oder was ser dampf ver neb lung so wie ei ner leich ten se die rung, so fern dies not wen dig er scheint.bei schwe rer aus prä gung der atem not be währt sich eine korti kos te ro id the ra pie ( dexa me tha son 0,6 mg/kg kg als ein ma li ger bo lus i.v.) oder die in ha la ti on von to pi schen ste roi den und/oder die wie der hol te in ha la ti on von ad re na lin. bei er folg lo sig keit dieser the ra pie kann eine po si ti ve druck be at mung mit na sen-cpap oder nicht-in va si ver druck be at mung ver sucht wer den. eine in tu- ba ti on er üb rigt sich so mit in fast al len fäl len. eine an ti bio ti sche the ra pie ist nur bei ei ner pu ru len ten la ryn gotrachei tis ge rechtfer tigt (klas si sche er re ger: sta phy lo coc cus au reus, hae mo phi lus in flu enzae, strep to kok ken).zur in tu ba ti on gel ten die glei chen be mer kun gen und vorsichts maß nah men wie be schrie ben (7 s. oben: »epiglot ti tis«). als tu bus grö ße wird nor ma ler wei se eine grö ße un ter der dem al ter ent spre chen den ge wählt, eine tu bus lecka ge muss vor ex tuba ti on vor han den sein. eine bron cho sko pi sche oder la ryn go skopi sche eva lu ie rung (su che nach ei ner gra nu lom bil dung) kann bei feh len dem tu bus leck nach 4-5 ta gen in di ziert sein.pos tex tu ba ti onss tri dor. ein stri dor nach ex tu ba ti on, auch nach ei ner in tu ba ti on von kur z er dau er, kann beim klein kind von zeit zu zeit be ob ach tet wer den. da bei han delt es sich um eine sub glot ti sche ver en gung der auf die ser höhe schon en gen atemwe ge auf grund ei ner ödem bil dung, ei ner in fl am ma ti on oder we gen gra nu la ti ons ge we be. nor ma ler wei se ist ein gu tes an sprechen auf eine ste roid the ra pie zu be obach ten (dexa me tha son 0,6 mg/kg kg über 48 h).gra nu la ti ons ge we be muss al len falls bron cho sko pisch entfernt wer den. sel ten ist eine ste no sie ren de nar ben bil dung nach in tu ba ti on zu be obach ten, was mit dem wachs tum des kin des zu zu neh men der atem be hin de rung füh ren kann. eine tra cheosto mie kann meist mit tels kri ko id spli t ope ra ti on ver hin dert werden; die se er laubt es, einen grö ße ren durch mes ser der atem wege in die sem be reich zu schaf fen.miss bil dun gen der atem we ge. miss bil dun gen der atem we ge kön nen im rah men von an ge bo re nen miss bil dun gen und syndro mer kran kun gen auft re ten oder er wor ben wer den (tu mo rerkran kun gen). die ab klä rung muss durch einen kin der fach arzt in zu sam men ar beit mit dem kin der chir ur gen und ggf. ei nem ge ne ti ker er fol gen.tra cheo(bron cho)ma la zie. die im säug lings al ter re la tiv häu fi g vor han de ne tra cheo ma la zie ist cha rak te ri siert durch eine mangel haft e aus bil dung der tra chea len knor pel span gen. dies führt ins be son de re zu ei ner in sta bi li tät der tra che a hin ter wand mit kol laps bei for cier ter ex spi ra ti on (deut lich hör ba rer ex spi ra to rischer stri dor bei hus ten, schrei en oder star ker er re gung). obwohl eine tra cheo bron cho ma la zie iso liert vor kom men kann, ist sie oft mit kon ge ni ta len herz-und ge fäß miss bil dun gen as so ziiert (z. b. vas ku lä re rin ge bei dop pel tem aor ten bo gen oder pulmo nal ar te ri en sch lin ge) oder mit dem syn drom ei ner feh len den pul mo nal klap pe. die se müs sen des halb be wusst ge sucht und aus ge schlos sen wer den.die the ra pie ist pri mär kon ser va tiv, mit aus nah me der ge fäß miss bil dun gen, wel che kar dio chir ur gisch an ge gan gen wer den müs sen. bei aus ge präg ter kol laps ten denz mit wie derhol ten ob struk ti ven ap noee pi so den oder hy po xä mi en war früher die in di ka ti on zur stent im plan ta ti on oder tra cheo sto mie ge ge ben, häu fig ge nügt aber auch bei die sen schwe ren for men die vor über ge hen de an wen dung ei nes kon ti nu ier lich po si ti ven atem weg drucks mit tels na sa lem cpap (. abb. 84.12). die langzeit pro gno se ist je doch gut, weil mit zu neh men dem al ter die weichen knor pel span gen sta bi ler wer den.atem be ding te in tra tho ra ka le druck schwan kun gen wir ken sich in ver schie de ner wei se auf das blut ge fäß sys tem und die glo ba le herz funk ti on aus. be trof fen sind: 4 herz fre quenz, 4 vor last, 4 kon trak ti li tät, 4 nach last.zu sätz lich muss be dacht wer den, dass eine ver än de rung des intra tho ra ka len drucks die rechts-und die links ven tri ku lä re pumpfunk ti on in ge gen sätz li cher rich tung be ein flus sen kann.aku tes lun gen ödem bei ob struk ti on der obe ren atem we ge.we gen des klei nen durch mes sers der kind li chen atem we ge kann schon eine re la tiv leich te ob struk ti on der obe ren atem wege (z. b bei vor lie gen ei nes ob struk ti ven schlafap noe syn droms, ei ner fremd kör pe ra spi ra ti on, ei nem krupp-syn drom, ei ner epiglot ti tis, ei ner sub glot ti schen pos tex tu ba ti ons s te no se so wie auch bei schwe rer ob stru ie ren der ton sil len-und/oder ade noidhy per pla sie) zu ei ner star ken er hö hung der atem wegs re sis tenz füh ren. um ein ad äqua tes atem zug vo lu men auf recht er hal ten zu kön nen, müs sen des halb stark ne ga ti ve in tra tho ra ka le druck werte er zeugt wer den. dies kann zur lun gen ödem bil dung füh ren [15] . ein stark ne ga ti ver in tra tho ra ka ler druck er höht die linksven tri ku lä re nach last und den sys tem ve nö sen rück fluss. dies führt zu ei ner aku ten ver min de rung des herz mi nu ten vo lu mens und ei nem er höh ten pul mo na len blut vo lu men mit er hö hung des pul mo nal ka pil lä ren drucks. eine hyp oxie-und hy per kap niebe ding te va so kon strik ti on der pul mo nal ge fäße kann den pul monal ka pil lä ren druck wei ter er hö hen.die pri märe the ra pie zielt auf eine ver min de rung der in tratho ra ka len druck schwan kun gen und eine kor rek tur der hypoxie und der re spi ra to ri sa chen azi do se mit tels nicht-in va si ver oder in va si ver po si ti ver druck be at mung. der ge brauch von diure ti ka und/oder va soak ti ven sub stan zen ist nicht in di ziert.asth ma an fall. beim schwe ren asth ma an fall kön nen ne ga ti ve, sub at mo sphä ri sche in tra tho ra ka le drücke so wohl wäh rend der in spi ra ti on als auch wäh rend der ex spi ra ti on (per sis tie ren de inspi ra to ri sche mus ke lak ti vi tät, um einen atem wegs koll pas während der ex spi ra ti on zu ver hin dern) eben falls zur lun gen ödembil dung füh ren [15] .zur ver ein fa chung der dis kus si on von in fek ti ons krank hei ten und sep sis kann man säug lin ge und kin der au ßer halb des neuge bo re nen al ters in 2 al ters grup pen un ter tei len: 5 jah re oder äl ter als 5 jah re. die se un ter schei dung ist sinn voll, weil bei kin dern un ter 5 jah ren mit ei ner sep sis häu fig kein klar lo ka li sier ba rer infekt herd zu fin den ist. die an ti bio ti sche the ra pie muss des halb auf die mög li chen er re ger ab ge stimmt sein. die häu figs ten er reger in die ser al ter sklas se sind hae mo phi lus in flu enzae b, strepto coc cus pneu mo niae und neis se ria me nin gitidis.kli ni sche zei chen ei ner sep sis sind ho hes fie ber, ta chy kardie, ta chyp noe und eine ver min der te pe ri phe re durch blu tung.pe te chi en, be wusst seinsein trü bung und ze re bra le krampf an fäl le kön nen auf tre ten. spe zi fi sche me nin gi tis zei chen kön nen beim kind un ter 2 jah ren feh len, eine lum bal punk ti on ist des halb nach schock the ra pie, so fern not wen dig, und nach ab si che rung nor ma ler blut ge rin nungs tests und throm bo zy ten zah len in dieser al ters grup pe in di ziert.i eine pur pu ra ful mi n ans, klas sisch be schrie ben bei der menin go kok ken sep sis, kann auch bei strep to kok ken-oder sta phy lo kok ken in fek ten an ge troff en wer den.die me nin go kok ken sep sis ist nach wie vor die ge fürch tets te krank heit beim kind und mit ei ner mor ta li tät von etwa 5-10% be haf tet. eine ag gres si ve schock the ra pie und die früh zei ti ge an tibio ti sche be hand lung mit cef tria xon ha ben die mor ta li tät stark ge senkt. ein großes pro b lem blei ben aber die z. t. schnell auf treten den ne kro sen der ex tre mi tä ten im rah men der fou droyant ver lau fen den pur pu ra ful mi n ans bei be ste hen der ge rin nungs störung, cha rak te ri siert u. a. durch einen mas si ven ab fall des pro tein-c-spie gels. trotz po si ti ver pro te in c-sep sis stu die bei der erwach se nen sep sis ist es der zeit noch zu früh, pro te in c-prä pa ra te stan dard mä ßig beim kind ein zu set zen, und zwar aus fol gen den grün den: 4 es ist nicht klar, wel ches prä pa rat (ak ti vier tes pro te in c oder pro te in c-kon zen trat) ge wählt wer den soll te. 4 ei ni ge be ob ach tun gen so wie die erst kürz lich pu bli zer ten re su la te der »open-la bel« en han ce-stu die si gna li sie ren ein er höh tes hirn blu tungs ri si ko im rah men ei ner the ra pie mit ak ti vier tem pro te in c [11] . 4 es exis tiert noch kei ne ran do mi sier te stu die mit pro te in c-kon zen trat.beim kind über 5 jah ren ist eine sep sis ohne klar zu grun de lie gen de er kran kung oder aus gangs herd (z. b. os teo mye li tis, en do kar di tis etc.) äu ßerst sel ten und tritt prak tisch nur beim im mun kom pri mier ten pa ti en ten auf. sta phy lo kok ken, gramnega ti ve bak te ri en und pseu do mo nas sind die häu figs ten mit ei ner sep sis as so zi ier ten er re ger in die ser pa ti en ten grup pe. eine menin go kok ken in fek ti on kann eben falls vor kom men.trotz vie ler ähn lich kei ten zwi schen er wach se nen und kin dern beim sep ti schen schock syn drom sind ge wis se ei gen hei ten beim kind zu ken nen. ei ner seits ist das er re ger spek trum wie oben be schrie ben ver schie den, an de rer seits ist der ver lauf beim kind häu fig ext rem schnell, und der schock zu stand wird we gen noch nor ma ler blut druck wer te (kom pen sier ter schock) ver kannt. eine schlech te pe ri phe re per fu si on mit kal ten ex tre mi tä ten und ei ner mar mo rie rung der haut kann beim kind bei noch nor malen blut druck wer ten be ob ach tet wer den.eine vor han de ne ta chyp noe (we gen be reits vor lie gen der me ta bo li scher azi do se) oder leich te ta chy kar die (zur kompen sa ti on des herz mi nu ten vo lu mens bei ver min der ter myo kar dia ler kon trak ti li tät oder ver min der tem »pre load«) soll te je doch an einen noch hä mo dy na misch teil wei se kompen sier ten schock zu stand den ken las sen. eine ag gres si ve schock the ra pie muss zu die sem zeit punkt so fort be gon nen wer den, auch wenn ge mes se ne blut ruck wer te noch »normal« sind! the ra pie kon zep te beim sep tisch-to xi schem schock zu stand die the ra pie des sep ti schen schocks be ruht auf 3 pfei lern:4 end or gan un ter stüt zung (si cher stel lung ei ner mög lichst adäqua ten end or gan per fu si on mit ent spre chen dem o 2 -an gebot), 4 früh zei ti ge ak ti ve ate mun ter stüt zung bei er höh ter atem arbeit (15-30% hö he rer sau er stoff ver brauch), 4 an ti bio ti sche the ra pie.ad ju van te zu satz the ra pi en -wie nie re n er satz ver fah ren, hämofil tra ti on, plas maaus tausch, ste roi de (hy dro kor ti son) bei aku ter ne ben nie ren in suf fi zi enz -müs sen in je dem fall ein zeln dis kutiert wer den.i ini ti al ist eine ra sche und effi zi en te re ani ma ti on von entschei den der be deu tung.bei vor lie gen der in tra vas ku lä rer hy po vol ämie bzw. ei ner in suffi zi en ten or gan per fu si on (lak ta zi do se) -dies ist prak tisch bei je dem kind mit ei ner schwe ren sep sis der fall -ist eine schnel le vo lu men ga be ent schei dend und re du ziert das mor ta li täts ri si ko dras tisch. so konn te eine stu die klar zei gen, dass kin der, wel che mehr als 40 ml/kg kg in ner halb der 1. stun de er hiel ten, eine deut li che er höh te über le bens ra te auf wie sen [4] . oft sind in tia le vo lu men ga ben von 60-100 ml/kg kg not wen dig. bei schlech tem an spre chen auf die ini ti a le vo lu men the ra pie, bei per sis tie ren der ar te ri el ler hy po to nie mit war mer pe ri phe rie und aus ge präg ter sy sto lo-dia sto li scher druck dif fe renz emp fiehlt sich eine low-dose-no rad rena lin ga be (0,1 g/kg kg/min), bei blas sem kind mit küh ler pe ri phe rie und klei ner sy sto lo dias to lischer druck dif fe renz soll te zu sätz lich zu no rad rena lin eine inotro pe sub stanz ein ge setzt wer den (dop amin 5-10 g/kg kg/ min oder do but amin 5-10 g/kg kg/min oder ad re na lin in ge rin ger do sis von 0,05-0,1 g/kg kg/min).es lie gen kei ne do ku men tier ten da ten vor, wel che eine überle gen heit der einen oder an de ren kom bi na ti on von va soak ti ven sub stan zen zei gen konn ten. bei re frak tä rem schock ist va so pressin (0,001 g/kg kg/min) zur an he bung des blut druck wer tes effi zi ent, eine kon trol lier te stu die ist je doch bis her nicht ver öf fentlicht. die in ter pre ta ti on der o 2 -sät ti gungs kur ve (puls oxy me ter) er laubt einen hin weis auf den vo lu men sta tus. eine aus ge präg te re spi ra to ri sche va ri a bi li tät bis hin zum pul sus pa ra do xus (au ßer bei vor lie gen der ob struk ti on der obe ren atem we ge, asth ma oder ei ner pe ri kardtam po na de) ist hin weis auf eine per sis tieren de hy po vol ämie. eine mes sung des zent ra len ve nen drucks (zvd) er laubt eine re la tiv zu ver läs si ge be ur tei lung des vo lu mensta tus. ein zvd von 10-15 mm hg soll te an ge strebt wer den.eine nach la st re duk ti on kann in ei ner 2. pha se zur er höhung des herz mi nu ten vo lu mens bei per si tie ren der myo kar dialer dys funk ti on sinn voll sein, da die kon trak ti li täts re ser ve beim klein kind re la tiv ge ring ist und es nicht sinn voll ist, das herz des klein kin des, ins be son de re des säug lings, zu be las ten. ni tro prussit na tri um und be son ders phos pho dies teras ein hi bi to ren ge nießen des halb zu neh men de be liebt heit in der sep sis the ra pie.hämo fi l tra ti on. in der prak ti schen er fah rung be währt sich eine früh zei ti ge hämo fi l tra ti on, v. a. um bei oli gu rie/an urie und der in der men ge kaum zu re du zie ren den vo lu men zu fuhr (me di kamen te) die vo lu men bi lanz in den griff zu be kom men. eben falls kann auf die se wei se früh zei tig mit ei ner pa ren te r a len er nährung mit kor rek ter ka lo ri en zu fuhr be gon nen wer den. bis her gibt es kei ne ein deu ti gen stu di en, die zei gen konn ten, dass eine hämo fi l tra ti on aus an de ren grün den die out co me-re sul ta te ver bes sern könn te.eine de hy dra ta ti on im rah men ei nes »brech durch falls« (ga stroen te ri tis und/oder en tero ko li tis) ist beim kind im vor schulal ter ein häu fi ges krank heits bild und führt bei schwe rer aus prä gung (mit oder ohne schock zu stand) häu fig zu ei ner hos pi ta li sa ti on auf der in ten sivsta ti on. ne ben der ein schät zung des de hy dra tati ons gra des (. tab. 84.15), wel che die pla nung ei ner kon trol lierten re hy dra ta ti on er laubt, sind eine blut gas ana ly se so wie eine be stim mung der elek tro ly te (nat ri um, ka li um) so fort bei aufnah me durch zu füh ren. klas si scher wei se wer den kin der mit trau ma ti schen hirn lä sionen, be wusst seinsein trü bung bis zum koma ver schie de ner ätio lo gie oder mit sta tus epi lep ti cus oder nach ge ne ra li sier tem krampf an fall mit pos tik taler be wusst seinsein trü bung oder thera pie be ding ter ate min suf fi zi enz auf der in ten sivsta ti on hos pi tali siert, pri mär zur neu ro lo gi schen über wa chung so wie zur unter stüt zung der vi ta len funk tio nen.ein ko ma tö ser zu stand kann be dingt sein durch: 4 eine or ga nisch-ana to mi sche (struk tu rel le) lä si on im be reich der groß hirn he mi sphä ren oder des hirn stamms (hirn blu tung, trau ma ti sche hirn lä si on mit oder ohne hirnödem, miss bil dung), 4 einen me ta bo li schen oder to xi schen ef fekt.zur be ur tei lung des schwe re gra des der be wusst seinsein trü bung (ko ma tie fe) wird, wie auch bei er wach se nen, die »glas gow coma sca le« (gcs; . tab. 84.16) an ge wandt, die se muss je doch beim klein kind un ter 5 jah ren mo di fi ziert wer den. an stel le der ver ba len ant wort wird der ge sichts aus druck auf schmerz vol le sti mu la ti on ge prüft. die not fall the ra pie beim koma un kla rer ätio lo gie zielt in ers ter li nie auf eine kreis lauf sta bi li sie rung und eine gute ze re bra le sau er stoff ver sor gung. ent spre chend der ätio lo gie ist erst dann eine spe zi fi sche the ra pie an ge zeigt. beim schä del-hirn-trau ma gel ten die glei chen richt li ni en wie beim er wach se nen, bei ei ner in tra kra ni el len blu tung oder ei nem pro gres si ven hy dro ze pahlus ist ein not fall mä ßi ger neu ro chir ur gi scher ein griff zur de kompen sa ti on zu dis ku tie ren, bei ei ner in fek ti on des zen tral ner vensys tems ist eine schnel le und adä qua te an ti bio ti ka the ra pie einzu lei ten, bei ei ner me ta bo li schen en ze pha lo pa thie soll te schnell eine gute ze re bra le sub strat ver sor gung ge si chert wer den, wei terhin sind zu sätz li che ent gif tungs maß nah men an ge zeigt.an fall in der pos tik talen pha se auf tre ten und durch eine an tie pilep ti sche the ra pie noch ver stärkt wer den. es ist des halb nicht un ge wöhn lich, dass kin der we gen ei ner atem de pres si on erst in der pos tik talen pha se in tu biert wer den müs sen. im prin zip ist zwi schen 2 gro ßen grup pen von krampf an fällen zu un ter schei den: 4 fie ber krämp fe (v. a. beim klein kind ab etwa 6. le bens monat bis zum 5. le bens jahr im rah men ei nes fe bri len in fekts auf tre tend), 4 fo ka le oder ge ne ra li sier te epi lep ti schen an fäl len.fie ber krämp fe. die meis ten fie ber krämp fe tre ten in den ers ten stun den ei nes fie be r an stiegs (manch mal so gar kurz vor her) auf. es wird zwi schen 2 for men un ter schie den, dem un kom pli zierten und dem kom pli zier ten fie ber krampf: 4 un kom pli zier te fie ber krämp fe (ge ne ra li sier te to nisch-kloni sche an fäl le, ma xi ma le dau er 15 min, in ner halb 24 h kein wei te rer an fall, pos tik tal kei ne neu ro lo gi schen aus fälle) sind an und für sich harm los und be nö ti gen kei ne wei tere ab klä rung. eine an tie pi lep ti sche the ra pie in form von rek tal zu ap pli zie ren dem dia ze pam wird den el tern nach hau se mit ge ge ben, eine prä ven ti ve an ti kon vul si ve the ra pie ist nicht in di ziert. 4 der kom pli zier te fie ber krampf (fo ka ler an fall oder gene ra li sier ter an fall von mehr als 15 min dau er, pos tik tal neu ro lo gi sche aus fäl le) be dingt eine wei te re ab klä rung mit blut sta tus (blut zu cker, elek tro ly te in klu si ve io ni siertes kal zi um), eeg im frei en in ter vall so wie bei fo ka len an fäl len eine not fall mä ßi ge schä del com pu ter to mo gra phie (schä del-ct) oder heut zu ta ge zu neh mend eine ma gne treso nanz un ter su chung (mrt) zum aus schluss ei ner aku ten blu tung (vas ku lä re miss bil dun gen), ei nes raum for dern den pro zes ses (hy dro ze pha lus oder tu mor) oder ei ner ent zündli chen krank heit (me nin goe n ze pha li tis). eine lum bal punkti on ist nach er halt ei nes nor ma len ct-oder mr-re sul tats durch zu füh ren. die au gen hin ter grund un ter su chung ist beim nicht ko ma tö sen klein kind oft äu ßerst schwie rig durch zu füh ren und des halb häu fig nicht ver läss lich, um einen er höh ten in tra kra ni el len druck aus zu schlie ßen.die not fall the ra pie ei nes fie ber kramp fes be steht in der rek talen gabe von dia ze pam (5 mg bei <10 kg kg, 10 mg bei >10 kg kg; kann evtl. nach 5-10 min wie der holt wer den). al ter na tiv können an de re ben zo dia ze pin prä pa ra te i.v. ver ab reicht wer den (lo ra ze pam 0,05-0,1 mg/kg kg oder mi da zo lam 0,1-0,2 mg/ kg kg als bo lus i.v.). bei the ra pie re sis tenz wird phe no bar bital (20 mg/kg kg i.v. als kurz in fu si on über 30 min in ti al, dann 10 mg/kg kg) oder phe ny to in (10-20 mg/kg kg i.v. als kurz infu si on über 20 min). phe ny to in hat eine sehr lan ge halb werts zeit von über 70 h und ist da her nicht un be dingt als erst the ra pie zu emp feh len.! cave alle an ti kon vul si ven not fall me di ka men te ha ben einen atem-und kreis lauf de pres si ven eff ekt. ent spre chen de vor sichts maß nah men müs sen des halb ge troff en wer den und sau er stoff so wie ein atem beu tel in griff nä he sein. eine in tu ba ti on ist je doch prak tisch nur bei feh len den schutz re fl e xen in di ziert.epi lep ti sche krampf an fäl le und sta tus epi lep ti cus. ein neuauf ge tre te ner epi lep ti scher an fall beim kind be dingt, wie der kom pli zier te fie ber krampf, eine aus ge dehn te ab klä rung mit blut bild, blut gas ana ly se, elek tro lyt be stim mung und me ta bo lischer ba si sab klä rung (glu ko se, nat ri um, ka li um, phos phat, kalzi um, mag ne si um, harn stoff , evtl. am mo ni ak), eeg und bildge ben den ver fah ren. die th e ra pie zielt in ers ter li nie auf eine si cher stel lung der vi ta len funk tio nen und ein un ter bre chen des krampf an falls, be vor wei te re ab klä run gen ver an lasst wer den kön nen. die an ti kon vul si ve th e ra pie er folgt -iden tisch zum vor ge hen bei er wach se nen -mit ben zo dia ze pi nen und phe nobar bi tal oder phe ny to in. beim the ra pie re sis ten ten staus epi lep ti cus wird das bar bi turat ko ma kaum mehr not wen dig, weil mit tels mi da zo lam-dauerin fu si on (0,1-0,3 mg/kg kg/h) oder di so pri van (pro po fol: 2-10 mg/kg kg/h; nicht zu emp feh len beim klein kind als langzeit the ra pie) die elek tri sche krampf ak ti vi tät meist un ter drückt wer den kann. eine kom bi na ti on von mi da zo lam und di so pri van er laubt es, die di so pri van-do sis mög lichst klein (1-2 mg/kg kg/ h) zu hal ten. da sel ten ein py ri do xin-(vi ta min-b 6 -)man gel einem krampf lei den zu grun de lie gen kann, emp fiehlt es sich, eine do sis vi ta min b 6 zu ver ab rei chen. die wei te re lang zeit the ra pie muss den neu ro lo gen oder ep ti lep to lo gen über las sen wer den.eine ein tei lung nach schwe re grad auf grund der glas gow coma sca le (. tab. 84.16) ist we sent lich für das wei te re di ag nos ti sche und the ra peu ti sche vor ge hen (. tab. 84.17).di ag nos tik. die kli ni sche un ter su chung be ruht in in ers ter li nie auf ei ner schnell be ur tei lung der vi ta len zei chen (abc der reani ma ti on) und der re gel mä ßi gen und wie der hol ten be ur tei lung des be wusst seins (gcs!), der tes tung der pu pil len mo to rik und hirn stamm re fl e xe, der be ur tei lung des to nus, der su che nach fo ka len zei chen so wie der un ter su chung des au gen hin ter grundes (cave: stau ungs pa pil len kön nen in der früh pha se des hirnödems noch feh len). da ne ben ist ein schä del-ct bei je dem pa tien ten mit län ge rer be wusst seins stö rung (gcs <15) oder fo ka len neu ro lo gi schen symp to men ab so lut not wen dig.es ist je doch zu be den ken dass feh len de zei chen für ein hirn ödem bei ei nem schä del-ct, das kurz (in ner halb der ersten 4-6 h) nach dem un fall er eig nis an ge fer tigt wur de, die nachträg li che bil dung ei nes hirn ödems nicht aus schlie ßen. des halb ist eine wei te re eng ma schi ge neu ro lo gi sche über wa chung bei ei nem gcs <15 auch bei »nor ma lem« schä del-ct-be fund notwen dig.über wa chung. bei schwe rem schä del hirn trau ma (gcs <9) ist ein spe zi fi sches mo ni to ring auf der in ten sivsta ti on mit hirn- . abb. 84.13. al go rith mus zur behand lung des er höh ten hirn drucks ge mäß den richt li ni en der in ter essen grup pe pä di at ri sche in ten siv medi zin schweiz. (nach [32] ) 84.5.6 me ta bo li sche pro b le me 5 am mo ni um >400 mol: hämo fil tra ti on + l-car ni tin (100 mg/kg kg/24 h i.v.) + kor rek tur der me ta bo li schen azi do se mit na tri um bi kar bo nat i die erst ver sor gung der aku ten stoff wech se lent glei sung bein hal tet die si cher stel lung der ener gie zu fuhr durch hoch do sier te glu ko se in fu si on (min des tens 10 mg/kg kg/ min).der dia be tes mel li tus typ 1 wird oft erst im rah men ei ner ersten dia be ti schen ent glei sung mit oft aus ge präg ter ke toa zi do se di ag nos ti ziert, ob wohl anam nes tisch schon seit meh re ren ta gen oder so gar wo chen kla re hin wei se (po ly dy spie, po ly u rie, gewichts ab nah me und all ge mei ne mü dig keit) auf eine dia be ti sche stoff wech sel la ge be stan den. zur be stä ti gung der di ag no se müssen eine hy per glyk ämie (kann we nig aus ge prägt sein) und eine me ta bo li sche azi do se vor han den sein so wie ke ton kör per im urin nach ge wie sen wer den.i die ini ti a le re ani ma ti on zielt ne ben all ge mei nen maßnah men, wie si che rung der atem we ge beim ko ma tö sen pa ti en ten, auf eine re hy dra ta ti on ab, da die se kin der häu fi g schwer de hy driert sind (os mo ti sche di ure se we gen glu kos urie) oder sich so gar in ei nem hy po volä mi schen schock zu stand be fi n den kön nen.re hy dra ta ti ons sche ma bei hy po vol ämie/de hy dra ta ti on im rah men ei ner dia be ti schen ke toa zi do se 5 ini ti al und nur bei hy po volä mi schem schock zu stand: 20 ml/kg kg 0,9%ige nacl-lö sung oder 10 ml/kg kg al bu min 5% als in tra ve nö ser bo lus 5 vo lu men de fi zit the ra pie ne ben ei ner nor ma len er hal tungs the ra pie:de fi zit in li ter = ge schätz te de hy dra ta ti on in % körper ge wicht in kg. das aus maß der de hy dra ta ti on kann ge mäß . tabelle 84.15 und auf grund der anam nes tischen an ga be des kurz fris ti gen kör per ge wicht ver lusts recht zu ver läs sig ab ge schätzt wer den. der er hal tungsbe darf ist in . tabelle 84.5 an ge ge ben. zur de hy dra ta tions-und er hal tungs the ra pie wird bei ei nem plas maglu ko se wert >12 mmol/l nur iso to ne nacl-lö sung ein ge setzt. erst ab ei nem glu ko se wert <12 mmol/l wird auf eine mi schin fu si on aus 0,45%iger nacl-lö sung und 5%iger glu ko se lö sung im ver hält nis 3 : 1,5 um ge stellt. eine nacl-kon zent ra ti on von 0,45% ist der je ni gen von 0,3% we gen des er heb li chen ri si kos ei nes schnel len abfalls der plas ma na tri um kon zen tra ti on mit er heb li chem hirn ödem ri si ko vor zu zie hen. die elek tro ly te müs sen in die ser re hy dra ta ti ons pha se min des tens 2-stünd lich kon trol liert wer den. 5 elek tro lyt sub sti tu ti on:eine ka li um sub sti tu ti on soll te mög lichst früh er fol gen (au ßer bei an urie), zu min dest aber bei be ginn ei ner in su lin the ra pie. ka li um ist haupt säch lich ein in tra zel lu läres lon, und der ge samt kör per ka li um ge halt ist im mer massiv er nied rigt, auch wenn häu fig nor ma le oder so gar er höh te plas ma ka li um wer te ini ti al ge mes sen wer den kön nen. bei an stieg des ph-wer tes im rah men der vo lu men sub sti tu ti ons the ra pie be ginnt der ex trazel lu lä re ka li um ge halt we gen ver schie bung in den in tra zel lu lär raum ab zu fal len, dies wird noch ver stärkt durch die in su lin ga be. ka li um sub sti tu tio nen von mehr als 8-12 mmol/kg kg/tag sind kei ne sel ten heit. als ein fa che re gel be währt sich die gabe von 20 mmol pro 500 ml vo lu men, auf ge teilt in 50% kcl (7,45%ig) und 50% kh 2 po 4 (13,6%ig).von ei ner kor rek tur des ba sen de fi zits mit bi kar bo natga ben ist prin zi pi ell ab zu ra ten (ri si ko ei nes schnel len ka li ums hift bei kor rek tur des ph-wer tes). bei per sis tieren der me ta bo li scher azi do se soll ten noch mals eine vo lu men sub sti tu ti on mit 0,9%iger nacl-lö sung oder kol loi den durch ge führt und die in su lin do sis (evtl. un ter zu sätz li cher glu ko se zu fuhr) er höht wer den. eine bi kar bo nat ga be ist al len falls bei ei nem ph-wert <7,0 und bei per sis tie ren der herz-kreis lauf-in suf fi zi enz (per sis tie ren der schock zu stand) zur ver bes se rung der myo kard kon trak ti li tät zu recht fer ti gen.in su lin the ra pie. die in su lin the ra pie soll te erst nach ei ner all gemei nen schock the ra pie und nach be ginn der re hy dra ta ti onsthe ra pie be gon nen wer den. eine kon ti nu ier li che low-dose-in su lin the ra pie wird ge wählt (es be steht kei ne in di ka ti on zur bo lus ga be). es emp fi ehlt sich die zu be rei tung ei ner in su lin lösung von 0,5 ie/ml (kur z wir ken des in su lin) in 0,9%iger nacl-lö sung. die se in su lin lö sung wird über ein y-stück mit ei ner sprit zen pum pe ver ab reicht und soll te nie in einen hän gen den in fu si ons beu tel ge ge ben wer den. die ini ti a le in fu si ons geschwin dig keit die ser lö sung (0,5 ie/ml) be trägt 0,1 ie/kg kg/h (. tab. 84.19 zur wei te ren do si san pas sung). bei klein kin dern kön nen 0,05 ie/kg kg/h aus rei chend sein, in die ser al ter sklas se soll te bei ei nem blut g lu ko se wert ab fall von mehr als 5 mmol/l/h auf die se tie fe do sis um ge stellt wer den. bei zu schnel lem glu ko se ab fall (<5 mmol/h) soll te die in su lin thera pie nie, au ßer bei dro hen der hy po glykä mie (blut zucker wert <3 mmol/l), voll stän dig ge stoppt wer den, hin ge gen wird mehr glu ko se zu ge führt (der dia be ti ker braucht in su lin). hiv-in fi zier te pa ti en ten kön nen aus ei ner rei he von in di ka tionen he raus der in ten siv be hand lung be dür fen (. abb. 66.1; [7, 17, 19, 33, 41, 44, 51] ). in 50-75% der fäl le stellt aku tes re spi rato ri sches ver sa gen die in di ka ti on für die be hand lung hiv-in fizier ter auf der in ten sivsta ti on dar [7, 17, 19, 33, 41, 44, 51] . bei 55-90% die ser pa ti en ten mit in ten siv be hand lungs be dürf ti gem re spi ra to ri schen ver sa gen stellt pneu mo cys tis ca ri nii das für die er kran kung ver ant wort li che pa tho gen dar [7, 33, 44] .an de re häu fi ge ur sa chen für die ver le gung von hiv-in fi zierten pa ti en ten auf in ten sivsta tio nen sind neu ro lo gi sche (ca. 13%) und sep ti sche er kran kun gen (ca. 10%). eine dem ge gen über rela tiv ge rin ge an zahl hiv-in fi zier ter pa ti en ten wer den auf grund an de rer, von der hiv-in fek ti on un ab hän gi ger er kran kun gen inten siv be hand lungs be dürf tig [17, 44] .die ein füh rung ef fek ti ver er an ti re tro vi ra ler the ra pi en in den letz ten jah ren hat zu ei ner ver min de rung in ten siv me di zini scher be hand lun gen bei hiv-in fi zier ten ge führt. dies ist darauf zu rück zu füh ren, dass durch die ver zö ger te ent wick lung des hiv-in du zier ten im mun de fekts un ter der ver bes ser ten an ti retro vi ra len the ra pie die rate schwe rer the ra pie be dürf ti ger kompli ka tio nen zu rück ge gan gen ist. zu sätz lich dürf te die da durch sel te ne re not wen dig keit in va si ver di ag nos ti scher maß nah men (bron cho sko pie, hirn bi op sie u. a.) für den rück gang der behand lungs be dürf tig keit hiv-in fi zier ter pa ti en ten auf der in tensivsta ti on ver ant wort lich sein [50] .die mor ta li tät hiv-in fi zier ter pa ti en ten in kli nisch fort ge schritte nen sta di en der hiv-in fek ti on, die auf ei ner in ten sivsta ti on behan delt wer den, be trägt 32-70% bei ei ner mitt le ren lie ge zeit auf der in ten sivsta ti on von 5-11 ta gen [7, 33, 44] . die se an ga ben wer den durch die in den letz ten jah ren eben falls bes ser ge wor denen re sul ta te der be hand lung des aku ten re spi ra to ri schen ver sagens bei pneu mo cys tis-ca ri nii-pneu mo nie (pcp) be stimmt, da pa ti en ten mit die ser er kran kung die zah len mä ßig größ te gruppe der be han del ten bil den [6, 15, 19, 20, 41, 51] . die an ga ben der mor ta li tät für pa ti en ten im fort ge schritte nen sta di um der hiv-er kran kung (cd4-po si ti ve zel len <200/μl blut), die aus an de ren grün den als aku tem re spi ra to-ri schen ver sa gen auf ei ner in ten sivsta ti on be han delt wer den, sind un güns ti ger, wäh rend pa ti en ten mit in ten siv be hand lungsbe dürf ti gen neu ro lo gi schen er kran kun gen und hiv-in fek tion of fen bar eine ähn li che prog no se wie pa ti en ten mit aku tem re spi ra to ri schem ver sa gen ha ben [2, 45] . ver gleichs wei se liegt die mor ta li tät auf in ten sivsta tio nen bei nicht-hiv-in fi zierten pa ti en ten mit aku tem re spi ra to ri schem dis tress syn drom (ards) bei 30-60%, bei pa ti en ten mit hä ma to lo gi schen system er kran kun gen bei 80% und bei pa ti en ten mit le ber ver sagen bei 89% [39] .trotz der an wen dung ei ner pro phy la xe ge gen pneu mo cystis ca ri nii und trotz ei ner in den letz ten jah ren er heb lich ver min der ten er kran kungs fre quenz bleibt das aku te re spira to ri sche ver sa gen bei pcpn (pcp) der häu figs te grund für eine in ten siv me di zi ni sche be hand lung von pa ti en ten mit hiv-in fek ti on [53] .die über le bens ra te in ten siv me di zi nisch be han del ter hiv-in fizier ter pa ti en ten mit pcp wird auf grund ei ner rei he von stu di en mit 30-45% aus ge wie sen und ist da mit güns ti ger als noch vor eini gen jah ren [17] . mög li che er klä run gen hier für könn ten in der bes se ren se lek ti on von pa ti en ten für die in ten siv me di zi ni sche be hand lung, der zu sätz li chen be hand lung mit kor ti kos te roi den und in ei ner kon se quen ten an ti re tro vi ra len be hand lung mit ver min de rung des hiv-in du zier ten im mun de fekts lie gen [19] . ins be son de re die hö he re di ag nos ti sche sen si bi li tät für das auftre ten ei ner pneu mo cys tis-ca ri nii-pneu mo nie bei ärz ten und pa ti en ten dürf te in den letz ten jah ren zu ei ner im sta tis ti schen mit tel frü he ren be hand lung der er kran kung ge führt ha ben und da mit zu ei ner ent schei den den ver bes se rung der prog no se trotz aus ge präg ter re spi ra to ri scher in suf fi zi enz [53] . aus ver schie de nen gro ßen be hand lungs zen tren in den usa und ka na da wur den in den 1990er-jah ren wie der schlech te re über le bens ra ten und über le bens zei ten von pa ti en ten be rich tet, die mit aku tem re spi ra to ri schem ver sa gen bei hiv-as so zi ier ter pcp be han delt wur den. über ein stim men de er geb nis se ver schiede ner un ter su chun gen zeig ten, dass die se ver schlech te rung in ers ter li nie auf eine ver grö ße rung des an teils dro gen ab hän giger pa ti en ten zu rück zu füh ren ist, die in ei nem -ver gli chen mit an de ren pa ti en ten -spä te ren sta di um der hiv-in fek ti on und mit ei ner im mit tel stär ker aus ge präg ten re spi ra to ri schen in suffi zi enz bei pneu mo cys tis-ca ri nii-pneu mo nie zur auf nah me kamen [30] . 5 ar te ri el ler sau er stoff druck <50 mm hg oder ar te ri el le sau er stoff diff e renz >50 mm hg bei be ginn der be hand lung 5 ent wick lung ei nes pneu mo tho rax bei me cha ni scher ven ti la ti on 5 er höh te se rum-lak tat de hy dro gen ase ak ti vi tät 5 ra dio lo gi scher nach weis aus ge dehn ter ver än de rungen auf dem tho ra x rönt gen bild 66.3.1 pneu mo cys tis-ca ri nii-pneu mo nie (pcp)ty pi scher wei se kom men die pa ti en ten mit schwe rer pcp mit fieber, häu fig nicht pro duk ti vem hus ten und dys pnoe in ärzt li che be hand lung [53] . ein be son de res kenn zei chen der durch pneumo cys tis ca ri nii her vor ru fe nen pneu mo ni en bei hiv-in du ziertem im mun de fekt be steht da rin, dass häu fig ein über wo chen beste hen des mono-oder oli go sym pto ma ti sches vor sta di um mit meist tro ckenem hus ten be steht. in die ser zeit kön nen fie ber und dys pnoe feh len. in di vi du ell kön nen zeit li che ent wick lung und kli ni sche in ten si tät ei ner pcp bei hiv-in fi zier ten pa ti en ten in wei ten gren zen va ri ie ren. in ei ner gro ßen stu die wur de eine mitt le re oli go sym pto ma ti sche dau er von 28 ta gen vor prä sen ta tion der hiv-in fi zier ten pa ti en ten beim arzt mit ge teilt.da eine mög lichst frü he di ag no se und früh ein set zen de behand lung aus schlag ge bend für die prog no se der pcp sind, ist es von großer wich tig keit, die pneu mo nie be reits in der mono-oder oli go sym pto ma ti schen vor pha se di ag nos tisch zu er fas sen und zu be han deln. eine im sta di um des schweren re spi ra to ri schen ver sa gens dia gno s ti zier te pcp ist mit ei ner schlech ten prog no se as so zi iert [24] .zur den kli ni schen symp to men der schwe ren pneu mo cys tis cari nii-pneu mo nie ge hö ren fie ber (>38,5 °c) und schwe re ta chypnoe bei re spi ra to ri scher in suf fi zi enz (ar te ri el ler sau er stoff druck <50 mm hg oder ar te ri el le sau er stoff dif fe renz >50 mm hg bei be ginn der be hand lung). aus kul ta to risch und per ku to risch fin det sich da ge gen häu fig ein blan der be fund. als zei chen der in ters ti ti el len pneu mo nie zeigt sich häu fig ein ver schärf tes atem ge räusch (meist bi la te ral und aus ge dehn te lun gena rea le be tref fend). lo ka li sier te und um schrie be ne be fun de da ge gen spre chen für das (mög li cher wei se si mul ta ne) vor han den sein von ver än de run gen an de rer ätio lo gie (cave: be glei t in fek tio nen, tu mo ren). bei pcp lässt sich in 83-100% der fäl le schon bei be ginn der kli ni schen symp to matik ein er höh ter lak tat de hy dro gen ase-(ldh-)spie gel im blut der pa ti en ten fest stel len [24] . im fall derje ni gen pa ti en ten, die we gen ei ner pcp in ten siv me di zi ni scher be hand lung be dür fen, fin det sich nach ei ner zu sam men stel lung meh re rer be hand lungs zen tren bei al len pa ti en ten ein er höh ter se rum-ldh-wert. es konn te auch ge zeigt wer den, dass das ausmaß der se rum-ldh-wert-er hö hung mit der prog no se so wie mit über le bens ra te und über le bens zeit und mit dem an sprechen auf die the ra pie kor re liert.eine un ter the ra pie wei ter stei gen de ldh-ak ti vi tät im serum ist da nach mit ei ner sig ni fi kant ver schlech ter ten progno se, ei nem the ra pie ver sa gen und ge stei ger ter mor ta li tät as so zi iert, wäh rend sich um ge kehrt eine bes se re prog no se für pa ti en ten er ge ben hat, bei de nen sich im ver lauf der be hand lung eine ab neh men de ldh-ak ti vi tät im se rum be obach ten lässt [2, 7, 37] .die di ag no se der pcp er gibt sich aus der ge schil der ten kli nischen symp to matik, dem nach weis von pneu mo cys tis ca ri nii im pro vo zier ten spu tum oder nach bron choal veolä rer la va ge sowie durch den kli ni schen und rönt ge no lo gi schen nach weis der in ters ti ti el len pneu mo nie.bei ver dacht auf pcp bei hiv-in fi zier ten pa ti en ten und im munde fekt ist die aus wer tung der rönt gen auf nah me des tho rax von aus schlag ge ben der be deu tung [28] . bei der durch pneu mo cys tis ca ri nii her vor ge ru fe nen pneu mo nie fin det sich in der re gel eine bi la te ra le, meist sym me tri sche re ti ku lä re oder gra nu lä re zeichnung über den lun gen fel dern. häu fig sind im fall fort ge schritte ner re spi ra to ri scher in suf fi zi enz bei pneu mo cys tis-ca ri nii-infek ti on dif fu se, z.t. kon fluie ren de ver än de run gen nach weis bar, die an die rönt gen ver än de run gen bei ards er in nern kön nen [28] . häu fig sind dünn wan di ge, luft ent hal ten de zys ten oder pneu ma to ze len sicht bar. pneu ma to ze len kön nen be reits bei diag no se stel lung sicht bar sein oder sich in den ers ten ta gen un ter the ra pie erst ent wi ckeln. es han delt sich häu fig um mul ti pel über bei den lun gen fel dern ver teil te pneu ma to ze len, die -wenn sie eine ge wis se grö ße er rei chen -auch für die ent ste hung eines pneu mo tho rax prä dis po nie ren kön nen [38] . auf grund der be ein träch ti gung des lun gen ge rüsts durch die pneu mo ni schen ver än de run gen kön nen bei die sen pa ti en ten bei me cha ni scher ven ti la ti on oder aber auch spon tan pneu mo tho ra ces ent ste hen [36, 46] .die ent ste hung von pneu mo tho ra ces ver schlech tert wegen der ext rem schlech ten hei lungs ten denz in sta tis tisch re le van ter wei se die prog no se der pa ti en ten [25] .bei schwe ren ver läu fen der pcp tre ten ge le gent lich fo ka le infil tra te und at e lek ta sen auf [37] . in tra tho ra ka le lymph kno tenschwel lun gen und pleu raer güs se sind je doch sel ten. der ar ti ge ver än de run gen im ver lauf ei ner mi kro bio lo gisch be stä tig ten pcp soll ten drin gend an lass ge ben, nach an de ren, mög li cherwei se si mul tan vor han de nen pro zes sen, wie bak te ri el len in fek tionen (ins be son de re auch tu ber ku lo se) und/oder ka po si-sar kom, zu su chen. auch un ter ef fek ti ver the ra pie der pcp und bei kli ni scher und re spi ra to ri scher bes se rung kön nen die rönt ge no lo gisch nach weis ba ren ver än de run gen im lau fe der ers ten wo chen nach be ginn der be hand lung wei ter zu neh men. eine häu fi ge beobach tung ist, dass die se ver än de run gen erst im lau fe von ei ner bis meh re ren wo chen nach be ginn ei ner ef fek ti ven be hand lung eine bes se rung an zei gen, auch wenn schon sehr viel frü her eine kli ni sche bes se rung der re spi ra to ri schen funk ti on und der entzünd li chen ver än de run gen ein ge tre ten ist [37] . 66.3 · re spi ra to ri sche kom pli ka tio nen bei fort ge schrit te ner hiv-er kran kung the ra pie der schwe ren eine »schwer« ver lau fen de pneu mo cys tes-ca ri nii-pneu mo nie wird de fi niert als eine pneu mo nie mit den oben ge nann ten diag nos ti schen kri te ri en und aus ge präg ter re spi ra to ri scher einschrän kung (ar te ri el ler sau er stoff druck <50 mm hg oder ar te ri elle sau er stoff dif fe renz >50 mm hg bei be ginn der be hand lung).die an ti bio ti sche be hand lung der wahl bei schwe rer pcp besteht in der gabe von tri me tho prim-sul fa me thoxa zol. tri me thoprim-sul fo me thoxa zol steht als fixe kom bi na ti on zur ver fü gung und soll te in ei ner do sie rung von 12-15 mg/kg kg der tri metho prim-kom po nen te, auf ge teilt in 3 do sen, i.v. für min des tens 21 tage ver ab reicht wer den (. tab. 66.1; [53] ). nach grö ße ren statis ti ken liegt die rate der ne ben wir kun gen die ser be hand lung bei ca. 50% der mit die ser arz nei mit tel kom bi na ti on in die ser do sis be han del ten pa ti en ten.nach ei ner sta tis tik aus san fran cis co sind nur ca. 32% der pa ti en ten in der lage, die be hand lung mit tri me tho prim-sul fo me thoxa zol bis zum ge for der ten 21. be hand lungs tag fort zu set zen. die ne ben wir kun gen, die v. a. ku ta ne ex an theme, aber auch stö run gen der blut bil dung be tref fen kön nen, tre ten ins be son de re nach dem 4. be hand lungs tag auf [53] .je doch kön nen die meis ten pa ti en ten eine ini ti a le be hand lung mit tri me tho prim-sul fo me thoxa zol und bei auf tre ten von neben wir kun gen eine fort set zung der be hand lung mit i.v. ver abreich tem pen ta mi din bis zum 21. be hand lungs tag ver tra gen [53] . bei pa ti en ten, die auch i.v. ver ab reich tes pen ta mi din nicht ver tra gen, muss auf an de re, wahr schein lich we ni ger wirk sa me the ra peu ti schen sub stan zen aus ge wi chen wer den: tri me threxat i.v. plus dap so ne oral (kom bi niert mit leu co vor in) oder die ver ab rei chung von clin da my cin i.v. plus pri ma quin oral. da bei muss al ler dings her vor ge ho ben wer den, dass bis her in kei ner aus sa ge fä hi gen the ra pie stu die die se 3 me di ka men ten kom bi natio nen in der be hand lung der pcp im di rek ten ver gleich un tersucht wur den. die dar ge stell te rei hen fol ge der an wen dung der the ra peu ti schen sub stanz kom bi na tio nen be rück sich tigt da her ers ter li nie die rate der auf tre ten den ne ben wir kun gen und die brei te der bis her ge sam mel ten the ra peu ti schen er fah run gen mit der je wei li gen sub stanz.in meh re ren stu di en konn te ge zeigt wer den, dass ato vaquone zu min dest bei mit tel schwe rer und leich ter pcp eine im vergleich zu pen ta mi din ähn li che wirk sam keit bei ver tret ba ren ne ben wir kun gen auf weist. aus sa ge fä hi ge da ten für die be handlung von pa ti en ten mit schwe rer pneu mo cys tes-ca ri nii-pneu monie mit ato vaquo ne lie gen bis her nicht vor. für in ten siv me di zi nische an wen dung liegt ein nach teil der ato vaquo ne-be hand lung auch da rin, dass kei ne i.v. ver ab reich ba re for mu lie rung zur verfü gung steht.pa ti en ten mit fort ge schrit te ner hiv-in fek ti on und mä ßi ger bis schwe rer pcp soll ten zu sätz lich kor ti kos te roi de er hal ten (. tab. 66.1; [8, 12, 21] ). in ei ner rei he von kli ni schen stu di en konn te ge zeigt wer den, dass durch eine be hand lung mit kor tikos te roi den, die in ner halb von 24-72 h nach be ginn der be handlung der pcp be gon nen wird, die häu fig be ob ach te te ini ti a le verschlech te rung der pcp ver hin dert, die häu fig keit zu neh men den re spi ra to ri schen ver sa gens ge senkt und die über le bens ra ten sig-ni fi kant ver bes sert wer den kön nen [13] . ob eine spä ter (mehr als 72 h nach be ginn der pcp-the ra pie) be gon ne ne ste ro id behand lung noch wirk sam ist, ist nicht ge klärt.in ei ner un ter su chung von laroc co et al. [32] wur de über ver bes ser te über le bens ra ten bei me cha nisch ven ti lier ten pa ti enten mit fort ge schrit te ner hiv-in fek ti on und pcp be rich tet, die mit kor ti kos te roi den be han delt wur den [8, 32] .die in di ka ti on für den ein satz ei ner re spi ra tor the ra pie rich tet sich nach den all ge mei nen grund sät zen ei ner der ar ti gen behand lung. we gen der mög li cher wei se ver schlech ter ten prog no se nach in tu ba ti on wird auf eine mög lichst weit ge hen de zu rück haltung und kon zent ra ti on auf drin gen de kli ni sche not wen dig keit hin ge wie sen.in ei ner rei he neue rer stu di en konn te ge zeigt wer den, dass die tech nik der mas kenat mung mit kon ti nu ier lich po si ti vem atem wegs druck (cpap) bei aku tem re spi ra to ri schem ver sa gen bei hiv-as so zi ier ter pcp eine mög lich keit dar stellt, die ar te ri el le oxy ge nie rung zu ver bes sern und an de rer seits die mög li cher wei se . er höh te zu sätz li che in fek ti ons ge fähr dung durch in tu ba ti on und me cha ni sche be at mung hin aus zu zö gern oder zu ver mei den [23] . vo raus set zung für die an wen dung der (cpap) ist, dass der pa tient wach und ko ope ra tiv ist und eine aspi ra ti on ver mei den kann.pa ti en ten grup pen, bei de nen die mög lich keit für eine aus sichts rei che an wen dung der mas kenat mung mit kon ti nu ier lich po si ti vem atem wegs druck (cpap) be steht [23] 5 pa ti en ten mit aku ter und mög li cher wei se kurz an dauern der ver schlech te rung der re spi ra to ri schen funk ti on nach bron cho sko pie 5 pa ti en ten, die den wunsch äu ßern, nicht in tu biert zu wer den, an de rer seits aber re spi ra to ri scher un ter stützung be dür fen 5 pa ti en ten nach in tu ba ti on und be at mung, die ex tu biert sind und zeit wei lig der at mungs un ter stüt zung be dürfendie meis ten pa ti en ten mit pro gre dient ver lau fen der pneu mocys tis-ca ri nii-in fek ti on mit mit tel schwe rer bis schwe rer symp tomatik be dür fen je doch we gen der er heb lich ge stei ger ten atem arbeit der in tu ba ti on und me cha ni schen ven ti la ti on.pa ti en ten mit pcp, die me cha ni scher ven ti la ti on be dür fen, brau chen grund sätz lich as sis tier te und kon trol lier te be atmung oder in ter mit tie ren de zu satz be at mung. po si ti ve endex spi ra to ri sche drücke (peep) kön nen die oxy ge nie rung ver bes sern, wenn dies auch bei die sen pa ti en ten häu fig nur mä ßig gra dig er reicht wer den kann [44] .das auf tre ten se kun därer pul mo na ler be glei t in fek tio nen bei pcp wird in ver schie de nen kli ni schen un ter su chun gen unter schied lich an ge ge ben und liegt zwi schen 10 und 60% [32] . die rate se kun där er wor be ner no so ko mia ler pneu mo ni en bei be at me ten pa ti en ten mit hiv-as so zi ier ter pneu mo cys tes ca rinii-pneu mo nie scheint ge rin ger zu sein als bei pa ti en ten ohne hiv-in fek ti on. eine mög li che er klä rung hier für könn te die wirk sam keit der meist ver wen de ten an ti bio ti ka tri me tho prim-sul fa me thoxa zol ge gen über gramne ga ti ven kei men sein [42] .aids-pa ti en ten mit pcp, die in kli ni ken zur be hand lung ein ge wie sen wer den, die aus ge dehn te er fah run gen in der be hand lung von pa ti en ten mit fort ge schrit te ner hiv-in fek tion be sit zen, ha ben eine bes se re prog no se als pa ti en ten, die in kli ni ken ein ge wie sen wer den, in de nen nur ge rin ge erfah run gen mit die sen er kran kun gen be ste hen [5, 48] . da bei er gibt sich kei ne ab hän gig keit von den für die be hand lung der pa ti en ten auf ge wende ten fi nan zi el len mit tel.der prä dik ti ve wert des apa che-ii-in dex (»acu te phy sio lo gy and chro nic he alth eva lua ti on«) für die prog no se bei pcp-asso zier tem aku tem re spi ra to ri sche ver sa gen wur de in ver schie-de nen kli ni schen stu di en eva lu iert. da bei zeig te sich in ei ner stu die, dass der apa che-ii-in dex eine mor ta li tät von 44% im stu dien kol lek tiv vor her sag te, die ak tu el le mor ta li tät je doch 86% be trug. in ei ner spä te ren stu die bei hiv-in fi zier ten pa ti en ten mit aku tem re spi ra to ri schen ver sa gen zeig te sich kein sig ni fi kanter un ter schied des apa che-ii-in dex bei pa ti en ten, die die erkran kun gen über leb ten im ver gleich zu de nen, die verstar ben.in ei ner stu die, die da ten von 1986-1991 be rück sich tig te, fand sich, dass die be rech nung mit dem apa che-ii-in dex die mor ta li tät auf der in ten sivsta ti on bei hiv-in fi zier ten pa ti enten mit fort ge schrit te nem im mun de fekt (<200 cd4-po si ti ve zel len/ l blut) im ver gleich zur prog nos ti schen aus wer tung auf grund der an zahl cd4-po si ti ver zel len im pe ri phe ren blut als sig ni fi kant ge rin ger an gab. bei pa ti en ten mit ge rin ger aus gepräg tem hiv-in du zier ten im mun de fekt (an zahl cd4-po si ti ver zel len im pe ri phe ren blut >200/ l) da ge gen wa ren die se un terschie de nicht nach weis bar. bak te ri el le, vi ra le und my ko ti sche pneu mo ni en sind als ur sa che für aku tes re spi ra to ri sches ver sa gen bei pa ti en ten mit hiv-in fekti on ge häuft. häu fig keit und even tu el le prä dik to ren für das auftre ten ei nes akut re spi ra to ri schen ver sa gens bei den ge nann ten in fek ti on sind nicht be kannt. an de re ur sa chen für aku tes re spira to ri sches ver sa gen bei hiv-in fi zier ten pa ti en ten stel len pul mona le ka po si-sar ko me, non-hodg kin-lym pho me und lym pho zytisch in ters ti ti el le pneu mo ni en (v. a. im kin desal ter) dar. aku tes re spi ra to ri sches ver sa gen, das nicht im zu sam men hang mit dem hiv-in du zier ten im mun de fekt steht -wie chro nisch ob struk ti ve lun gen er kran kun gen, aspi ra ti on, herzin suf fi zi enz und me di kamen ten über do sie rung -, stellt sel te ner die ur sa che für das auftre ten von aku tem re spi ra to ri schen ver sa gen bei hiv-in fi zier ten dar [7, 44, 51] . seit ein füh rung ei ner me di ka men tö sen oder in ha la ti ven prophy la xe ge gen pneu mo cys tis ca ri nii ist die häu fig keit von pcpn dras tisch zu rück ge gan gen [26, 27] . bis her lie gen kei ne ge si cherten da ten da rü ber vor, in wie weit eine pro phy la xe ge gen pneu mocys tis ca ri nii den kli ni schen ver lauf und die prog no se ei ner trotz pro phy la xe auf tre ten den pcp mo di fi ziert.etwa 50% der pa ti en ten mit hiv-in fek ti on ent wi ckeln im vollbild aids kli nisch re le van te neu ro lo gi sche kom pli ka tio nen [34] . ent zünd li che und nicht ent zünd li che lä sio nen der hirnsub stanz, me nin gitiden und mye lo pa thi en stel len die häu figsten neu ro lo gi schen kom pli ka tio nen dar, die die ur sa che ei ner aku ten ver schlech te rung des men ta len zu stands des pa ti en ten mit fort schrei ten der som no lenz, ko ma tö sen zu stän den, kopfschmer zen, ze re bra len krampf an fäl len oder se kun där re spi ra to-66.4 · neu ro lo gi sche kom pli ka tio nen der fort ge schrit te nen hiv-in fek ti on und de ren be hand lung ri schem ver sa gen dar stel len kön nen und eine be hand lung auf der in ten sivsta ti on not wen dig ma chen [4] .neu ro lo gi sche er kran kun gen, die hiv-as so zi iert auf tre ten und eine be hand lung auf der in ten sivsta ti on not wen dig ma chen kön nen (nach [34] ) 5 in tra ze re bra le raum for de run gen -ze re bra le to xo plas mo se (to xo plas mo se gon dii) -pri märelym pho me des zen tral ner ven sys tems -an de re pri märe tu mo ren des zen tral ner ven sys tems 5 me nin gi tis/me nin goe n ze pha li tis mit fol gen den er regern -kryp to kok kus neo for mans -my co b ac te ri um tu ber cu lo sis -lis te ria mo no cy to ge nes -no car dia as te roi desin ei ner zu sam men stel lung von ro sen et al. [45] von auf der inten sivsta ti on be han del ten pa ti en ten mit fort ge schrit te ner hiv-in fek ti on zeig te sich, dass 17% der pa ti en ten mit fort ge schrit tener hiv-er kran kung we gen neu ro lo gi scher kom pli ka tio nen auf die in ten sivsta ti on ein ge wie sen wur den. die meis ten die ser pa ti en ten be durf ten we gen se kun dären re spi ra to ri schen ver sagens ei ner re spi ra tor be hand lung. die häu figs te er kran kung des zen tral ner ven sys tem war die ze re bra le to xo plas mo se. die morta li tät lag bei 68%, be zo gen auf einen zeit raum von 3 mo na ten.in die ser un ter su chung ließ sich eine sig ni fi kan te kor re la ti on des le ta len ver laufs der er kran kung mit ei nem glas gow coma sco re von <7 und kli ni schen zei chen der hirn stamm be tei li gung be obach ten. in te res san ter wei se er gab sich bei die ser prog nos tischen aus wer tung kei ne kor re la ti on zur an zahl cd4-po si ti ver zel len im blut der pa ti en ten [4] . etwa 40% der pa ti en ten mit hiv-in fek ti on ent wi ckeln im ver lauf der hiv-er kran kung zen tra le ner vö se ver än de run gen, die die fä hig keit ei nes pa ti en ten, an ent schei dun gen hin sicht lich sei ner be hand lung mit zu wir ken, be ein träch ti gen kön nen [2] . in ei ner un ter su chung ga ben 53% in ei ner hiv-kli nik am bu lant behan del ten pa ti en ten an, dass sie, wenn dies not wen dig sein wür de, in ten siv be hand lungs maß nah men für sich wün schen. nur 19% die ser pa ti en ten wünsch ten je doch in ten siv be hand lungs maß nahmen für den fall, dass bei ih nen hirn or ga nisch be grün de te einschrän kun gen ih rer ent schei dungs fä hig keit be stün den. dies zeigt die not wen dig keit, aus rei chend früh und wie der holt wäh rend des krank heits ver laufs über der ar ti ge spä ter mög li cher wei se not wendi ge ent schei dung mit dem pa ti en ten zu spre chen (7 kap. 66.11).ein großes spekt rum ga stro in tes tina ler er kran kun gen kann die aufnah me des pa ti en ten auf eine in ten sivsta ti on not wen dig ma chen oder den krank heits ver lauf wäh rend der aus an de ren grün den in di zier ten be hand lung auf der in ten sivsta ti on kom pli zie ren. der häu figs te grund für star ke ab do mi nel le schmer zen bei pa ti en ten in fort ge schrit te nem sta di um der hiv-er kran kung ist die cy to me galie vi rus-(cmv-)as so zi ier te in tes ti no pa thie mit pe ri to ni tis, die von ei ner cmv-ma ni fes ta ti on des ko lons und/oder des dünn darms aus geht. im ver lauf die ser er kran kung kann es zu per fo ra tio nen kom men, die ope ra ti ve maß nah men und ent spre chen de in ten sivme di zi ni sche the ra pie zur fol ge ha ben. die hiv-as so zi ier te cholan gio pa thie, die durch ver schie de ne in fek ti öse oder neo plas ti sche pro zes se her vor ge ru fen wer den kann, ist eben falls eine häu fig in tensiv me di zi ni sche maß nah men er for dern de er kran kung [52] .ter mi na les le ber ver sa gen auf dem bo den ei ner vi rus he pa ti tis b und/oder c gibt in den letz ten jah ren zu neh mend grund für die auf nah me von hiv-in fi zier ten und -er krank ten auf der in tensivsta ti on. da bei ist zu be rück sich ti gen, dass 3 an ti re tro vi ral wirksa me sub stan zen (la mi vu di ne, em tri ci ta bi ne, te nofo vir) auch ge gen he pa ti tis b (hbv) wirk sam sein kön nen. we gen der ho hen rate von hbv-re sis ten zen ge gen über la mi vu di ne oder em tri cita bi ne soll te eine kom bi na ti on die ser sub stan zen mit te nofo vir in er wä gung ge zo gen wer den. dies gilt ins be son de re bei an ti viral/an ti re tro vi ral un be han del ten pa ti en ten zur ver mei dung von re sis ten zen. pa ti en ten, die vor der auf nah me der ar ti ge the ra peu ti sche sub stan zen er hiel ten, soll ten nach mög lich keit die se auch während der in ten siv be hand lung wei ter er hal ten, da nach ab set zen schwe re schü be von he pa ti tis b be ob ach tet wur den [55] .die fort set zung ei ner an ti vi ra len the ra pie mit in ter fe ron und ri ba vi rin bei pa ti en ten mit he pa ti tis c wird, so weit die ne ben wirkun gen die ser prä pa ra te dies zu las sen, eben falls emp foh len.pa ti en ten mit ter mi na ler le be r in suf fi zi enz sind po ten zi ell kandi da ten für eine le ber trans plan ta ti on. die hiv-in fek ti on galt lan ge zeit als ab so lu te kon train di ka ti on für die durch füh rung ei ner le ber-oder an de ren or gan trans plan ta ti on, weil das ri si ko op por tu nis ti scher in fek tio nen bei gleich zei ti ger hiv-as so zi ierter und ia tro ge ner im mun sup pres si on sehr hoch war. durch die mög lich keit der durch füh rung und die ef fek ti vi tät ei ner hochwirk sa men an ti re tro vi ra len kom bi na ti ons the ra pie hat sich die situ a ti on grund le gend ge än dert. bei pa ti en ten, die er folg reich mit an ti re tro vi ra len kom bi na ti ons the ra pi en be han del bar sind, können or gan trans plan ta tio nen mit na he zu der sel ben er folgs quo te wie bei hiv-ne ga ti ven pa ti en ten durch ge führt wer den [14] .ter mi na le nie ren in suf fi zi enz auf dem bo den ei ner hiv-as so ziier ten ne phro pa thie, ei ner he pa ti tis-b-/-c-ko in fek ti on, ei nes be glei ten den dia be tes oder bei ar te ri el ler hy per to nie stellt eine häu fi ge kom pli ka ti on der fort ge schrit te nem hiv-er kran kung dar und kann zur auf nah me auf die in ten sivsta ti on füh ren. die se er kran kun gen soll ten nach kli ni schen not wen dig kei ten wie bei nicht-hiv-in fi zier ten pa ti en ten be han delt wer den, ein schließlich der an wen dung von dia ly se und nie ren trans plan ta ti on. die an ti re tro vi ra le the ra pie soll te, so weit mög lich, fort ge führt wer den. ge gen eine ste ro id me di ka ti on be ste hen grund sätz lich kei ne kon train di ka tio nen. eine in di vi du el le the ra pie pla nung ist drin gend ge ge ben [55] .in ei ner stu die, in der mehr als 3000 pa ti en ten mit hiv-as so zi ierter pcp und de ren be hand lung in ver schie de nen kran ken häu sern new yorks aus ge wer tet wur den, zeig te sich, dass frau en sig ni fi kant sel te ner bron cho sko piert wer den als män ner mit ver gleich ba rem schwe re grad der er kran kung (50,7% vs. 61,2%, p=0,02). die se unter su chung zeigt da rü ber hi naus, dass frau en mit die ser er krankung häu fi ger be at mungs be dürf tig wer den als män ner (13,6% vs. 9,9%, p=0,01). die mor ta li täts ra te für frau en, die aus die ser in di kati on he raus in ten siv me di zi ni scher be hand lung be durf ten, be trug 84% im ver gleich zu 57% für män ner (p=0,05) [3] .re spi ra to ri sches ver sa gen bei pneu mo cys tis-ca ri nii-pneu monie ist der haupt säch li che grund für die in ten siv be hand lung von säug lin gen mit hiv-in fek ti on [40] . für die se säug lin ge besteht eine ext rem schlech te prog no se mit we ni ger als 20% überle ben den be zo gen auf ein in ter vall von 5 wo chen nach be ginn der be hand lung und von nur 8% über le ben den bei ei nem jahr nach be ob ach tungs zeit. ähn lich wie in der be hand lung er wachse ner mit pcp wur de auch bei der be hand lung von säug lin gen in neue ren un ter su chun gen von ei ner et was bes se ren prog no se be rich tet. auch für klein kin der und äl te re kin der bil det die pneu mocys tes-ca ri nii-pneu mo nie mit ih ren kom pli ka tio nen den hauptgrund für die an wen dung von in ten siv me di zi ni schen maß nahmen. da rü ber hi naus je doch kommt es bei die sen kin dern häufi ger als bei säug lin gen zum auf tre ten von bak te ri el ler sep sis, sys te mi schen my ko bak te ri el len oder pilz in fek tio nen so wie von ga stro in tes tina len blu tun gen und blut bil dungs stö run gen [36] . die »lym pho zy tä re in ters ti ti el le pneu mo nie« stellt eine häu fi ge kom pli ka ti on des krank heits ver laufs der hiv-er kran kung im kin desal ter dar. im ver lauf die ser pneu mo nie kommt es meist zu ei ner lang sam fort schrei ten den ver schlech te rung der re spi rato ri schen funk ti on. über aku tes re spi ra to ri sches ver sa gen wurde je doch sel ten be rich tet [36, 40] .in ten sivsta ti on die prog no se der hiv-er kran kung ist durch die ein füh rung der hoch ak ti ven an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pie (haart) seit 1996 er heb lich ver bes sert wor den. ob wohl dies ei gent lich einen posi ti ven ein fluss auf die hiv-test pra xis ha ben soll te, ist da von aus zu ge hen, dass ca. 30% der auf der in ten sivsta ti on erst ma lig ge stell ten di ag no sen ei ner hiv-in fek ti on bei pa ti en ten er hoben wer den, die be reits einen fort ge schrit te nen hiv-in du zierten im mun de fekt (<200 cd4-po si ti ve lym pho zy ten/ l blut) auf wei sen [46] .bei auf nah me von pa ti en ten mit be kann ter hiv-in fek ti on oder bei di ag no se der hiv-in fek ti on auf der in ten sivsta ti on stellt sich die fra ge, in wie weit eine fort füh rung der an ti re trovi ra len the ra pie in der ge samt si tua ti on güns tig sein kann. zu die ser fra ge feh len bis her er geb nis se kli nisch aus sa ge fä hi ger grö ße rer un ter su chun gen. die in di ka ti on oder das aus set zen der lau fen den an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pie bei dem in ten siv me dizi nisch zu be han deln den hiv-in fi zier ten pa ti en ten ori en tiert sich da her meist an den im fol gen den er läu ter ten über le gungen:fort füh rung der an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pieef fek ti vi tät der an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pie. hoch ak ti ve an ti re trovi ra le the ra pie ver mit telt eine ver lang sam te ent wick lung des hiv-in du zier ten im mun de fekts und ist in der lage, auch bei pa ti en ten mit fort ge schrit te nem im mun de fekt eine im mun restau ra ti on her vor zu ru fen. dies hat zur kon se quenz, dass oppor tu nis ti sche er kran kun gen un ter an ti re tro vi ra ler the ra pie in ver min der ter häu fig keit und mit ge rin ge rem schwe re grad auf tre ten. es konn te ge zeigt wer den, dass die ra ten so wohl von am bu lant-als auch im hos pi tal er wor be nen pneu mo ni en bei pati en ten un ter hoch ak ti ver an ti re tro vi ra ler the ra pie ver min dert sind [16] . die se da ten spre chen für den be ginn oder für eine fort set zung der an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pie auf der in ten sivsta tion [1] .fort füh rung der an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pie ne ben wir kun gen der an ti re tro vi ra len the ra piebei hiv-in fi zier ten pa ti en ten mit kom pli ka tio nen und ne benwir kun gen, die di rekt auf die an ti re tro vi ra le the ra pie zu be ziehen sind, wie z. b. lak ta ta zi do se oder pank re a ti tis, be steht die not wen dig keit, eine lau fen de an ti re tro vi ra le the ra pie ab zu setzen [35] . . tabelle 66.2 gibt aus kunft über die häu fig keit des ent ste hens ei ner lak ta ta zi do se un ter ver schie de nen an ti re tro vira len the ra pies che ma ta. ob wohl die pa tho ge ne se der lak ta ta zi do sen un ter an ti re trovi ra ler the ra pie noch nicht voll stän dig ge klärt ist, scheint die fä hig keit ver schie de ner an ti re tro vi ral wirk sa mer sub stan zen, mit ochon dria le dna-po ly me ra se-zu in hi bie ren, stö run gen in der at mungs ket te her vor zu ru fen und eine da mit un ter umstän den le bens be droh li che lak ta ta zi do se aus zu lö sen.eine pank re a ti tis kann teil die ses syn droms sein, sie kann aber auch durch die di rek te to xi sche wir kung an ti re tro vi ra ler substan zen, wie etwa di da no sin, auf tre ten. eine rei he von an ti re trovi ral wirk sa men sub stan zen, ins be son de re pro teas ein hi bi to ren, kön nen er höh te plas ma kon zen tra tio nen von cho les te rin, tri glyze ri den und glu ko se her vor ru fen (li po dystro phie syn drom). dies kann zu schwe ren in ten siv me di zi nisch re le van ten me ta boli schen kom pli ka tio nen füh ren [35] .es konn te ge zeigt wer den, dass nicht nu kleo si da le in hi bito ren (ne vi ra pi ne) der hiv-re ver sen tran skrip ta se in ei ni gen fäl len le ber ver sa gen her vor ru fen kön nen. auch an de re an ti retro vi ral wirk sa me sub stan zen, die bei hoch ak ti ver an ti re tro vi raler the ra pie zum ein satz kom men, be sit zen -ins be son de re in kom bi na ti on mit an de ren im rah men der in ten siv be hand lung häu fig be nutz ten me di ka men ten -eine re le van te le ber to xi zi tät.wenn die in ten siv me di zi nisch be hand lungs be dürf ti ge erkran kung des pa ti en ten in re le van tem maße auf ne ben wir kungen der an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pie zu be zie hen ist, zwingt dies dazu, die an ti re tro vi ra len me di ka men te ab zu set zen. eine wirksa me nach fol ge be hand lung mit an de ren an ti re tro vi ra len subs tan zen oder sub stanz kom bi na tio nen ist auf grund von ne ben wirkun gen, re sis ten z ent wick lung und in ter ak tio nen mit an de ren me di ka men ten, ge ra de bei an ti re tro vi ral vor be han del ten pa ti enten, häu fig schwer zu se lek tio nie ren.hiv-re sis ten z ent wick lung ge gen die an ti re tro vi ra le the ra pie pa ti en ten mit hiv-in fek ti on kön nen auf grund an ti re tro vi ra ler vor be hand lung eine re sis tenz ge gen ei ni ge oder alle bis zu diesen zeit punkt ein ge nom me nen an ti re tro vi ra len me di ka men te ent wi ckeln. bei die sen pa ti en ten be steht in der re gel eine nur we nig durch me di ka men te kon trol lier te hi-vi ra le re pli ka ti on. die se pa ti en ten sind er fah rungs ge mäß be son ders durch das auftre ten schwe rer op por tu nis ti scher in fek tio nen und tu mo ren ge fähr det. ihr hiv-in du zier ter im mun de fekt ist, ge ra de beim auf tre ten schwe rer in ten siv me di zi nisch be hand lungs be dürf tiger kom pli ka tio nen, kurz fris tig nur sehr ein ge schränkt durch me di ka men te be ein fluss bar. die blo ße fort füh rung der lau fenden an ti re tro vi ra len me di ka ti on ist da her in die ser kli ni schen si tu a ti on nicht ef fek tiv und mög li cher wei se durch er heb li che ne ben wir kun gen be las tet. be ste hen je doch bei die sen pa ti en ten un ter be rück sich ti gung von ne ben wir kun gen, in di vi du el lem resis tenz pro fil und me di ka men ten in ter ak tio nen aus sichts rei che me di ka men tös-an ti re tro vi ra le al ter na ti ven, so kön nen die se -ge ra de in ei ner der ar ti gen si tu a ti on -hilf reich sein.the ra pie auf der in ten sivsta ti ongrund sätz lich soll te die an ti re tro vi ra le the ra pie als kom bi nati ons be hand lung und nach den de fi nier ten richt li ni en (z. b.deutsch-ös ter rei chi sche emp feh lun gen zur an ti re tro vi ra len thera pie [18] , eu ro pä ische richt li ni en zur durch füh rung der an ti retro vi ra len the ra pie [11] ) durch ge führt wer den. be son der hei ten bei der an wen dung die ser the ra pie auf der in ten sivsta ti on er geben sich ins be son de re durch die vor ab an ge spro che nen punk te. in den . tabelle 66.3 bis 66.5 sind die wich ti gen cha rak te risti ka der an ti re tro vi ral wir ken den me di ka men te mit ih ren grundle gen den phar ma ko ki ne ti schen pa ra me tern und me ta bo li schen wir kun gen zu sam men ge fasst. mo di fi ka tio nen der do sis er geben sich durch be gleit er kran kun gen, wie nie ren in suf fi zi enz und he pa ti sche funk ti ons ein schrän kung. die ent spre chend not wendi gen an pas sun gen sind in . tabelle 66.6 auf ge führt.an wen dung an ti re tro vi ra ler me di ka men te wäh rend in ten siv me di zi ni scher be hand lungdas plötz li che ab set zen an ti re tro vi ra ler me di ka men te führt ge legent lich zu ei nem sich im ver lauf von ta gen ent wi ckeln den absin ken der an zahl cd4-po si ti ver zel len im blut und zu ei nem mas si ven an stieg der hi-vi rus last. dies kann die ur sa che für ein aku tes »sero kon ver si ons syn drom« mit ver schlech te rung des all ge mei nen zu stands und/oder fie ber und ar thral gi en sein. an de rer seits zei gen an de re un ter su chun gen, dass das ab set zen der an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pie in ei ni gen, bis her nicht ge nau defi nier ten fäl len auch zur in duk ti on spe zi fi scher im mun re ak tionen und da mit zur ver bes se rung der in di vi du el len im mun reati vi tät ge gen über der au to lo gen hiv-po pu la ti on im sin ne ei ner »selbstim mu ni sie rung« füh ren kann.das ab set zen der an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pie kann von ei ner be schleu nig ten ent wick lung von re sis ten zen ge gen an tire tro vi ra le sub stan zen ge folgt sein. dies trifft v. a. für die grup pe der nicht nu kleo si da len in hi bi to ren der re ver sen tran skrip ta se zu, da die se sub stan zen nach dem ab set zen mit ei ner mitt le ren halb werts zeit im plas ma zwi schen 3 und 5 ta gen einen für ei ni ge tage an hal ten den sub the ra peu tischen wirk spie gel ent fal ten, wäh rend des sen sich re sis tenzen ge gen die se me di ka men te ent wi ckeln kön nen.wäh rend der in ten siv me di zi ni schen be hand lung kann es zur ent wick lung von re sis ten zen auf grund schlech ter re sorp ti on der an ti re tro vi ra len sub stan zen aus dem darm und da mit zu einer an hal ten den un ter do sie rung kom men. dies hat nicht nur einen wir kungs ver lust, son dern auch eine be schleu nig te re sisten z ent wick lung zur fol ge. 66.10 · an ti re tro vi ra le the ra pie auf der in ten sivsta ti on an de rer seits sind nur sehr we ni ge da ten vor han den, die de tailliert aus kunft über die re sorp ti on und wirk sam keit der ver wende ten an ti re tro vi ral wirk sa men sub stan zen nach ap pli ka ti on über eine na so ga s tra le son de ge ben. zi do vu din ist die ein zi ge sub stanz, die pa ren te r al in tra ve nös ver ab reich bar ist.plas ma spie gel kön nen für pro te in as ein hi bi to ren und nicht nukleo si da le in hi bi to ren der re ver sen tran skrip ta se ge mes sen werden und so (ins be son de re die tal spie gel vor er neu ter ap pli ka tion) einen ge wis sen an halt für die re sorp ti on die ser sub stan zen aus dem darm er ge ben. spie gel be stim mun gen für nu kleo si da le in hi bi to ren der re ver sen tran skrip ta se sind je doch -ins be son dere in der in ten siv be hand lung -häu fig nicht be son ders aus sa ge fähig, da kei ne in for ma tio nen über den grad der in tra zel lu lä ren phos pho ri lie rung und da mit über die ei gent lich wirk sa men meta bo li ten zu er hal ten sind.von be son de rer be deu tung sind in ter ak tio nen der an ti re tro vi ral wirk sa men sub stan zen mit an de ren häu fig in der in ten siv me dizi ni schen be hand lung ver wen de ten sub stan zen, ins be son de re wenn en zy min du zie ren de sub stan zen, wie phe ny to in oder rifam pi cin, an wen dung fin den.! cave pro teas ein hi bi to ren und nicht nu kleo si da le in hi bi to ren der re ver sen tran skrip ta se kön nen als in hi bi to ren des cyto chrom c450iiia4 wir ken und da mit den me ta bo lis mus vie ler häu fi g auf in ten sivsta tio nen ver wen de ter substan zen, ein schließ lich der opioide, in re le van tem maße be ein fl us sen.zu sam men fas send soll te in der pra xis so oft wie mög lich und so weit ge hend wie mög lich eine an ti re tro vi ra le the ra pie auch während der in ten siv me di zi ni schen be hand lung fort ge setzt wer den. an de rer seits ist zu be rück sich ti gen, dass die me di ka men ten neben wir kun gen und -in ter ak tio nen, ins be son de re für die in ten sivme di zi ni sche be hand lung und de ren ef fekt, von aus schlag ge bender be deu tung sein kön nen. um eine ge fähr dung des pa ti en ten zu ver mei den, muss in ei ner sol chen si tu a ti on zum ab set zen der an ti re tro vi ra len the ra pie und zur pri mären be hand lung der für die kli ni sche ent wick lung re le van ten er kran kun gen ge ra ten werden, auch wenn die se durch den hiv-in du zier ten im mun de fekt mit be dingt sind. es wäre zu wün schen, dass der ef fekt ei ner hoch ak ti ven an tire tro vi ra len the ra pie auf die kli ni schen ver läu fe in ten siv me di zi nisch be han del ter pa ti en ten un ter mög lichst kon trol lierten be din gun gen an grö ße ren pa ti en ten zah len un ter sucht und do ku men tiert wird, um zu künf tig eine ba sis für ver läss li che empfeh lun gen zum ein satz und zur fort füh rung die ser the ra pie unter in ten siv me di zi ni schen be din gun gen zu er hal ten. ga stro in tes tina le be schwer den, ex an them k. a.: kei ne an ga ben. a zur ver än de rung der phar ma ko ki ne tik an de rer an ti re tro vi ra ler sub stan zen wer den ge rin ge re do sen ver ab reicht (aus führ li che dar stel lung bei [11, 18] ).grund la gen für die mit dem pa ti en ten ab ge stimm te in ten siv me di zi ni sche be hand lung -vor aus an wei sun gen und voll mach ten ten. pa ti en ten da ge gen, die sich in dem jahr vor der be fra gung in sta tio närer be hand lung be fan den, hat ten in ei nem we sent lich hö he ren pro zent satz den wunsch, mit ih rem arzt oder zu mindest mit fa mi li en mit glie dern und ih rem part ner über die in dika ti on und die durch füh rung le bens er hal te ner maß nah men zu spre chen. grund sätz lich hat je der pa ti ent das recht, über ge plan te medi zi ni sche und ge ra de auch über in ten siv me di zi ni sche maß nahmen in for miert zu wer den und die se so wohl in ei ner ter mi nal be droh li chen als auch in ei ner nicht be droh li chen kli ni schen situ a ti on ab zu leh nen. da bei ist eine früh zei ti ge pa ti en ten be stimmung, un ter um stän den lan ge vor not wen dig wer den in ten siv medi zi ni scher maß nah men, über die durch füh rung me di zi ni scher maß nah men, ins be son de re le bens er hal ten den maß nah men, von be son de rer be deu tung, da in die sem fall da von aus ge gan gen werden kann, dass der pa ti ent sich im voll be sitz sei ner geis ti gen entschei dungs ka pa zi tät be fin det (7 kap. 3; [49] ).in ten sivsta ti ondie wirk sams ten und ein fachs ten me tho den zur ver hin de rung der über tra gung von hiv-in fek tio nen wie auch an de ren durch blut über trag ba ren vi rus in fek tio nen auf das ärzt li che oder pflege per so nal so wie auf an de re pa ti en ten lie gen in der be ach tung der hy gie ne re geln und der un fall ver hü tungs vor schrif ten.ge ra de auf in ten sivsta tio nen er gibt sich bei der be hand lung hiv-in fi zier ter pa ti en ten häu fig die fra ge ei ner mög li chen expo si ti on des ärzt li chen und des pfle ge per so nals ge gen über hiv [42] . be ruf li che hiv-über tra gun gen sind bis her nur durch blut oder vi rus kon zen trat (vi rus kul tur) er folgt, und zwar bei 4 stich-und schnitt ver let zun gen, 4 kon takt mit ei ner of fe nen wun de oder nichtin tak ter (geschä dig ter) haut, 4 schleim haut ex po si ti on.u biquitin (ub) is an essential posttranslational modifier conserved from yeast to mammals [1] [2] [3] . typically, the cterminal glycine residue of ub is covalently attached to lysine residues of substrate proteins. ub itself is also a substrate for ubiquitylation, and forms a covalently linked ub chain. the ub chain linked via lys48 (k48 chain) is the primary targeting signal for proteasomal degradation [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . polyubiquitylated proteins in isolation can be direct targets of the proteasome, whereas those embedded into membranes or assembled into multisubunit complexes need to be extracted or segregated by the conserved aaa-family atpase cdc48 (yeast) or p97/vcp (metazoan) with the aid of its cofactor complex, ufd1-npl4 (un), prior to the proteasomal degradation [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] . the cellular function or localization of the cdc48/p97 atpase is controlled by many cofactors. the un heterodimer is one of the best-characterized cofactors [12] [13] [14] [15] .the cdc48/p97 atpase consists of an n-terminal (n) domain and two atpase domains (d1 and d2). d1 and d2 form a hexameric double ring with a central pore 16 . the conformation of the n domain relative to the d1-d2 ring is coupled to the nucleotide state of d1; the n domain is located above the d1 ring in the atp state (up conformation), and is coplanar with the d1 ring in the adp state (down conformation) [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] . in addition, relative rotations between the d1 and d2 rings occur upon binding of atp to d2. although understanding the mechanism of the substrate translocation accompanied with the ub chain binding and atp hydrolysis has been a long-standing problem, recent structural and functional studies provided important mechanistic insights into reacting steps of the cdc48/p97-un complex 22 . the un heterodimer captures the substrate-attached ub chain at the initial step 15 .npl4 is responsible for recognition of the substrate-attached ub chain, and thus likely mediates a ub chain-associated reacting step 15 . the mammalian npl4 (also known as nploc4) consists of a ubx-like (ubxl) domain, zinc-finger domain (previously designated as zf-npl4), mpr1/pad1 n-terminal (mpn) domain, c-terminal domain (ctd), and nzf domain. the mammalian npl4 binds to ub chains without linkage specificity through the nzf domain. on the other hand, yeast npl4 lacks the nzf domain, and binds specifically to k48 chains via zf-npl4-mpn-ctd 15, 23, 24 . the mpn domain of npl4 topologically resembles the catalytic domain of the jab1/mpn/mov34 metalloenzyme (jamm)-family deubiquitylating enzyme (dub) 19 , which accommodates the c-terminal tail of ub. therefore, the groove corresponding to the catalytic site of jamm dubs 25, 26 has been proposed as a potential ub-binding site of npl4. however, a recent cryo-em analysis of the substrate-engaged cdc48-un complex at 3.9 å resolution has shown that the k48 chain on the substrate does not interact with the groove of ynpl4 mpn but with ctd and other regions of mpn 22 . nevertheless, due to the low local resolution, the density for ufd1 was not interpreted with the atomic model and the interaction between npl4 and the two folded ub moieties has not been characterized in detail 22 .here, we present the crystal structures of yeast npl4 (zf-npl4-mpn-ctd) in complex with lys48-linked diubiquitin (k48-ub 2 ) and with ufd1 at 2.55 and 1.58 å resolutions, respectively. the crystal structures reveal that the distal and proximal ub (ub dist and ub prox , respectively) moieties of k48-ub 2 interact with the c-terminal helix and n-terminal loop (n loop) of npl4 ctd, respectively, and that ufd1 binds to the groove of npl4 corresponding to the catalytic groove of jamm. in vitro and in vivo mutational analyses confirm that the npl4 mpn groove is required for binding to ufd1 but not to k48 chains. also, npl4 mutants that are designed to disrupt the ub binding show that the interaction between the npl4 c-terminal helix and ub is critical for the ub chain binding and stimulation of the atpase activity of the cdc48-un complex. moreover, we reveal that mutations on the proximal ub-binding site of npl4 affect its linkage-specificity. our crystallographic and biochemical studies provide essentially important insights to understand the reaction mechanism of the cdc48/p97-un complex.structure of npl4 in complex with k48-ub 2 . the region containing residues 113-580 of saccharomyces cerevisiae npl4 (ynpl4 113-580 , with the prefix "y" indicating saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins) specifically recognizes k48 chains in vitro ( fig. 1) 15 . the triple e123a k124a e125a mutation was introduced to reduce excess surface conformational entropy 27 . the ynpl4 113-580 (e123a k124a e125a) protein yielded high-quality crystals, and its structure was determined at 1.72 å resolution by the single-wavelength anomalous diffraction (sad) method using the zinc edge (table 1) . we also attempted to crystallize ynpl4 113-580 in complex with k48 chains. although k48-ub 2 , k48-ub 3 , k48-ub 4 , and k48-ub 5 were tested for crystallization of the complex, only k48-ub 2 was successfully co-crystallized with ynpl4 113-580 . eventually, we determined the crystal structure of ynpl4 113-580 in complex with selenomethionine (semet)-labeled k48-ub 2 at 2.55 å resolution ( fig. 2a and table 1 ). the structure was determined by the molecular replacement method using ynpl4 113-580 alone as the search model. although molecular replacement using ub (pdb 1ubq [https://doi.org/10.2210/ pdb1ubq/pdb]) 28 as the search model was unsuccessful, we found residual electron density corresponding to k48-ub 2 and manually built the model of k48-ub 2 . the final model contains one ynpl4 113-580 -k48-ub 2 complex and one isolated ynpl4 113-580 molecule in the asymmetric unit. we here note that the electron density of k48-ub 2 is weak, especially of ub prox ( supplementary fig. 1a) . the electron density of the ynpl4interacting part of ub prox is observed, whereas the solvent exposed part of ub prox is obscured ( supplementary fig. 1a, b) . to confirm the positions of ub dist and ub prox , we replaced pro19 val26 or ile30 of ub with semet and calculated the anomalous difference fourier map in the ynpl4 113-580 -k48-ub 2 complex ( supplementary fig. 1c ). although some signals derived from semet were indistinguishable or not detected, we detected the signals derived from semet1, semet19, and semet26 of the ub dist and semet1, semet26, and semet30 of the ub prox .the ynpl4 113-580 structure consists of three subdomains, zf-npl4, mpn, and ctd, similarly to the previously reported structures of npl4 19, 22 . the ynpl4 mpn subdomain consists of the mpn core and two insertions, ins-1 (residues 287-317) and ins-2 (residues 403-462), similarly to other mpn dubs. the ub dist moiety contacts the ctd subdomain of ynpl4 with a buried surface area of 460 å 2 (fig. 2b) . the ub prox moiety contacts the ctd and mpn subdomains of ynpl4 with a buried surface area of 468 å 2 . although the electron density corresponding to the c-terminal five residues (arg-leu-arg-gly-gly) of ub dist and the lys48 side chain of ub prox are invisible (fig. 2c) , the cα-cα distance between leu71 of ub dist and lys48 of ub prox (11 å) is within the range of those in the previously reported crystal structures of k48 chains in complex with their specific effectors (sars plpro 29 , airapl 30 , and mindy-1 31 ; 9-20 å). furthermore, we examined the ynpl4-k48-ub 2 crystals by sds-page ( supplementary fig. 1d ), and confirmed that the linkage of k48-ub 2 was retained in the crystals. therefore, we concluded that the isopeptide bond connects ub dist and ub prox in the present ynpl4-k48-ub 2 structure. no large conformational difference was observed between ynpl4 113-580 alone and ynpl4 113-580 -k48-ub 2 , except for the region comprising residues 290-300 in ins-1, whose conformation is constrained by crystal packing (supplementary fig. 2a) .the c-terminal helix of npl4 plays a key role in ub binding. ub dist of k48-ub 2 interacts primarily with the c-terminal helix of ynpl4 ctd (fig. 2b ). met574 and ile575 form a hydrophobic surface to interact with the ile44-centered hydrophobic patch of ub dist . this hydrophobic interaction is further stabilized by hydrogen bonds between thr571 of ynpl4 and the main-chain nh groups of ala46 and gly47 in ub dist . adjacent to the c-terminal helix-mediated interactions, tyr501 and ile538 of ynpl4 project into a hydrophobic pocket formed by leu8, his68, and val70 of ub dist . to assess the roles of these interactions in the ub chain recognition by npl4, we examined the binding of the t571a, m574a, m574q, and i575a mutants of ynpl4 to k48 chains by surface-plasmon resonance (spr) spectroscopy ( table 2 ). the spr analysis of mutant ynpl4 was performed using k48-ub 4 because the affinity for k48-ub 2 was too low to be analyzed. longer ub chains bind to their effectors with higher affinity in general 30, 32, 33 . the t571a mutation of ynpl4 113-580 decreased the affinity for k48-ub 4 to 5.0% of the wild-type affinity ( table 2 ). the i575a mutation of ynpl4 113-580 decreased the affinity to an unmeasurable level. the m574a mutation of ynpl4 113-580 had a weak effect and decreased the affinity for k48-ub 4 to 43% of the wild-type affinity. on the other hand, the m574q mutation had a greater effect than the m574a mutation, and decreased the affinity for k48-ub 4 to 9.1% of the wild-type affinity. this is likely because the hydrophilic side chain of gln inhibits the hydrophobic interaction between ynpl4 113-580 and ub dist . we further analyzed the affinities between ynpl4 113-580 mutants and k63-or m1-ub 4 . the t571a, m574a, m574q, or i575a mutation decreased the affinity for k63-or m1-ub 4 to an unmeasurable level (table 2 ). these results suggest that the ynpl4-ub dist interface primarily contributes to the affinity for ub chains rather than the linkage specificity.next, the binding between the cdc48-un complex and k48 chains was analyzed by gst pulldown assays. gst-ynpl4 mutants were immobilized to glutathione beads and incubated with cdc48, yufd1, and k48 chains. after washing, the bound a 2f o -f c composite omit map is shown as an olive mesh contoured at 1 σ level. d analysis of the binding between k48 chains and the cdc48-un complex containing wild-type or mutant gst-ynpl4 by pulldown assays. the bound k48 chains were detected by immunoblotting with anti-ub antibody (upper panel). blot membranes were stained with ponceau s (lower panel). in all, 20% input means 20% of the volume of the sample (k48 chain, cdc48, and yufd1) that was mixed with the gst-ynpl4-bound glutathione resin. asterisks indicate contamination. this experiment was repeated with distinct samples (supplementary fig. 3a) . source data are provided as a source data file. e atp hydrolysis rates of the cdc48-un complex containing wild-type or mutant ynpl4 with or without k48-ub n -gfp. the rates were normalized to the average of the atp hydrolysis rates of the wild-type cdc48-un complex without k48-ub n -gfp. the line represents the mean of the rates after normalization (mean values; n = 10 independent experiments; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001 from tukey's test).proteins were eluted with lds-loading buffer and analyzed by immunoblotting with anti-ub antibody ( fig. 2d and supplementary fig. 3a ). in this assay, yufd1 or cdc48 had a little effect on the binding to k48 chains, and the un or cdc48-un complex formation was not affected by the mutations of ynpl4 examined in this study. on the other hands, the t571a, m574q, or i575a mutation, which had a severe effect on the k48-ub 4 binding, completely abolished the binding of cdc48-un for k48 chains. the m574a mutation, which had a mild effect on the affinity for k48-ub 4 , did not completely eliminate the binding. similar gst pulldown assays using gst-yufd1 instead of gst-ynpl4 showed consistent results ( supplementary fig. 3b ). to further assess the functional significance of the ynpl4-ub dist interaction in vivo, mutant ynpl4-3xflag was expressed under its own promoter in npl4δ cells. ynpl4-3xflag was immunoprecipitated with anti-flag antibody, and co-immunoprecipitation of lys48-linked polyubiquitylated proteins were analyzed with anti-k48 chain antibody ( supplementary fig. 3c ). in agreement with the result of the in vitro binding assay, the t571a, m574q, or i575a mutation decreased the amount of co-immunoprecipitated lys48-linked polyub conjugates, although these mutations had little effect on cdc48 binding.previous studies showed that ufd1 binds to k48 chains through its ut3 domain 24, 34 . however, our pulldown analysis failed to detect the binding of yufd1 to k48 chains ( supplementary fig. 3b ). we next analyzed the binding between the gst-ynpl4 and k48 chains on increasing concentrations of yufd1 by gst pulldown assay but did not observe substantial effects ( supplementary  fig. 3d ). spr analysis using the purified yufd1-ynpl4 113-580 complex and k48-ub 4 also showed that the presence of yufd1 has little effect on the affinity of ynpl4 for k48-ub 4 ( table 2) . although the k d value of yufd1 for polyub has not been estimated, that for monoub was estimated to be within the range of 1-2 mm 34 . this value is much higher than the k d value of ynpl4 for k48-ub 2 or k48-ub 4 ( table 2 ), suggesting that the affinity of yufd1 for k48 chains is much lower than that for ynpl4. collectively, these in vitro and in vivo results suggest that the c-terminal helix of ynpl4 is the key determinant for ub chain recognition by the cdc48-un complex.the n loop of npl4 ctd contributes to k48 chain specificity. ub prox of k48-ub 2 mainly interacts with the n loop of ynpl4 ctd (residues 493-501) (fig. 2b) . the n loop of ynpl4 ctd interacts with the hydrophobic patch formed by leu8, ile44, and val70 of ub prox . ser498 of ynpl4 forms a hydrogen bond with arg42 of ub prox . the main-chain co group of gln493 in ynpl4 forms a hydrogen bond with the main-chain nh group of leu71 in ub prox . the functional importance of these interactions was confirmed by spr analyses using the a494f, s498l, and s498r mutants of his 6 -ynpl4 113-580 ( table 2 ). the s498l mutation of ynpl4 had a little effect on the affinity for k48-, k63-, and m1-ub 4 , whereas the s498r mutation of ynpl4 decreased the affinity for k48-ub 4 to 36% of the wild-type affinity ( table 2 ). these results suggest that the n loop of ynpl4 ctd is a binding site for ub prox , although the contribution of the n loop to k48-ub 4 binding is smaller than that of the c-terminal helix. reflecting this, gaps are found in the interface between ynpl4 and ub prox . one of the gaps is located between ala494 of ynpl4 and leu8 of ub prox . the phe replacement of ala494 in ynpl4 increased the affinity of ynpl4 for k48-ub 4 2.2-fold ( table 2 ). it is likely that the bulky side chain of phe filled the gap and increased the affinity. the involvement of the n loop of ynpl4 ctd in the ub prox recognition was further supported by gst pulldown assays using the cdc48-un complex containing a gst-ynpl4 mutant: the a494f mutation of ynpl4 enhanced the binding between cdc48-un and k48 chains, whereas the s498r mutation decreased it (fig. 2d ). similar results were obtained even when the gst tag was fused to ufd1 instead of npl4 ( supplementary  fig. 3b) .the s498r or a494f mutation hardly affected the affinity for k63-or m1-ub 4 , in contrast to that for k48-ub 4 , and thereby 3.78 ± 0.14 q554m1.11 ± 0.09data are presented as mean ± standard deviation; n = 3 independent experiments k d values in parentheses are above half of the upper limit of the substrate concentration used in the experiment, and may be underestimated a the assays of wild-type ynpl4 were performed twice using distinct samples with similar results changed the linkage specificity (represented by the reciprocal ratio of dissociation constants; table 2 ). the affinity of wild-type ynpl4 for k48-ub 4 was 11 and 15 times higher than that for k63or m1-ub 4 , respectively. the s498r mutation of the ynpl4 decreased the linkage specificity. in contrast, the a494f mutant of ynpl4 increased the linkage specificity because this mutant increases the affinity for k48-ub 4 but hardly affects that for k63or m1-ub 4 ( table 2 ). these results indicate that the interaction between ub prox and the n loop of ynpl4 ctd contributes to the specificity of ynpl4 to k48 chains.k48 chain-ctd binding stimulates the cdc48 atpase activity.lys48-linked polyubiquitylated gfp (k48-ub n -gfp) has been used as a model substrate that can stimulate the atp hydrolysis of the cdc48-un complex 13, 14 . to evaluate the coupling between the binding to a k48 chain and atp hydrolysis in the cdc48-un complex, we analyzed the rate of the atp hydrolysis by the cdc48-un complex containing mutant ynpl4. addition of k48-ub n -gfp increased the atp hydrolysis rate of the cdc48-un complex, depending on the affinity of ynpl4 for k48 chains ( fig. 2e and supplementary fig. 3e ). for instance, k48-ub n -gfp increased the atp hydrolysis rate of the cdc48-un complex approximately 5-fold. the t571a, m574q, or i575a mutation at the ynpl4-ub dist interface, which severely decreases the affinity for k48 chains, decreased the atp hydrolysis rate. the s498r mutation at the ynpl4-ub prox interface, which shows a mild effect on the affinity, also decreased the atpase hydrolysis rate but less than the t571a, m574q, or i575a mutation. these results indicate that the stimulation of the atpase activity of the cdc48-un complex requires the binding activity of ynpl4 ctd to k48 chains.structure of npl4 in complex with ufd1. npl4 and ufd1 can form a heterodimer, even in the absence of cdc48/p97 or a polyubiquitylated substrate. the mechanism of the ufd1-npl4 interaction remains unclear, although residues 258-275 of human ufd1 (hufd1 258-275 , with the prefix "h" indicating the human protein; equivalent to residues 288-305 of yufd (yufd1 288-305 )) have been assigned as the npl4-binding motif (nbm) (fig. 1 ) 35 . indeed, fluorescence anisotropy-based affinity measurement using flash-labeled yufd1 288-305 showed that yufd1 288-305 binds to ynpl4 with k d of 85.7 nm (table 3) . to further reveal the structural basis of the interaction between npl4 and ufd1, we determined the crystal structure of ynpl4 113-580 (e123a k124a e125a) in complex with yufd1 288-305 (fig. 3a, b and table 1 ). the structure was determined by the molecular replacement method using ynpl4 113-580 alone as the search model. in the crystal, ynpl4 113-580 formed a stoichiometric complex with yufd1 288-305 . no large conformational difference was observed between ynpl4 113-580 alone and the yufd1 288-305 -bound ynpl4 113-580 ( supplementary fig. 2b ).in the complex, residues 298-300 of yufd1 nbm form a βsheet with ins-1 of ynpl4 (fig. 3c, d) . leu296, phe326, leu353, met357, phe419, pro420, and tyr424 of ynpl4 form a hydrophobic groove to accommodate pro289, leu292, leu294, gly297, leu299, phe301, phe303, and met305 of yufd1. mutations of all these residues except for pro420 of ynpl4 and pro289 of yufd1 were examined by fluorescent anisotropy-based binding analysis (table 3 ). the mutation of leu296, leu353, or tyr424 of ynpl4 or leu292, gly297, leu299, or phe301 of yufd1 severely affected the affinity between yufd1 288-305 and ynpl4 113-580 . the ala replacement of leu292, leu299, or phe301 in yufd1 288-305 decreased the affinity to 1.6, 0.68, or 0.41% of the wild-type affinity, respectively. the leu, arg, or tyr replacement of gly297 of yufd1 288-305 decreased the affinity for ynpl4 113-580 to 14, 0.41, or 4.0% of the wild-type affinity, respectively. the backbone dihedral angles φ and ψ of gly297 are 90.1°and −8.5°, respectively. molprobity 36 , a standard program for protein structure validation, judges these angles as favored angles for gly but allowed angles for non-gly/pro residues. gly is more favorable than non-gly/pro residues at residue 297. yufd1 nbm is kinked at gly297, thereby fitting into the hydrophobic groove in the mpn subdomain of ynpl4 (fig. 3b) . gly297 and phe301 of yufd1 are conserved from yeast to human, whereas leu299 of yufd1 is replaced by functionally equivalent hydrophobic residues among other eukaryotes (fig. 3c) . although the sequence of ufd1 nbm is variable among eukaryotes, this gxφxf motif (x and φ represent any amino acids and hydrophobic amino acids, respectively) is well conserved, reflecting its functional importance (fig. 3c) . the ala replacement of leu296, phe326, leu353, or tyr424 of ynpl4 113-580 decreased the affinity to 1.2, 33, 6.2, or 1.0% of the wild-type affinity, respectively (table 3) . notably, leu296, phe326, and tyr424 of ynpl4 are conserved in hnpl4 ( supplementary fig. 4 ). leu296 and phe326 of ynpl4 interact with leu299 and phe301 of yufd1, which occupy the third and fifth positions of the gxφxf motif, and tyr424 of ynpl4 hydrophobically interacts with the main-chain co group of ala290 and the cα atom of lys291 in yufd1. these hydrophobic interactions are likely conserved from yeast to human. in addition to the hydrophobic interactions, arg364 and thr418 of ynpl4 form hydrogen bonds with glu296 and the main-chain nh group of ala290 in yufd1, respectively. the e296a mutation of yufd1 288-305 or the r364a mutation of ynpl4 113-580 decreased the affinity to 20% or 27% of the wild-type affinity, respectively (table 3 ). these residues are not conserved between yeast and human. the hydrophilic interactions between npl4 and ufd1 may be variable among species.ufd1 does not overlap with k48 chain on npl4. the catalytic groove in the mpn domain of jamm-family dubs accommodates the c-terminal tail of ub for cleavage 25, 26, 37 . the first insertion in the jamm core (i.e., ins-1) forms a β-sheet with the c-terminal tail of ub in the catalytic groove (fig. 3d) . npl4 is enzymatically inactive but has ins-1 and a groove similar to the catalytic groove of jamm-family dubs 19 . therefore, this groove and ins-1 have been assumed to form a potential ub chainbinding site. however, the present ynpl4 113-580 -yufd1 288-305 structure reveals that the groove of the mpn domain accommodates yufd1 nbm (fig. 3d) . the npl4-bound yufd1 does not overlap with k48-ub 2 in the ynpl4-k48-ub 2 complex. consistently, yufd1 did not inhibit the binding of k48 chains to ynpl4 (fig. 2d, supplementary fig. 3d ). in addition, the recently reported cryo-em structure of the substrate-engaged cdc48-un showed that the bound k48 chain and ufd1 do not overlap with cdc48-un assembly depends on the ufd1-npl4 interaction.to analyze the relationship between the ufd1-npl4 interaction and cdc48-un assembly, we first screened for mutations that effectively inhibit the interaction between yufd1 and ynpl4 by gst pulldown experiments with full-length proteins. although single point mutations of ynpl4 or yufd1 hardly affected the ynpl4-yufd1 interaction ( supplementary fig. 5a, b) , triple mutations of ynpl4 (l296a l353a y424a) or yufd1 (g297r l299a f301a) completely inhibited the formation of the un heterodimer, respectively ( fig. 3e and supplementary fig. 5a, b) . the triple mutant ynpl4 was confirmed to bind to k48 chains as well as wild-type ynpl4 (supplementary fig. 5c ). next, we analyzed the effect of ynpl4 or yufd1 mutations on the cdc48-un assembly by gst pulldown experiments and found that the triple mutants of either ynpl4 or yufd1 substantially reduced the formation of the cdc48-un complex ( fig. 3f and supplementary  fig. 5d) . thus, the un heterodimer formation facilitates the cdc48-un assembly, although both ynpl4 and yufd1 can directly bind to cdc48.to further assess the functional significance of the ufd1-npl4 interaction in vivo, mutated npl4-3xflag or ufd1-3xflag was expressed in npl4δ or ufd1δ cells, respectively. we examined the accumulation of ub conjugates in total cell lysate in these cells. the npl4-1 temperature-sensitive strain was also examined as an npl4-deficient control. the levels of ub conjugates were not changed in the cells that expressed ynpl4 or yufd1 single-point mutants ( supplementary fig. 5e ). in contrast, in the cells expressing the triple mutant of ynpl4 or yufd1, we observed a substantial accumulation of ub conjugates, which was comparable to that in the npl4-1 cell (supplementary fig. 5e ). correspondingly, these triple mutant-expressing cells displayed a temperature-sensitive growth phenotype, although it was milder than the npl4-1 phenotype (supplementary fig. 5f ). these findings indicate that the ufd1-npl4 interaction is important for the degradation of ub conjugates and for the cell growth.ctd of human npl4 is involved in binding to k48 chains. npl4 is a highly conserved protein from yeast to mammals. in mammalian npl4, the nzf domain located in its c-terminus binds to k48 chains and lys63-linked ub chains (k63 chains). the human npl4 (hnpl4) mutant lacking the nzf domain hardly binds to ub chains 15 . on the other hand, the ascomycota and plantae npl4 proteins lack the nzf domain in their c-termini (supplementary fig. 6a, b) . the npl4 proteins from s. cerevisiae and c. thermophilum bind to k48 chains via the zf-npl4-mpn-ctd domain 19 . multiple amino-acid sequence alignment including ynpl4 and hnpl4 shows that the ub dist -interacting residues in the c-terminal helix of the ctd are partially conserved between yeast and human; thr571 of ynpl4 is conserved, and ile575 of ynpl4 is replaced with leu in hnpl4, which should be functionally equivalent to ile (supplementary fig. 6a) . intriguingly, the t551a mutation of hnpl4 (equivalent to thr571 of ynpl4) decreased the affinity for k48-ub 4 to 58% of the wild-type affinity ( table 2) . on the other hand, met574 of ynpl4 is replaced with gln in hnpl4 and with ala in s. pombe. the m574q mutation of ynpl4 decreased the affinity for k48-ub 4 to 9.1% of the wild-type affinity, whereas the m574a mutation decreased it to just 43% (table 2) . reciprocally, the q554m mutation of hnpl4 (equivalent to met574 of ynpl4) increased the affinity for k48-ub 4 about two-fold ( table 2 ). these findings suggest that the c-terminal helix of hnpl4 ctd is also involved in binding to a ub chain like that of ynpl4 ctd.hnpl4 nzf can compensate for the defect of ynpl4 ctd. to assess the functional equivalence between ynpl4 ctd and hnpl4 nzf in the context of the ub chain binding and the cdc48 atpase activity, we investigated engineered ynpl4 proteins, where the nzf domain of hnpl4 (including the linker region between the ctd and nzf domains) was fused to the c-terminal end of the full-length ynpl4 (ynpl4-nzf) with or without mutations deficient in binding to ub chains (t571a or i575a). gst pulldown analysis showed that ynpl4-nzf bound to both k48 and k63 chains, even with the t571a or i575a mutation, indicating that the nzf fusion can rescue the defect of ub chain binding of the ctd mutations (fig. 4a, b and supplementary  fig. 6c ). next, we analyzed whether the ynpl4-nzf proteins support the k48 chain-dependent atpase activity of the cdc48 complex ( fig. 4c and supplementary fig. 6d) . the nzf fusion to wild-type ynpl4 did not enhance the atpase activity above the wild-type level, probably because the affinity of wild-type ynpl4 for k48 chains is sufficient to stimulate the full atpase activity of cdc48. on the other hand, the nzf fusion completely recovered the decrease in the atpase stimulation by the t571a or i575a mutation, suggesting that ynpl4 ctd and hnpl4 nzf are functionally equivalent. this also raises the possibility that the enhancement of atp hydrolysis is independent of lys48-linkage specificity. however, k63 chains did not stimulate the atpase activity of the cdc48-un complex containing ynpl4-nzf, which can bind to k63 chains as well as to k48 chains (fig. 4c) . thus, the stimulation of the atpase activity of the cdc48-un complex actually depends on lys48-linkage specificity of ynpl4. considering that lys48-linkage specificity of ynpl4 ctd is dispensable for the stimulation of the atp hydrolysis, one may expect that ynpl4, yufd1, and/or cdc48 have additional lys48linkage-specific recognition site(s) besides npl4 ctd. the cryo-em structure of the substrate-engaged cdc48-un has shown that ynpl4 mpn binds to unfolded ub, which bridges between ub prox and the central pore of cdc48 22 (supplementary fig. 6e ). this binding may be related to the k48 chain-specific stimulation of the atpase activity of cdc48.in this study, we determined the crystal structure of the ynpl4 113-580 -k48-ub 2 complex. both ub dist and ub prox interact with ynpl4 ctd, which is a newly identified ub-binding domain (fig. 5a) . the c-terminal helix of ynpl4 ctd is the primary ubbinding site of ynpl4. among the previously reported ub-binding domains (ubds), ub-interacting motif (uim), motif interacting with ub (miu), and uim and miu related ubd (umi) have a single helix as a ub-binding site. ynpl4 ctd, miu, and umi but not uim exhibit the same helix orientation relative to the bound ub. therefore, we compared the ub-binding helices of ynpl4 ctd, rnf168 umi (pdb 5xis [https://doi.org/10.2210/pdb5xis/pdb]) 38 , and rabex5 miu (pdb 2c7n [https://doi.org/10.2210/pdb2c7n/ pdb]) 39 (fig. 5b) . these ubds have an n-terminal hydrophilic residue for hydrogen bonding with the nh groups of ala46 and gly47 of ub, and a central hydrophobic residue for the interaction with the hydrophobic pocket formed by leu8, ile44 and val70 of ub (fig. 5b, c) . the differences of the n-terminal hydrophilic residue and central hydrophobic residue in the ub-binding helix affect its orientation relative to ub. the central hydrophobic residues are ile in npl4 ctd and umi and ala in miu. the longer side chain of ile in ynpl4 ctd or umi pushes out the c-terminal end of the helical ubd, whereas those n-terminal hydrophilic residues move close proximity to the nh groups of ala46 and gly47 of ub. 39 . the coloring scheme of the ynpl4-ub dist complex is the same as that in fig. 2a . rnf168 umi and rabex-5 miu are colored yellow and green, respectively. hydrogen bonds are shown as black dotted lines. the residues involved in the binding between ynpl4 and ub dist and the corresponding residues of rnf168 umi and rabex-5 miu are shown as sticks. c sequence alignment of the c-terminal helix of ynpl4, rnf168 umi, and rabex-5 miu. the residues involved in the binding between ynpl4 and ub dist and the corresponding residues of rnf168 umi and rabex-5 miu are highlighted in cyan. fig. 4 analysis of the nzf-fused ynpl4. a, b analysis of the binding of gst-hnpl4, gst-ynpl4 or gst-ynpl4-nzf to k48 chains (a) or k63 chains (b) by pulldown assays. the bound ub chains were detected by immunoblotting with anti-ub antibody (upper panel). blot membranes were stained with ponceau s (lower panel). 20% input means that 20% of the volume of the sample (ub chains) that was mixed with gst-ynpl4-or gst-ynpl4-nzf-bound glutathione resin. these experiments were repeated with distinct samples (supplementary fig. 6c ). source data are provided as a source data file. c atp hydrolysis rates of the cdc48-un complex containing ynpl4 or ynpl4-nzf with k48-ub n -gfp or k63-ub n -gfp. the rates were normalized to the average of the atp hydrolysis rates of the wild-type cdc48-un complex without ub n -gfp. the line represents the mean of the rates after normalization (mean values; n = 3 independent experiments; *p < 0.05 from student's t-test).because of this proximity, the n-terminal hydrophilic residue of ynpl4 ctd and umi are thr and ser, respectively, which are shorter than asp, the n-terminal hydrophilic residue of miu. the cryo-em structure of the substrate-engaged cdc48-un 22 contains two folded ub moieties, which correspond to ub dist and ub prox in the present crystal structure of ynpl4 113-580 -k48-ub 2 (fig. 6a) . in both structures, the c-terminal helix of ynpl4 ctd interacts with the ile44-centered hydrophobic patch of ub dist (fig. 6b) , and therefore, the ub dist recognition mode of ynpl4 is essentially the same. on the other hand, the ub prox recognition mode is different. in the ynpl4-k48-ub 2 structure, ser498 of ynpl4 forms a hydrogen bond with arg42 of ub prox . gst pulldown and spr analysis of the s498r mutant of ynpl4 showed that ser498 of ynpl4 is actually involved in binding to k48 chains (fig. 2d, supplementary fig. 3b and table 2 ). in the structure of the substrate-engaged cdc48-un, ub prox moves toward cdc48 by~10 å, as compared with ynpl4-k48-ub 2 , and does not interact with ser498 of ynpl4 (fig. 6b) . this ub prox movement appears to be coupled with threading of the unfolded ub moiety; i.e., ub prox interacts with ser498 of ynpl4 at the initial ub chain recognition step. at the subsequent substrate-threading step, the unfolded ub is inserted into the central pore of cdc48, and pulls ub prox , which loses its interaction with ser498 of ynpl4.we also determined the crystal structure of ynpl4 113-580 -yufd1 288-305 . we docked the structure of the nbm region of ufd1 into the cryo-em structure of the substrate-engaged cdc48-un 22 (fig. 6c) . the present yufd1 288-305 model was nicely fitted into the unassigned density observed in the cryo-em map (fig. 6c, d) , which was supposed to correspond to a part of yufd1 22 . this indicates that the ynpl4-ufd1 interaction revealed by crystallography of the un complex similarly occurs in the substrate-engaged cdc48-un (fig. 6d) .inhibitors of ub-proteasome system (ups) have recently been developed as anticancer drugs 40 . because the p97/cdc48-un complex plays crucial roles upstream of the proteasome, its inhibition has emerged as a novel therapeutic target in cancer cells 41 . however, since p97/cdc48 also plays various roles outside the ups pathway, its inhibition may affect many cell functions. in the context, disruptions of the specific p97-cofactor association will likely lead to the novel p97 inhibitors with enhanced specificity of anticancer activity. inhibition of the interaction between ufd1 and npl4 prevents formation of the cdc48-un complex (fig. 3f) . our present structure of ynpl4 113-580 -yufd1 288-305 might facilitate the development of such anticancer drugs by serving as a useful platform for structure-based design.preparation of npl4, ufd1, and cdc48. the codon-optimized cdnas of ynpl4, hnpl4, and yufd1 were synthesized (eurofins) to improve their expressions in escherichia coli. for crystallization, the gene encoding ynpl4 113-580 or yufd1 288-305 was cloned into the pgex-6p1 expression vector using bamhi and xhoi sites or pcold-gst expression vector using ndei and xhoi sites, respectively, to produce the n-terminal gst fusion proteins. for gst pulldown assays, the fulllength ynpl4 and yufd1 genes were cloned into the pgex-6p1 expression vector using bamhi and xhoi sites 15 , and the cdc48 gene was cloned into the pet21a expression vector using bamhi and xhoi sites. for spr analyses, the gene encoding ynpl4 113-580 or hnpl4 105-608 was cloned into the pet28a expression vector using ndei and xhoi sites to produce the n-terminal his 6 -tagged proteins. for fluorescence anisotropy-based affinity measurements, the gwccpgcc sequence was attached to the c-terminus of yufd1 288-305 . the yufd1 288-305 -gwccpgcc gene was cloned into the pcold-sumo expression vector using ndei and xhoi sites to produce the n-terminal his 6 -tagged sumo fusion protein.mutations were generated by pcr-based mutagenesis. primer sequences used in this study are shown in supplementary table 1. e. coli strain rosetta (de3) cells (invitrogen) were transformed with each expression vector, and cultured in lb medium containing 100 mg l −1 ampicillin for the pgex-6p1 or pcold expression vectors or 50 mg l −1 kanamycin for the pet28a expression vector at 37°c. when the optical density of the culture at 600 nm reached~0.5, isopropyl-β-d-thiogalactopyranoside (iptg) was added to a final concentration of 0.1 mm to induce protein expression, and the culture was further continued for 18 h at 20°c for the pgex-6p1 and pet28a expression vectors and for 24 h at 15°c for the pcold expression vector. the cells transformed with the pgex-6p1 or pcold-gst expression vector were disrupted by sonication in phosphate buffered saline (pbs) containing 1 mm dithiothreitol (dtt) and 0.5% triton x-100, and purified by a glutathione sepharose ff column (ge healthcare) and a resource q anion exchange column (ge healthcare). the gst tag of gst-ynpl4 113-580 was cleaved by hrv3c protease, and the sample was further purified by a resource q anion exchange column and a hiload 16/60 superdex 75 column (ge healthcare) in 10 mm tris-hcl buffer (ph 7.2) containing 50 mm nacl and 5 mm βmercaptoethanol. to prepare the ynpl4 113-580 -yufd1 288-305 complex for crystallization, a two-fold molar excess of gst-yufd1 288-305 was incubated at 4°c for 10 min with ynpl4 113-580 . the gst-yufd1 288-305 -ynpl4 113-580 complex was purified by a hiload 16/60 superdex 75 column in 10 mm tris-hcl buffer (ph 7.2) containing 50 mm nacl and 5 mm β-mercaptoethanol. the gst tag of gst-yufd1 288-305 -ynpl4 113-580 was cleaved by hrv3c protease. to remove gst, the sample was passed over a glutathione sepharose ff column pre-equilibrated with 10 mm tris-hcl buffer (ph 7.2) containing 50 mm nacl and 5 mm βmercaptoethanol. the cells transformed with the pcold-sumo or pet28a expression vectors were disrupted by sonication in 50 mm tris-hcl buffer (ph 8.0) containing 150 mm nacl and 0.5% triton x-100, and purified by a nickelnitrilotriacetic acid (ni-nta) column (qiagen) and a resource q anion exchange column (ge healthcare), except for cdc48. for preparation of cdc48, the cdc48expressing cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mm sodium phosphate buffer (ph 7.0) containing 300 mm nacl, 10% glycerol, 1 mm tris (2-carboxiehyl) phosphine hydrochloride (tcep), 5 mm mgcl 2 , and 100 μm atp) and disrupted by sonication. after addition of triton x-100 (final concentration, 0.1%), the lysate was clarified by centrifugation at 29,300 x g for 30 min. the resultant supernatant was incubated with talon resin (takara). after extensive washing, cdc48 was eluted in 50 mm hepes-naoh buffer (ph 7.1) containing 100 mm nacl, 0.3 m imidazole, 5 mm mgcl 2, 100 μm atp, and 0.5 mm tcep. to further enrich for hexameric cdc48, the solution was loaded on a superose 6 10/300 column equilibrated to 50 mm hepes-naoh buffer (ph 7.5) containing 100 mm nacl, 5 mm mgcl 2 , and 0.5 mm tcep with a flow rate of 0.25 ml min −1 . to prepare the yufd1-his 6 -ynpl4 113-580 complex for spr analysis, the cells expressing gst-yufd1 and those expressing his 6 -ynpl4 113-580 were mixed and disrupted at the same time by sonication in pbs containing 1 mm dtt and 0.5% triton x-100. the cleared lysate was loaded onto a glutathione sepharose ff column (ge healthcare). the gst tag of gst-yufd1-his 6 -ynpl4 113-580 was cleaved by hrv3c protease, and the sample was further purified by a ni-nta column (qiagen) and a hiload 16/60 superdex 75 column (ge healthcare) in 10 mm hepes-naoh (ph 7.5) containing 150 mm nacl.preparation of ub chains and ubiquitylated substrates. ub was overproduced in e. coli strain rosetta (de3) cells (invitrogen) transformed with the pet26b expression vector harboring the ub gene in lb medium containing 50 mg l −1 kanamycin at 20°c. the semet-labeled ub, ub (p19m v26m), and ub (i30m) was overproduced in the methionine-auxotroph e. coli strain b834 (de3) cells in the customized medium equivalent to lemaster medium (code no. 06780, nacalai tesque) with 30 μg ml −1 l-semet (nacalai tesque) and 50 mg l −1 kanamycin at 20°c. the cells were disrupted by sonication in 50 mm ammonium acetate buffer (ph 4.5). the cleared lysates of ub and ub variant were incubated for 5 min at 80 and 60°c, respectively. the denatured and insolubilized e. coli proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 30,000×g for 60 min. the supernatant was purified by a resource s cation exchange column (ge healthcare) and a hiload 26/60 superdex 75 size-exclusion column (ge healthcare) in 10 mm tris-hcl buffer (ph 7.2) containing 50 mm nacl. the purified ub was concentrated with an amicon ultra-15 10,000 mwco filter (millipore).k48-, k63-, and m1-ub 4 , and semet-labeled k48-ub 2 were synthesized enzymatically. for k48-ub 4 synthesis, e1 (0.25 μm), e2-25k (5 μm), and ub (2 mm) were mixed in the reaction buffer (50 mm tris-hcl (ph 9.0) containing 10 mm atp, 10 mm mgcl 2 , and 0.6 mm dtt) and incubated at 37°c for 15 h. for semet-labeled k48-ub 2 synthesis, e1 (0.25 μm), e2-25k (5 μm), and ub (2 mm) were mixed in the reaction buffer and incubated at 37°c for 15 h. for k63-ub 4 synthesis, e1 (0.25 μm), ubc13 (10 μm), mms2 (10 μm) and ub (2 mm) were mixed in the reaction buffer and incubated at 37°c for 15 h. for m1-ub 4 synthesis, e1 (0.2 μm), ubch7 (5 μm), hoip (residues 697-1072; 0.1 μm) and ub (2 mm) were mixed in the reaction buffer and incubated at 37°c for 15 h. each reaction solution was mixed with four volumes of 50 mm ammonium acetate buffer (ph 4.5) and loaded onto a resource s cation exchange column (ge healthcare) preequilibrated with 50 mm ammonium acetate buffer (ph 4.5) containing 140 mm nacl. the synthesized ub 4 species or semet-labeled k48-ub 2 were eluted with a linear gradient of 140-400 mm nacl in 50 mm ammonium acetate buffer (ph 4.5). peak fractions containing the ub 4 species or semet-labeled k48-ub 2 were loaded onto a hiload 16/60 superdex 75 size-exclusion column (ge healthcare) with 10 mm hepes-naoh (ph 7.5) containing 150 mm nacl. the purified ub chains were concentrated to~1 mm and stored at −80°c until use.for preparation of ub n -gfp substrates, the gene encoding ub-sfgfp-cytochromeb2 derived tail (ub-gfp) 42 was cloned into the pet21a expression vector using ndei and ecori sites. ub n -gfp substrates were enzymatically synthesized and purified by column chromatography 14 . for k48-ub n -gfp synthesis, 10 μm ub-gfp, 1 μm e1, 20 μm gp78ring-ube2g2, and 400 μm ub were incubated in 20 mm hepes-naoh buffer (ph 7.4) containing 10 mm atp and 10 mm mgcl 2 at 37°c overnight. for k63-ub n -gfp synthesis, 20 μm ubc13/ mms2 was used, instead of 20 μm gp78ring-ube2g2. ub n -gfp substrates were bound to ni-nta beads, washed, and then eluted in 50 mm hepes-naoh buffer (ph 7.5) containing 100 mm nacl and 0.3 m imidazole. the elution was loaded onto a superdex 200 increase 10/300 column equilibrated to 50 mm hepes-naoh (ph 7.5) buffer containing 100 mm nacl and 10% glycerol. fractions containing long ub chains (approximately ub 10 in average) were collected for atpase assay.crystallization. for crystallization of ynpl4 113-580 and the ynpl4 113-580 -yufd1 288-305 complex, the e123a, k124a, and e125a mutations were introduced into ynpl4 113-580 so as to reduce excess surface conformational entropy 27 . for crystallization of the ynpl4 113-580 -semet-labeled k48-ub 2 (wt, p19m v26m, or i30m) complex, ynpl4 113-580 was mixed with the semet-labeled k48-ub 2 in a molar ratio of 1:1.2. initial crystallization screening was performed with the sitting drop vapor diffusion method at 20°c using a mosquito liquid-handling robot (ttp lab tech). we tested about 500 conditions with crystallization reagent kits supplied by hampton research and qiagen. initial hits were further optimized. the best crystals of ynpl4 113-580 were grown at 20°c with the sitting drop vapor diffusion method by mixing 0.5 μl of protein solution with an equal amount of reservoir solution containing 4% tacsimate (ph 6.0) and 12% peg3350 and equilibration against 500 μl of the reservoir solution. the best crystals of the ynpl4 113-580 -yufd1 288-305 complex were grown at 20°c with the sitting drop vapor diffusion method by mixing 0.2 μl of protein solution with an equal amount of reservoir solution containing 90 mm bis-tris-hcl buffer (ph 7.5), 19% peg3350, and 10 mm atp and equilibration against 50 μl of the reservoir solution. the best crystals of the ynpl4 113-580 -semet-labeled k48-ub 2 (wt) complex were grown at 20°c with the sitting drop vapor diffusion method by mixing 0.5 μl of protein solution with an equal amount of 100 mm bicine-naoh buffer (ph 9.0) containing 34% peg3350 and 200 mm li 2 so 4 and equilibration against 500 μl of reservoir solution containing 100 mm bicine-naoh buffer (ph 9.0), 18% peg3350, and 200 mm li 2 so 4 . the best crystals of the ynpl4 113-580 -semet-labeled k48-ub 2 (p19m v26m) complex were grown at 20°c with the sitting drop vapor diffusion method by mixing 0.5 μl of protein solution with an equal amount of 100 mm bicine-naoh buffer (ph 9.0) containing 24% peg3350, 200 mm nacl, 3% 1,5-diaminopentane, and 10 mm mgcl 2 and equilibration against 500 μl of reservoir solution containing 100 mm bicine-naoh buffer (ph 9.0), 20% peg3350, and 200 mm nacl. the best crystals of the ynpl4 113-580 -semet-labeled k48-ub 2 (i30m) complex were grown at 20°c with the sitting drop vapor diffusion method by mixing 0.5 μl of protein solution with an equal amount of 100 mm bicine-naoh buffer (ph 9.0) containing 23% peg3350, 200 mm li 2 so 4 , 3% 1,5-diaminopentane, and 10 mm mgcl 2 and equilibration against 500 μl of reservoir solution containing 100 mm bicine-naoh buffer (ph 9.0), 12% peg3350, 200 mm li 2 so 4 , and 10 mm mgcl 2 . for data collection, the crystals were transferred to cryostabilizing solution, which was the individual reservoir solution containing 30% glycerol for ynpl4 113-580 , 20% glycerol for ynpl4 113-580 -yufd1 288-305 , or saturated trehalose for ynpl4 113-580 -semet-labeled k48-ub 2 (wt, p19m v26m, or i30m). the cryoprotected crystals were flash frozen in liquid n 2 .structure determination. diffraction data sets were collected at beamline bl41xu in spring-8 (hyogo, japan) at 100 k. pilatus3 6 m (dectris) was used for the data collection of ynpl4 113-580 and ynpl4 113-580 -semet-labeled k48-ub 2 and 22 . the coloring scheme is the same as that in fig. 1 . the unfolded ub is colored magenta. b comparison of the k48 chain-binding site of ynpl4-k48-ub 2 and the substrate-engaged cdc48-un complex. the coloring scheme is the same as that in fig. 6a . c, d the structure of ynpl4-yufd1 was superposed on the substrate-engaged cdc48-un complex using the coot lsq protocol with the zf-npl4-mpn-ctd structure of ynpl4 as the reference 47 . yufd1 nbm was further fitted as a rigid body into the cryo-em map of the substrate-engaged cdc48-un (emd-0665) 22 and was refined against it with real space refinement in phenix 45 . the coloring scheme is the same as that in fig. 3a . the cryo-em map is shown as grey mesh. c overall view of ynpl4-yufd1 and two folded ub moieties with the cryo-em map contoured at 5 σ level. d close-up view of the interaction between ynpl4 and yufd1 with the cryo-em map contoured at 8 σ level.