s ars-cov-2, newly named by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses, belongs to the family coronaviridae and the order nidovarales, a family that includes viruses causing diseases ranging from the common cold to severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). [1] [2] [3] on the same day, who named the disease caused by the novel coronavirus as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). 4 here we report 5 cases of the novel coronavirus pneumonia and demonstrate the common imaging features of the disease in order to help radiologists be equipped with early recognition of this disease.a 45-year-old woman presented to the hospital with a 3-day history of fever, dyspnea, and cough. she indicated that she had a cruise tour to japan 2 weeks before.at admission, her body temperature was 38.3°c, and coarse breath sounds of both lungs were heard at auscultation. laboratory studies showed leucopenia (white blood cell count, 3.77×109/l) and lymphopenia (lymphocyte count, 0.901×109/l). the white blood cell differential count showed 69.2% neutrophils and 23.9% lymphocytes. elevated c-reactive protein (32.73 mg/l, normal range, 0 to 10 mg/l) was detected. real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction from the patients' nasal and pharyngeal swab specimen was positive for the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) nucleic acid. unenhanced chest computed tomography (ct) showed the typical "crazy paving" pattern in both upper lungs (fig. 1a) .the patient was treated with antiviral drugs (lopinavir-ritonavir) and supportive care. two days later, the patient's temperature was 36.7°c. repeat ct scan showed partial resolution of the ground-glass opacities (ggos) and new septal line thickening in both upper lungs. a new consolidation in the left upper lung was also discovered (fig. 1b) . the patient showed improvement under observation after administration of the antiviral drugs (lopinavir-ritonavir) and the anti-infection drug (levofloxacin).a 62-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with cough and sputum for 4 days. her son-in-law came back to see her from wuhan 11 days before she became ill. the patient had hypertension for 10 years.at admission, her body temperature was 37.3°c, and coarse breath sounds of both lungs were heard at auscultation. laboratory studies showed normal complete blood count values and normal c-reactive protein. real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction from the patients' nasal and pharyngeal swab specimen was positive for the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) nucleic acid. unenhanced chest ct showed patchy peripheral ground-glass lesions in the right upper lobe ( fig. 2a) .the patient was treated with antiviral drugs (lopinavir-ritonavir) and supportive care. two days later, the patient's temperature was 37°c. repeat ct scan showed progression of the original lesions (fig. 2b) .a 59-year-old woman presented to the hospital with a 5-day history of fever, chills, and fatigue. she indicated that she had a long-distance flight from london to chengdu 10 days before.at admission, her body temperature was 37.4°c, and coarse breath sounds of both lungs were heard at auscultation. laboratory studies showed normal complete blood count values, but slight lymphopenia (lymphocyte 1.065×109/l), and elevated c-reactive protein (24.61 mg/l, normal range, 0 to 10 mg/l). real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction from the patients' nasal and pharyngeal swab specimen was positive for the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) nucleic acid. unenhanced chest ct showed patchy ggos with some thickened interlobular septa in the right lower lobe (fig. 3a) .the patient was treated with antiviral drugs (lopinavir-ritonavir) and supportive care. two days later, the patients' temperature rose to 38.2°c. a repeat ct scan showed partial resolution of the ggos and new linear opacities in the right lower lobe (fig. 3b ).a 55-year-old man who presented with a 14-day history of cough and his wife, a 41-year-old, who presented with a 6-day history of cough and sputum, after a dinner with their friends from wuhan 2 weeks before, were admitted to our hospital.at admission, both of them had normal body temperature 37.0°c, but coarse breath sounds of both lungs were heard at auscultation. laboratory studies showed that both had normal complete blood count values but elevated c-reaction protein (69.93 mg/l for the man and 21.27 mg/l for the woman, normal range, 0 to 10 mg/l). real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction carried out for the patients' nasal and pharyngeal swab specimens were positive for the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) nucleic acid. unenhanced chest ct showed multiplethe world health organization declared the china coronavirus as a global health concern on january 30, 2020. on february 28, there have been a total of 78,959 confirmed cases of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pneumonia, and an additional 2308 suspected cases have been reported in china, with 2791 deaths.according to a recent report from china, most patients of the novel coronavirus pneumonia had a history of contact with livestock, recent travel to wuhan, and contact with people from wuhan, but still 26.0% of patients outside of wuhan did not have a recent travel to wuhan or contact with people from wuhan. 5 in our 5 cases of the novel coronavirus pneumonia, 2 patients were affected from a family cluster, 1 patient had contact with people from wuhan, and the other 2 patients had long-distance travelling or flight. these findings also verified the human-to-human transmission of the virus, as none of our patients had a direct contact with livestock. the patients probably were infected from asymptomatic individuals. 6 the most common symptoms of the disease are fever and cough, which were also found in our patients. underlying disorder (ie, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) were more common in severe cases. 5 and, among our cases, only 1 patient had comorbidity of hypertension.for laboratory findings at presentation, elevated levels of c-reactive protein were demonstrated in most patients, and lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia can also be found in severe cases. 5 in our 5 cases, 4 patients had elevated levels of c-reactive protein, and 1 patient had both leukopenia and lymphopenia.chest ct is an important modality in the early diagnosis of the novel coronavirus pneumonia for patients with suspected infection. ggos and consolidation are the main ct findings followed by opacities with a rounded morphology, reticulation, and crazy paving. 7 the lesions also had a peripheral predominance from the previous report. 7 ggo are the most common finding in our patients, and one patient manifested the typical crazy-paving pattern, which is described as thickened interlobular septa and intralobular lines with superimposed ggo. the lesions in our cases also had a peripheral distribution.follow-up chest ct is important for the evaluation of the progression of the disease, as it may change fast within a few days. coexistence of ggo, consolidation, and septal line thickening is the main manifestation in the progression of the disease. the second ct showed progression in 7 of 8 patients in a previous report with increasing number of opacities and density of consolidation. 7 in our cases, 4 patients had a follow-up chest ct 2 days after admission. three cases demonstrated new lesions of consolidation and septal line thickening or expansion of the lesions of ggo, and only 1 patient showed improvement from ct images.the ct findings of the covid-19 pneumonia are similar to severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). 8, 9 however, multifocal involvement was more common in the covid-19 pneumonia, while unifocal lung involvement was more common in sars. 10 a basilar and subpleural airspace and extensive ggo are more common in mers, 8 which were less typical of the covid-19 pneumonia.in conclusion, given a history of exposure or travelling, symptoms of fever and cough, and the typical ct manifestation like ggo with a peripheral distribution, the radiologists should also be vigilant about the possibility of the covid-19 pneumonia for patients from cities other than wuhan.respectively. 1 based on currently available global data, covid-19 is thought to cause mild, limited, or no symptoms in at least 80% of those infected. [2] [3] [4] a substantial portion of covidinfected individuals are suspected to be asymptomatic carriers; estimates derived from select populations of quarantined individuals who underwent widespread testing (e.g. cruise ship passengers and japanese citizens evacuated from china) range from 18-33%. [5] [6] of those known to be covid-19 positive, approximately 20-30% will develop more severe disease necessitating hospitalization. such disease may progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), sepsis, multiorgan failure, and death. [7] [8] [9] risk factors for severe disease have been reported to include advanced age, hypertension, and diabetes-although recent data suggests hospitalization may be more common among younger covid-19 patients than previously suspected. [7] [8] case fatality ratios range widely from 0.2-7.7% depending on the population age, prevalence of comorbidities, testing criteria and availability, health care capacity, and how cases are defined. 10-13 a variety of electronic databases provide ongoing daily monitoring of covid-19 cases tabulated by country. 14-16 inevitably there will be an increased number of suspected or confirmed covid-19 deaths encountered at autopsy. while multiple guidelines have been issued regarding autopsy protocol in cases of suspected or confirmed covid-19 deaths, there is some variability in the recommendations. [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] additionally, limited recommendations to date have been a c c e p t e d 5 issued regarding scene investigative protocol. we present a case of sudden unexpected death due to covid-19 as a means of illustrating suggestive autopsy findings, diagnostic considerations, and recommended scene and morgue biosafety practices in novel coronavirus deaths.history a 58-year-old woman reported a week of fevers and respiratory difficulty. her medical history was significant for insulin-dependent type 2 diabetes mellitus (hemoglobin a1c range: 7 -11%), obesity, hyperlipidemia, mild intermittent asthma, and chronic lower extremity swelling with ulceration. she was instructed to stay home and self-quarantine by her retail store employer.she was found dead in her bedroom after last being known alive the night before. emergency medical services responded to the scene and attempted resuscitation before pronouncing death and notifying the medical examiner's office.two medicolegal death investigators performed a scene investigation. family members were interviewed outside the residence, eliciting the information that several of the decedent's coworkers and an adult member of her household had also developed respiratory illness symptoms.at least 6 feet (i.e. 2 meters) of separation was maintained between investigators and family members during interview. prior to entering the residence, investigators donned personal protective equipment (ppe) sufficient for contact and droplet precautions including gloves, fluidresistant gown, a barrier face mask and goggles. 17-18, 20 a camera was employed to document the scene photographically; otherwise, minimal equipment was brought into the residence. following a c c e p t e d documentation, the body was examined and placed in a plastic shroud and then sealed in a body bag and loaded into the transport vehicle. after the body was secured, investigators doffed their ppe and performed hand hygiene with an alcohol-based gel. the body was then transported to the morgue and logged in without opening the outer body bag. the transport vehicle was disinfected with a dilute bleach solution.an autopsy was performed in a separate negative pressure isolation suite adjacent to the main morgue room but on its own heating, ventilation and air-conditioning (hvac) circuit with 16 air changes per hour. only two operators (i.e. a pathologist and a technician) were permitted in the isolation suite during the case. a second technician acted as a circulator and monitored the case via an observation window; communication was facilitated via inexpensive low-power walkie-talkies. a small isolation cooler attached to the isolation room acted as an airlock to facilitate transfer of materials into and out of the isolation suite during the prosection (fig. 1 ).in accordance with guidelines, ppe utilized by autopsy prosectors included scrubs, dedicated autopsy footwear with shoe covers, a long-sleeve water resistant gown or tyvek suit, a long-sleeved splash apron, double gloves and cut gloves, hair covers, and a powered air-purifying respirator (papr) with full-face shield (fig. 2 ). 17-21 grossly soiled ppe was frequently wiped down with disinfectant wipes or dilute bleach solution during the procedure. doffing of ppe at the end of the procedure occurred in the isolation cooler airlock and was monitored by an inspector.the autopsy was performed with minor modifications to standard procedures. in order to minimize potential organism aerosolization, the sink-mounted vacuum aspirator, sink drain tissue grinder, and station hose were not used. all fluid collections were ladled from body cavities.although the head was opened with a powered oscillating saw, the upper half of the body, head of the table, and floor surrounding these areas was misted with disinfectant immediately upon cessation of powered sawing and before brain removal. only one prosector remained in the room during the sawing; for at least 10 minutes afterwards (i.e. 2 full air changes) no additional personnel entered the room. cleaning of the body and autopsy table was accomplished with towels that were subsequently discarded. limited body and specimen photography was accomplished either in situ or on a small photography board near the body.following autopsy, the body was closed in the standard fashion and cleaned with damp towels and disinfectant. a clean body table with a clean body bag and plastic shroud spread out on it had been placed in the isolation cooler airlock by the second technician. this was moved into the isolation suite and the body was transferred onto the clean shroud, wrapped tightly and sealed with tape, then zipped into the clean body bag. this procedure allowed the outer surfaces of the shroud and body bag to remain essentially clean. once sealed, the outer bag was labeled and signed by the pathologist and technician, each verifying the identity of the decedent. the outer surface of the body bag was then sprayed with disinfectant and the body table was removed to the isolation cooler where residual liquid disinfectant was removed and the bag labeled as infectious.release procedures were modified to prevent opening the body bag or shroud for visual identification confirmation by funeral home staff while the body was still in the facility. the dual signatures of the pathologist and technician acted as the confirmation that the body bag contained the correct decedent, and release to the funeral home was performed without opening the outer bag. the infectious nature of the case was disclosed to the funeral home personnel at the time of release. notably, none of the personnel involved in this index case (i.e. pathologist, technicians, scene investigators) suffered any symptoms consistent with covid infection in the two weeks following their involvement in the case nor since.external examination revealed an obese (bmi: 38 kg/m 2 ) middle-aged adult woman with fully developed rigor mortis and blanching livor mortis. changes of lower extremity venous stasis and scarring consistent with the history of lower leg ulcers were present. on internal examination there were no pleural effusions or other abnormal fluid collections. thick mucus was noted in the airways, however. the lungs were moderately heavy and edematous (right: 818 g, left: 705 g) and had a relatively firm texture throughout. areas of hemorrhage were evident in the right upper and middle lobes, and to a lesser extent in the left lower lobe (fig. 3 .) hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes appeared enlarged.the heart weighed 438 g and exhibited moderate coronary atherosclerosis in each of the main coronary distributions, but there were no occlusions or critical stenoses. the myocardium was free of obvious infarcts and had the expected firm texture and red-brown color. the left ventricle was 1.2-1.4 cm thick. the cardiac valves were normal. there was moderate infrarenal a c c e p t e d aortic atherosclerosis. the kidneys were finely granular and had focal cortical scars (right 170 g, left 183 g). the spleen had a normal appearing capsule and parenchyma (148 g). the liver (1990 g) was grossly unremarkable. the brain (1221 g) exhibited hydrocephalus ex vacuo; the frontal horns measured 2.8 cm in greatest dimension at the level of the temporal poles. tissue sections were placed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin and allowed to fix for 72 hours prior to histologic sampling. hematoxylin and eosin (h&e) staining was performed by an outside laboratory.histologic examination of the lungs revealed diffuse proteinaceous edema and dense amphophilic concretions along alveolar septae consistent with hyaline membranes. the lung architecture was preserved and the septae were of normal thickness, but mild mononuclear infiltrates were present throughout. there was prominent desquamating pneumocyte hyperplasia with focal multinucleated cells and bizarre forms. acute alveolar hemorrhage and collections of reactive foamy alveolar macrophages were focally present as were collections of alveolar fibrin based on the above autopsy and investigative findings, and in accordance with us national vital statistics certification guidelines, the cause of death was determined to be acute respiratory distress syndrome due to viral pneumonia due to covid-19. 22 other significant contributory factors included type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and obesity. the state department of health was notified.currently every state in the u.s. has reported covid-19 cases, resulting in a total of over 7600 deaths to date. 23 inevitably me/c offices will encounter increased numbers of sars-cov-2 infected decedents at autopsy as a result of covid-19 spread. while in some cases a history of fever and/or respiratory distress (e.g. cough or shortness of breath) may suggest the diagnosis, epidemiologic studies indicate that the majority of individuals infected with covid-19 develop mild to no symptoms. 2 even those dying with-but not of-covid-19 may still be infectious.transmission of sars-cov-2 from presymptomatic/asymptomatic individuals has been documented, although the frequency remains to be established. 24-27 me/c must use their judgment to determine whether postmortem covid-19 testing and/or autopsy should be pursued. in addition to suggestive antemortem signs/symptoms, epidemiologic factors may also help guide decisions such as history of contact with a known covid-19 positive case, or being a part of a cluster of respiratory illness cases in a closed setting (e.g., a nursing care facility). 17 the presented autopsy case and literature review are intended to help familiarize me/c offices with covid-19 disease features, diagnostic strategies, and key biosafety principles.it is suspected that sars-cov-2-similar to sars-cov and mers-cov-began as a zoonotic coronavirus that subsequently spread to humans. 1 community and healthcare-associated person-to-person transmission were documented early in the pandemic, and direct or close contact with infectious persons is believed to be the major mode of transmission. [28] [29] transmission occurs through exposure to infectious droplets originating from the respiratory tract; infectious droplets may be released from an infected individual via sneezing, coughing, talking or undergoing an a c c e p t e d aerosolizing procedure such as intubation or autopsy. [30] [31] reportedly droplets do not typically spread beyond 6 feet (2 meters) nor linger in air, although some evidence has suggested a longer range of spread may be possible. [31] [32] less commonly infection may arise as a result of indirect transmission through fomites, especially if the eyes, face, or mouth are contacted after touching an infected surface. 31, 33 sars-cov-2 has also been detected in blood and anal swabs; increasing evidence suggests that fecal-oral transmission may be another potential route of spread. [34] [35] [36] scene investigationas in the current presented case, investigators are advised to mitigate risk of potential sars-cov-2 exposure at death scenes by standing at a distance > 6 feet when conducting interviews and requesting interviewees to remain outside the residence while investigators enter.as the cdc has recently issued recommendations for the public to wear cloth facial coverings when at risk of social-based transmission, scene investigators may consider encouraging interviewees to don cloth facial masks. 37 scene investigators should don contact and droplet precaution ppe when entering residences. decontamination of all potentially contaminated equipment, careful body bagging procedures, and investigator hand hygiene are also encouraged.anecdotally, this has been the scene investigative policy of the snohomish county medical examiner's office which despite being the country with the second highest number of positive/confirmed covid cases in the state of washington has had no scene investigators test positive for sars-cov-2 to date. in order to more efficiently triage cases, me/c offices may elect to have scene investigators procure nasopharyngeal viral testing swabs at the scene. scene investigative recommendations are summarized in table 1 .each office is advised to carefully assess its own infrastructure, supplies, and staffing to determine whether suspected or confirmed covid-19 deaths can be safely prosected on-site. current cdc and who recommendations are that suspected/confirmed covid-19 autopsies be prosected in an airborne infection isolation rooms at negative pressure relative to surrounding areas, and ideally with at least 12 air changes per hour (though 6 will suffice in older structures.) with hepa filter is also indicated. [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] given national ppe supply limitations, me/c offices are encouraged to restrict autopsy attendance to key personnel only (i.e. prosector and technician). 38 in order to preserve eyewear, preferential use of powered air purifying respirators or goggles which can be reused following appropriate disinfection should be considered. 39 in general, paprs are preferable to n95 respirator masks as they provide even higher protection to prosectors and-with appropriate disinfection of reusable elements after use-can be repeatedly employed thus assisting with ppe conservation efforts. 40 papr filters should be replaced in accordance with manufacturer recommendations. some studies have suggested the possibility of decontaminating and reusing a c c e p t e d n95 masks via ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (uvgi), hydrogen peroxide vapor sterilization, and simply allowing respirators to hang to dry for 3 days. 38, [41] [42] [43] [44] [45] proposals for respirator mask construction have also been offered. 38 further details regarding ppe conservation strategies are beyond the bounds of the current review but are available through the cdc. 39aerosol generation at autopsy may occur through inadvertent splashing of fluids, puncturing of fluid pockets under pressure, and use of vacuum-assisted suction devices and sinkmounted tissue grinders. [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] however, the most likely aerosol generating autopsy procedure is use of powered oscillating bone saws, particularly during brain removal. [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] high densities of aerosolized particles are generated in the region of the saw placing the user at risk. while n95 respirator masks physically filter 95% of particles at least 1m in size from the inspired air, cdc and osha guidelines nonetheless suggest avoiding use of an oscillating bone saw at autopsy in cases of suspected/confirmed covid-19. if a saw is employed, it is recommended that a vacuum shroud be attached to assist in capturing aerosols. 17-18 other oscillating saw aerosol reduction techniques to consider include moistening the saw blade before cutting, using autopsy tables with built-in ventilation, tenting plastic around the decedent's neck and head to entrap aerosols, and wearing a hepa-filtered papr rather than n95 mask. [46] [47] [48] [49] as in the current presented case, other general splash and aerosol reduction techniques (e.g. eschewing use of vacuum assisted aspirator, sink tissue grinder, or hose) are also advised. autopsy protocol recommendations are summarized in table 2 .while much literature has been published regarding covid-19 signs/symptoms and clinical course, there is currently a paucity of data regarding expected postmortem gross and histologic findings. the case presented herein adds to those few previously published studies.lungs are often heavy and histologically reveal edema with focal/diffuse hyaline membrane formation, pneumocyte hyperplasia, patchy mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates, some multinucleated cells, and a lack of definitive intranuclear or intracytoplasmic viral inclusions. [51] [52] overall, pulmonary pathologic features generally appear consistent with early/organizing diffuse alveolar damage, and resemble those seen in sars autopsies .51-53 while myocarditis has been reported in association with covid-19, it appears to be a less common complication. [54] [55] most typically (as in the presented case) minimal mononuclear myocardial inflammatory involvement is found. rarely, covid-19 associated encephalitis has been reported. 56 in one experimental study, viable sars-cov-2 was detected up to 72 hours after being placed onto plastic and stainless steel surfaces; it also remained viable in an experimentally created aerosol for at least 3 hours, although infectious titers per liter of air decreased over time. 57 a recent review and analysis of literature found that generally human coronaviruses can remain infectious for up to 9 days on inanimate surfaces, depending on surface type and temperature; at temperatures > 30° c (i.e. 86° f) viral persistence shortened. 58 given that sars-cov-2 may remain viable on a variety of inanimate surfaces for a matter of days, careful morgue decontamination procedures are key. surface disinfection with diluted household bleach solutions (i.e. of 0.1% sodium hypochlorite), 0.5% hydrogen peroxide solutions, or alcohol solutions (i.e. with at least 70% a c c e p t e d ethanol) have been shown to inactivate human coronaviruses within 1 minute. [58] [59] for hospitalgrade disinfectants, staff should verify their suitability for use against sars-cov-2 and ensure disinfectants remain on surfaces in accordance with us environmental protection agency recommendations. [60] [61] while conclusive data regarding how long infectious human remains may harbor infectious sars-cov-2 is lacking, autopsies in cases of sars found that sars-cov could be recovered from lung tissue and grown in cell culture up to seven days after death. [62] [63] considering that there is reportedly 75-80% similarity between the viral genomes of sars-cov-2 (causative agent of covid-19) and sars-cov (causative agent of sars), these results suggest that protective precautions are called for even in cases of delayed suspected covid-19 death investigations or autopsies. 1, 64 while limited data exists regarding formalin inactivation of sars-cov-2 infected tissue, formalin fixation at room temperature has been shown to inactivate most of sars-cov (i.e. close to assay detection limits) within a day. [64] [65] diagnosis in cases of suspected covid-19 in which full autopsies are performed, submission of sars-cov-2 swabs from both upper and bilateral lower respiratory tracts is recommended by the cdc. 17 if nasopharyngeal as well as bilateral tracheobronchial/lung swabs are procured it is recommended they be submitted in separate vials each containing 2-3 ml of viral transport medium. 17 me/c offices, however, must be cognizant of their current state health department testing capacity and proceed accordingly. 17,19 a rational strategy for minimizing the number of swab submissions per autopsy is to submit swabs only from the lower respiratory tract.additionally, sampling both lungs with a single swab may increase recovery of viral rna.concurrent testing for other causes of respiratory illness such as influenza is also strongly 17, 19 in order to preserve limited viral testing kit supply, me/c offices are encouraged to communicate with their testing laboratories to verify whether covid-19 as well as other respiratory viral pathogen testing can be performed on a single swab. prosectors should submit a separate samples for bacterial/fungal organisms as indicated. in cases of suspected covid-19 in which autopsy is not performed, nasopharyngeal swab testing for covid-19 as well as other respiratory pathogens is recommended. 17only synthetic fiber swabs with plastic shafts should be submitted for sars-cov-2 reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) testing, as others may inactivate virus or otherwise inhibit the testing. in the event that swabs were not procured at autopsy, fixed autopsy tissue specimens may also be submitted to cdc in suspected covid-19 deaths for immunohistochemical, molecular, or other assay characterization. 17 recent diagnostic advancements include the food and drug administration (fda) emergency use authorization (eua) enabling us laboratories already certified for high complexity testing to develop and validate their own sars-cov-2 testing; this markedly augmented diagnostic capability as previously all testing was performed mainly by us public health laboratories. 66 additionally, there has been eua approval of rapid covid-19 pcr diagnostic tests that some manufacturers report can deliver results in less than an hour. 67 recently, a serologic enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) testing to assess for covid-19 antibodies has received fda approval and more are in development; these are expected to prove of utility in more accurately calculating disease transmission and mortality rates. 67-69previous surveys have indicated that morgues are heterogeneous in their preparedness to handle highly infectious disease cases. 70-71 facility environmental controls, availability of personal protective equipment (ppe), and staffing are all factors that me/c must carefully assess in determining whether suspected/confirmed covid-19 deaths will be autopsied. 17, 19 the majority of known covid-19 deaths technically should not fall under me/c office jurisdiction as they are natural deaths predominantly occurring in hospitalized patients. 72 while autopsy is unlikely to be necessary in such cases-and is, in fact, discouraged by osha-me/c may nonetheless be called upon to facilitate death certification ensuring accurate public health disease tracking, or in cases of medicolegal significance (homicides, accidents or suicides) where a decedent expires in the hospital and is covid-19 positive due to community spread. 18, 72 in deaths occurring outside of the hospital setting me/c offices are tasked with determining whether deaths are attributable to covid-19 or not, and performing autopsies as needed. 72 me/c offices may elect to triage cases by taking viral np swabs in suspected covid-19 deaths and reserve autopsy for those decedents with negative testing results or else cases in which sars-cov-2 infection is thought to be incidental rather than the cause of death. performing a nasopharyngeal (np) swab for sars-cov-2 requires neither a negative pressure room nor n95 respirator; basic contact and droplet precaution ppe are sufficient. 17 in cases in which autopsy is merited, the above described precautions should be followed to prevent morgue staff-acquired covid-19 infection. some offices have elected to perform limited autopsies (e.g. precluding brain/spinal cord removal) in cases of suspected/known covid-19 positivity to reduce morgue staff aerosol exposure. others have incorporated antemortem or postmortem ct radiology as a a c c e p t e d means of helping triage decedents meriting testing and/or autopsy. 19,21 establishing collaborative relations with larger me/c offices capable of safely autopsying suspected highly infectious disease cases should be encouraged. globally, mobile biosafety autopsy facilities/laboratories with sophisticated infrastructure have been deployed during disease epidemics such as sars and ebola virus; advantages include the ability to mobilize rapidly to areas of need with minimal footprint. [73] [74] [75] such mobile facilities may be advisable in the us as well.neither cdc nor who guidelines require double-bagging of known covid-19 positive decedents; however, me/c offices should ensure that any body fluids leaking from orifices are contained. 17,20 utilizing cotton packing of orifices, a plastic shroud, or a second body bag are all potential methods of preventing fluid leakage. following appropriate decontamination of the body bag, a method of clearly designating the infectious nature of contents to funeral home personnel should be employed (e.g. body bag notification sticker); me/c offices may want to consider modifying body release procedures to preclude contamination risks of opening body bag in morgue for funeral personnel identification. 76 cases  employ social distancing practices during scene interviews outside the residence  require interviewees to remain outside when entering residence  doff contact and droplet precaution ppe during scene investigations  if covid-19 testing is warranted, consider obtaining np swab at scene to expedite process  minimize exposure of excess personnel or equipment to scene  decontaminate exposed equipment and vehicles  perform hand hygiene after any unprotected contact with a potentially infectious surface and after doffing ppe  ensure bodies are fully enclosed in secure bag during transport to reduce change of leakage  do not expose the body until it is in an isolation suite a c c e p t e d table 2   table 2  prosect cases in negative pressure isolation suite with at least 6-12 air changes per hour  doff contact and droplet precaution ppe, as well as n95 respirator or papr  limit personnel in the isolation suite to the minimum necessary to perform the examination  employ splash and aerosol reduction techniques during prosection; oscillating saws are discouraged but if used should have vacuum shroud attachment  use caution when handling sharps; allow only one person to prosect at a given time  ensure a technician is outside isolation room to monitor procedure and provide support as needed  procure synthetic nasopharyngeal (+/-lung) respiratory swabs in sterile tubes of 2-3 ml of viral transport media for sars-cov-2 testing as needed  carefully decontaminate morgue surfaces and outer body bag following autopsy  ensure body is fully enclosed in a secure bag, tag as infectious and ensure funeral home is informed  consider modifying release procedures to prevent bag being opened in morgue for identification  perform hand hygiene after doffing ppe a c c e p t e din december of 2019, a mysterious virus that causes pneumonia and produces pneumonia-like symptoms; i.e., dry cough and fever was noticed to be spreading in wuhan, hubei province, china [1] [2] [3] [4] . the culprit was quickly identified as a new respiratory coronavirus (cov). this virus and its disease are currently known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2 and coronavirus infectious disease 2019 (covid-19) respectively [1] [2] [3] [4] . sars-cov-2 is observed to be even more contagious (but fortunately less fatal) than sars-cov that was seen in 2003.in 2011-2012, just before the outbreak of the middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers-cov), we built an empirically-based model that measures the percentage of intrinsic disorder (pid) of the membrane (m) and nucleocapsid (n) proteins in viruses [5, 6] . the main tool uses ai technology to recognize intrinsic disorder, given the protein sequence. the model involves the listing of shell disorder by coronaviruses that is easily clustered into three groups, which incidentally correlate with the known levels of fecal-oral and respiratory transmission of the various coronaviruses. the model predicts that the 2003 sars-cov (m pid = 8% and n pid = 50%) is included into a category of covs with intermediate levels of both respiratory and fecal-oral transmission potentials.an opportunity to test the validity of this model came when mers-cov first struck the middle east in 2012. upon the availability of the sequences of both mers-cov m and n proteins, the authors were able to confirm that mers-cov falls solidly into a category of viruses that have lesser respiratory transmission potential but have greater fecaloral transmission capabilitie [6, 7] . the categorization of mers-cov within this category was supported by the observations that mers-cov https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104177 received 17 february 2020; received in revised form 18 march 2020; accepted 27 march 2020 is not efficiently spreading among humans, unlike sars-cov, and requires close contact [8] . furthermore, it is now known that camels are the natural reservoir for mers-cov, and viruses that are associated with farm animals, such as camels, tend to have greater fecal-oral transmission potentials [9] .in this study, we will have the opportunity to once again test the model. this time, it will involve the sars-cov-2. we shall see that not only the model is reliable and consistent, but is able to detect something very odd about this virus that could account for its quick spread.protein intrinsic disorder is found when portions of or an entire protein has no structure. it is also called by other names such as unstructured, natively unfolded [10] [11] [12] . the main tool used to develop the covs shell disorder model involves the use of neural networks that had been trained to recognize ordered and disordered regions of a protein given its sequence. a suite of such artificial intelligence tools (ai) have been named pondr® (http://www.pondr.com).of a particular interest. pondr® vlxt has been found to be accurate for structural proteins with protein-protein and protein-rna/dna interactions [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . in fact, pondr® vlxt has shown consistency and reproducibility when used for the study of structural viral shells that protect the virion from environmental damage. a wide range of viruses have been studied using pondr® vlxt including equine infectious anemia virus (eiav), human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), herpes simplex virus (hsv), smallpox virus, polio virus, nipah and ebola viruses, sars-cov, mers-cov, influenza virus, hepatitis c virus (hcv), hepatitis a virus (hav), yellow fever virus (yfv), and zika virus [2, [5] [6] [7] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] .the coronavirus virion contains four major structural proteins: the spike (s) protein, nucleocapsid (n) protein, membrane (m) protein, and the envelope (e) protein [5] [6] [7] [28] [29] [30] . these proteins are needed for production of a structurally complete viral particle [30] [31] [32] [33] . the main focus of our intrinsic disorder-based model is at the viral m and n proteins. the m protein of cov was chosen over the e protein because the m protein is a major transmembrane protein that is found in large numbers in the virion, whereas e protein is a minor protein of the envelope. also, in previous studies, membrane or matrix proteins of various viruses were analysed with respect to their intrinsic disorder content and roles in protecting the respective virions. the n protein is also important for our model, as it has been shown that greater disorder in the inner shell is associated with the mode of infection and virulence in other viruses [23] [24] [25] [26] .the protein sequences of the selected cov m and n proteins were downloaded from uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org) the sequences were fed into a mysql database using java [19] . the sequences were fed into the pondr® vlxt, and the corresponding results were archived in the database. pondr® vlxt provides intrinsic disorder predisposition scores for each residue. residues with the scores of 0.5 and above are considered disordered, and, conversely, residues with the scores below 0.5 are taken as ordered. we represented the outputs of these analyses in the form of the percentage of intrinsic disorder (pid), which is defined as the number of residues predicted to be disordered divided by the total number of residues in a query protein. statistical analyses using regression analysis and analysis of variance (anova) were done using r statistical package [34] . regression analyses were done using category as the dependent variable with m and n pids as independent variables or n pid as a sole independent variable. categories were assigned the values of 1, 2 and 3 to the three groups as according to the level of respiratory transmission potential. the amino acid sequences of the sars-cov-2 m and n proteins are available at ncbi (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/mn908947). as aforementioned, the model predicting the mode of viral transmission was built before the 2012 mers-cov outbreak. this model was based on the analysis of mainly the pids found for n proteins, the viruses were clustered into three groups according to their transmission mode, while the m pids provide an indicator of resilience of the virus in the harsh environment. the three groups are represented in table 1 . a two-way anova (p < 0.001) indicates that the groups are statistically identifiable. the table shows that category a consists of viruses that have greater respiratory transmission capabilities but lower fecaloral transmission potentials. category b involves coronaviruses that have intermediate levels of both respiratory and fecal-oral transmission potentials, whereas category c comprises of viruses with lower respiratory transmission. furthermore, a higher inner shell disorder is often associated with the greater infectivity, especially with regard to respiratory transmission potential since disorder allows greater promiscuity of binding [6, 7] . table 1 shows that sars-cov is grouped into category b along with other viruses that have intermediate respiratory and fecal-oral transmission potentials. mers-cov falls into category c (lower respiratory potential but higher fecal-oral transmission capabilities). these are consistent with what we know about transmission behaviour of sars-cov and mers-cov [5] [6] [7] [8] 35] . it should be noted that category a are viruses with n pid above 53%, whereas category c comprises of those with n pid below 47%. since sars-cov-2 has an n pid of 48%, which is above 46% but below 54%, it must be considered as being in category b.3.3. sars-cov-2 has one of the hardest outer shell among covs (m pid = 6%)as already mentioned, based on the similar analysis of the sars-cov-2 (m pid = 6%, n pid = 48%), it is clear that this virus has to be placed in category b, along with sars-cov (table 1) . however, our data also pointed to something odd about the sars-cov-2. in fact, table 1 and fig. 1 show that data for the sars-cov-2, the m pid is 6%, which is second lowest in our sample of a fairly diverse selection of covs. this means that the sars cov-2 has one of the hardest outer shells among its counterparts.the model is consistent with the theme that viruses that remain in harsh environments require harder; i.e., less disordered, shells to survive. furthermore, the outer shell is likely to play an even greater role in protecting the virion [20, 22, 27] . this has important implications pertaining to the characteristics and behaviors of the virus as we shall see below.a superficial glance at the model that places sars-cov and sars-cov-2 in the same category, with intermediate levels of respiratory transmission potentials may mislead the reader to believe that the model is not reliable, given the fact that we have now seen that sars-cov-2 is much more contagious than sars-cov. we believe that this is not the case. if sars-cov-2 would be placed in category c, the same category as mers-cov, then the model would be definitely wrong in terms of reproducibility. on the other hand, the placing of sars-cov-2 in category a would be an inconsistency that would be difficult to explain. one would further notice that very few covs fall into category a, with the exception for hcov-229e and infectious bronchitis virus (ibv), which make the chance of any covs including sars-cov-2, to be in category a slim. more importantly, because sars-cov-2 is zoonotic and the only non-human cov in category a is the avian ibv, placing sars-cov-2 in category a could suggest that this virus is likely to be of avian origin, which is inconsistent with what we know about sars-cov-2. phylogenetic study has confirmed that the closest relatives of sars-cov-2 are bat covs [4, 36] . we also noticed that at least three of closest neighbors with similar n pids of 47-48% are those of bat origin (see table 1 ). this suggests that bat covs are likely to have an optimal mix of fecal-oral and respiratory transmission potentials that reflect their n pid range of 47-48%, which provides for greater fitness for the spread of the viruses among bats and that sars-cov-2 is likely to be of bat origin too given its n pid is 48%. there are highly debatable suggestions that snakes or pangolins [3, 37, 38] may be an intermediary host of the virus. even if any of these is later deemed as true, our data imply that the virus had not the chance to evolved much with any intermediary host except bats, unlike the cases of sars-cov and mers-cov, in which the model does suggest that they had evolved with hosts such as civet cats and camels respectively. this suggestion is, however, based on n pid alone.the cov shell disorder model was originally conceived as part of a spin-off from a parent research project that studied relationships among the mode of transmission, shell disorder and the absence of vaccines for certain sexually transmitted viruses such as hiv, hsv and hcv [19, 20, 27] . at that time even after 2003 sars-cov, the wealth of cov knowledge lies in the field of veterinary medicine [5, 6] . using what was then known about behaviors of porcine covs, a successful attempt to correlate m and n pids to modes of transmission was made [5, 6] . the results were similar to those found in table 1 and fig. 1 without the data pertaining to mers-cov and sars-cov-2, of course, since the mers-cov and covid-19 outbreaks had yet to occur then.evidence of a strong correlation of m and n pids to the mode of transmission (r 2 = 0.83, p < 0.001) can be seen in the regression analysis. furthermore, a strong but oddly weaker correlation (r 2 = 0.77, p < 0.001) can also be found when n pid is the sole independent variable even if poor correlation (r 2 = 0.21) is found when m pid is the sole independent variable. this basically means that the model should include both m and n pids as the statistical model seems to suggest that m pid does contribute, even if slightly, to the mode of transmission in conjunction to the major contribution by n pid. .this is consistent with the idea that both m and n play roles in protecting the virion from environmental damage and the need to protect the virion is dependent on mode of transmission. a qualitative inspection of the viruses in the three groups also reveals consistency. for example, as in table 1 , canine cov-respiratory falls into category b, while canine coventeritis is in category c. the porcine covs are also consistent with observation of their behaviors as we will later see.we need to keep in mind, however, that the outer shell is likely to play a greater and more immediate role in protecting the virion from environmental damage as it encases the entire virion, whereas the n protein is likely to protect only the rna. m pid is therefore a more crucial indicator of the "hardness" of the virion. however, because of the higher correlation of n to the mode of transmission, our model is apparently suggesting that some other mechanisms are involved. in fact, studies of inner shell of other viruses such as nipah virus, ebola virus and flaviviruses [23] [24] [25] [26] have indicated strong correlations between inner shell disorder and virulence. in the case of nipah virus, the virulence and inner shell disorder were linked to the modes of transmission [26] .the mechanism in which the virus acquires greater virulence via inner shell disorder arises from the ability of the viral protein to bind promiscuously to the host protein [6, [23] [24] [25] [26] . this ability provides for rapid replication of the viral proteins and particles. this quick replication is also an efficient way to evade the host immune system by reproducing a large number of viral particles before the immune system even recognizes the virus, which then often goes on to overwhelm the body leading to the death of the host [6, [23] [24] [25] [26] . one highly plausible explanation for the link between rapid replication and the modes of transmission is that viral load in the body fluids of the infected host needs to be sufficiently high before the virus can be infectious via the respiratory mode. this therefore explains the fact that rapid viral replication and inner shell disorder were found to be the common link between virulence and respiratory transmission in the case of nipah virus [26] .we don't, however, know if there is correlation between cov virulence and inner shell disorder, even though the authors believe it exists, just like the other viruses. if so, n will make an excellent target for cov vaccine development.the difficulty in the search for such links is that covs infect a large variety of animals and each cov often uses a different receptor [4, 6, 39] . for example, mers-cov has a case-fatality rate of above 30% [8] for humans but is generally harmless to camels [27] . furthermore, covs were generally not known to be virulent before the 2003 sars-cov outbreak and therefore lack adequate data for us to work with.the reason that we can make the necessary above-mentioned extrapolations pertaining to inner shell disorder among unrelated viruses with somewhat greater confidence is that inner shell proteins of different species of viruses often share similar functions and structures [30, 40, 41] . for example, the cov n proteins, like the nucleocapsids in other viruses, are responsible for assembling viral particles by forming complexes with other viral proteins and rna [24, 25, 41] . the n protein also helps with the packaging and budding of viral particles in the host er (endoplasmic reticulum) [23, 30, 40] . such tasks require binding to host proteins, and the promiscuous protein binding capabilities of a more disordered n will certainly help towards rapid replication of the virus.since both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 have intermediate respiratory transmission potentials, how do we account for the greater contagiousness of the latter? we need to understand that the respiratory transmission potential of a single viral particle is just one of several factors that might contribute to the contagiousness of the virus. other factors include how many particles are released by the host and how long does the particle remain in the environment. we mentioned that our model has detected something odd about sars-cov-2: this virus has one of the hardest outer shell within the family as seen in fig. 1 and table 1 (m pid = 6%). since the outer shell plays the greater role in protecting the virion in comparison to the inner shell, the harder outer shell provides virus greater resilience to outside the body environment and to the presence of digestive enzymes found in the saliva, mucus, and other bodily fluids [20, 22, [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] . as a result, the virus with the harder outer shell is able to remain active for a longer time and, therefore a lesser number of viral particles is required for a chance to infect someone. furthermore, because the virus is more resistant to the digestive enzymes in the bodily fluids, an infected body is likely to discharged more infectious particles.evidence of the protective role of the outer shells be seen in a wide variety of viruses. viruses associated with saliva (e.g., yfv, zikv, eiav, rabies) or fecal-oral transmission (e.g., poliovirus), have hard outer shells with low pid, whereas sexually transmitted viruses (e.g., hiv, hsv-2, hcv) have higher outer shell pids [6, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] . also, viruses that are notorious for lasting in the environment for a long time such, as the smallpox virus, have low outer shell pids.before the sars-cov outbreak, coronaviruses were not considered medically important, as, in the past, they had been primarily associated with cold viruses that cause minor sniffles. this is, however, not true in the field of veterinary medicine, where coronaviruses have posed a menace to livestock. this is especially so in the case of tgev (transmissible gastroenteritis virus) and pedv (porcine epidemic diarrhea virus). tgev could move rapidly among farm pigs to quickly devastate the farming community if not controlled early [5] [6] [7] . our analysis reveals that tgev is of category c (higher fecal-oral, lower respiratory transmission potentials) with m and n pids at 14% and 43% respectively. the reason that it is able to move rapidly is that its high fecaloral transmission potential represents a more efficient mode of transmission among the farm animals.there is an antigenically related cousin, pedv, which has similar characteristics as tgev [29] . like tgev, diarrhea and vomiting are main symptoms of pedv infection. while tgev is highly infectious, pedv is less contagious among farm pigs. a peculiar characteristic has been observed by farmers and veterinarians: pedv can reappear out of nowhere from within the same pen that was previously occupied by infected pigs, even after the disease has passed on several months ago. an inspection of the m and n pids reveals the reason showing that pedv belongs to the category b, along with sars-cov and sars-cov-2, unlike tgev and mers-cov. this means that pedv has a higher respiratory transmission potential than tgev and that implies greater chances of fecal-respiratory transmission for the former. obviously, viral particles in fecal materials that was somehow inadvertently left behind go on to infect a new population of pigs several months later [5] [6] [7] .infectious droplets from mucus, vomit, or feces have actually been seen during the sars-cov outbreak. a stark example happened in a 2003 outbreak at amoy gardens, a housing complex in hong kong, where a huge cluster of infected patients was found and the inefficient sewerage and toilet ventilation systems were responsible for the spread [5, 35, 47] . we need to be reminded that pedv, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2 are all under the same category b, and that sars-cov-2 has the hardest outer shell within the entire cov family.sars-cov-2 is thus likely to be able remain infectious in the environment for the longest time regardless of being in feces, mucus, vomit, sweat, or saliva.a puzzling thing can be observed is when we notice that pedv (m pid = 8%) has a harder outer shell than tgev (m pid = 14%), given that tgev is predicted as having higher fecal-oral transmission potential. we would think that having greater fecal-oral potential requires harder outer shell among covs. apparently, the result is implying that this is not necessarily true, as we have seen, and having higher fecaloral transmission potential can actually provide greater efficiency in the spread among farm animals, as we have seen in tgev, such that the virus does not have to stay long outside the body. the ability to stay longer in the environment could, however, provide advantages to a virus with greater respiratory transmission potential, especially with respect to spread via airborne virus from feces or body fluids. this is likely the case for sars-cov-2.we have presented here a set of data that not only place the sars-cov-2 within the category of covs that have intermediate levels of both respiratory and fecal-oral transmission potentials, alongside sars-cov and pedv, but have also predicted sars-cov-2 to have one of the hardest outer shells among most covs. this peculiarity is likely responsible for its high level of contagiousness, since hardness of its outer shell could provide the virus with the greater resilience to the conditions outside the body and in body fluid, as the harder shell will better protect the virion from damage as a result of the hostile environment and action of the digestive enzymes found in bodily fluids. as a result, it is likely that the infected body can shed more infectious particles that have a greater chance of infecting a person over its lifetime. chances of infections via indirect contact and airborne virus from feces and bodily fluids are therefore greater. the results of our research could have important implications for epidemiologists and public health officials.gkmg. conceived the idea, collected and analyzed the data and wrote the first draft. vnu. helped with the collection and analysis of literature data, reviewed and revised the draft. akd and jaf reviewed the manuscript and provided the resources necessary for the research.gkmg. is an independent researcher and the owner of goh's biocomputing, singapore.gkmg. has also written a book ("viral shapeshifters: strange behaviors of hiv and other viruses") on a related subject. the authors have no other potential conflict of interests.before the mers-cov outbreak in 2012, we built a model using artificial intelligence (ai) tools for the identification of the levels of predicted intrinsic disorder (pid) in a query protein using its amino acid sequence as the only input [1]. next, this information was applied to rank various coronaviruses based on the levels of disorder in their inner and outer shells (i.e., pid values evaluated for their nucleocapsid (n) and membrane (m) proteins, respectively) and to find if these shell pid values were indicative of how long the given virus was able to stay in the environment [1,2,3]. the application of this model ranked coronaviruses into three groups (categories a, b, and c), members of which differ not only by the levels of their shell disorder, but also by their respiratory and fecal-oral transmission potential [1,2,3]. the model was consistent with the hypothesis that viruses remaining in harsh environments require harder, i.e., less disordered, shells to survive [2,3]. furthermore, higher levels of inner shell disorder could be associated with greater infectivity, especially with regard to the viruses with high respiratory transmission potential [3,4,5]. on the basis of these considerations, category a coronaviruses are characterized by more disordered inner (n) shell and higher levels of respiratory transmission combined with lower levels of fecal-oral transmission. category b coronaviruses are characterized by the n shell having intermediate levels of disorder and intermediate levels of respiratory and fecal-oral transmission, whereas category c coronaviruses possess the most ordered n proteins and are characterized by higher levels of fecal-oral transmission and lower levels of respiratory transmission [1,2,3,4,5]. notably, some (not all) of the viruses with lower outer shell rigidity (higher m pid) are in category c with greater fecal-oral transmission potential because these viruses do not have to be in the environment for a long time given that the fecal-oral route is an efficient mode of transmission among some farm animals.according to this pid-based classification, sars-cov (with pids of 9% and 50% for its m and n proteins, respectively) falls into category b, which includes the coronaviruses with the intermediate levels of both respiratory and fecal-oral potential. however, mers-cov, whose m and n proteins are characterized by the pid values of 10% and 44%, respectively, were placed into a group with a higher fecal-oral and lower respiratory transmission potential, category c [5]. importantly, this classification of coronaviruses which is based on the rigidity of their shells was generally supported by clinical observations of their transmission modes. the usefulness of our model is now becoming obvious, considering the current covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov outbreak [6]. currently, the analysis suggests (details of this analysis will be published elsewhere [7]) that covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov belongs to category b, indicating that, similar to sars-cov, covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov can be efficiently transmitted via the respiratory mode. however, due to the fact that the outer shell of this virus is among the hardest in the coronavirus family, the model suggests that covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov is likely to be more resilient in body fluids and the environment than most of its cousins, including sars-cov and mers-cov. therefore, our model predicts that covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov can be efficiently spread by respiratory means, as in the case of sars-cov, but it also has the potential to remain outside the body longer than sars-cov, and, probably, mers-cov. the possibility of fecal-respiratory transmission of covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov is especially of concern, as was the case for sars-cov in the amoy garden, hong kong3. furthermore, the intermediate levels of fecal-oral transmission potential of covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov should also be kept in mind, as in the case of all other viruses in category b. although the ability to last longer outside the body provides better fitness of the virus that relies more on the fecal-respiratory route of transmission, as seen in pedv3,5, transmission of the more rigid virus can occur via feces, but also in airborne form released from mucus, vomit, and other body fluids. these properties can also explain the higher contagiousness levels of the covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov than with sars-cov [6]. in fact, the ability of covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov to remain infectious outside the body for a longer period than sars-cov could imply that it requires fewer viral particles for greater chances of infection. furthermore, an infected body can shed more active viral particles in greater concentrations as more particles are able to resist the digestive enzymes found in most bodily fluids including saliva [2,3]. all these can explain not only high contagiousness of the covid-19/wuhan 2019-ncov but also the reported capability of this virus to be spread even before the patient begins to show symptoms [6].is multiple sclerosis a pure oligodendrogliopathy/myelinopathy, but not an axonopathy?multiple sclerosis (ms) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central nervous system (cns) . although its precise etiology is unknown, ms is considered to synonymous with the pathological designation, aidp [21] . in 1986, however, feasby et al. [22] described an axonal form of gbs and challenged the existing notion of gbs being a primarily demyelinating disease [14] . in axonal gbs, axonal degeneration can be seen without demyelination or lymphocyte infiltration [29] . this is contrary to the traditional belief that axonal involvement in gbs occurs secondarily to or by a bystander fashion following severe demyelination. in axonal gbs, frequent associations with antecedent campylobacter jejuni infections and with anti-ganglioside antibodies have been demonstrated. molecular mimicry between c. jejuni and a neural epitope has been proposed as a mechanism for immunopathology. this is further supported by an animal model of axonal gbs that is induced by sensitization with gm1 ganglioside [103] . although axonal degeneration is increasingly recognized in ms, it is regarded as only a secondary or bystander event. is there primary axonal damage in ms and its animal model theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (tmev) infection?this question is raised from a rather unexpected area, spinal cord injury (sci). recently, similarities in neuroimmunology and neuropathology have shown that in both ms and sci; axonal injury, oligodendrocyte apoptosis and demyelination are all present [9, 10] . in sci, transection of an axon leads to delayed oligodendrocyte apoptosis and secondary demyelination. neurofilament immunostaining of spinal cord sections from tmev-infected mice visualizes axonal injury with oligodendrocyte apoptosis preceding the demyelination [90] . this suggests that axonal injury may well trigger demyelination. in this review, we propose a new model for the development of demyelination, in which lesions develop from the axon (inside) to the myelin (outside) (inside-out model) (fig. 1b) .the first section of this review provides a brief overview of the findings and theories in axonal pathology both in ms and a variety of virus infections, and introduces recent findings of axonal pathology and oligodendrocyte apoptosis in tmev infection. in the second part we will discuss similarities between tmev infection and sci, and review possible mechanisms of close association between axonal injury and demyelination: (1) disruption of cross-talk between the axon and the oligodendrocyte; (2) activation of microglia/macrophages and induction of oligodendrocyte apoptosis; and (3) induction of autoimmunity by cns injury. lastly, we will discuss the possible association of the inside-out versus outside-in models, in which the two models are not mutually exclusive, and could be useful in explaining different pathological features which, in reality, may be simply due to looking at different aspects of a consecutive series of events.using a silver impregnation technique and electron microscopy [82] , early studies demonstrated axonal degeneration in ms [32, 37] . however, little attention was paid to this axonal degeneration as compared to primary demyelination, extensive myelin loss with 'relative' preservation of axons. previous emphasis was on relative "preservation" of axons, not on the detectable axonal "degeneration." three pathological and neuroimaging studies in recent years have challenged the historical view of preserved axonal integrity in ms [80] .first, immunostaining studies provided direct evidence of axonal damage using antibodies against two markers for injured axons: nonphosphorylated neurofilament (nf) [84] , and amyloid precursor protein (app) [23, 28] . this made possible the identification of earlier and subtler changes than those seen by silver staining [28] . the number of macrophages correlated with the extent of axonal damage that showed spheroid enlargement or axonal swelling. however, acute inflammatory demyelination was not demonstrated to correlate with axonal injury at least in secondary progressive (sp)-ms. lovas et al. [43] demonstrated a significant reduction of axonal density in sp-ms and there was no significant difference in axonal density in the ms plaque versus contralateral nawm. they suggest that the equally decreased axonal density in the nawm and in the plaque could represent the final outcome of multisegmental long-standing inflammation affecting the tracts.second, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (mrs) analysis provided information on axonal pathology by analyzing the chemical composition of brain tissue [48] . in practice the ratio of n-acetyl aspartate (naa) to creatine (cr) (naa/cr) is used, as naa is confined to neurons and neuronal processes and cr is more evenly distributed. a reduction in the ratio in the white matter has been attributed to axonal loss, atrophy, degeneration or metabolic dysfunction. patients with ms have lower levels of naa than normal controls. partially reversible signal decrease is observed during the active inflammatory phase, which becomes irreversible during the chronic inactive state. the reversibility is interpreted as the result of the presence of edema, reactive astrocytes and inflammatory cells or as reversible axonal atrophy or metabolic dysfunction. the naa/cr signal decrease was also observed in nawm in both patients with relapsing-remitting (rr)-ms and sp-ms, while sp-ms patients showed lower naa/cr ratios than those in rr-ms [24] .third, atrophy of the brain and the spinal cord has been described on ct and mri, and it is associated with disturbances in neuropsychological and clinical function [81] . volume loss occurs in the corpus callosum, cerebellum, spinal cord and in tissues surrounding the third and lateral ventricles. in addition to myelin loss and tissue contraction from gliosis, axonal loss is believed to contribute to the cns atrophy.although there is evidence of axonal injury in ms, the axon has been regarded as an innocent bystander, not as a specific immune target. axonal destruction, however, may be due to immune attack directed at axonal components [80] . antibodies to neurofilament and tubulin have been reported to be present in some ms patients. it is uncertain whether these anti-axonal antibodies play a pathogenic role or merely reflect a release of axonal components to the systemic circulation following axonal degeneration.viruses disseminate in the cns by three ways: (1) within the extracellular space; (2) by axonal transport; and (3) via direct cell-to-cell transmission. infectious agents, including viruses, prions and bacteria, have been shown to spread within axons [38] . neurovirulent viruses, including herpes simplex, rabies, influenza, and borna disease viruses, can be anterogradely or retrogradely transported in axons [38, 55] . in some instances, viruses can be transported intra-axonally more than 1 m, yet this journey occurs intracellularly. therefore, the virus cannot be inactivated by neutralizing antibody during its transit, and may spread in the cns without inducing an anti-virus immune response while within the cell. when viruses can spread only intra-axonally and/or via direct cell-to-cell contact, they could potentially escape the attack of antiviral drugs or neutralizing antibodies.although axonal transport of virus can lead to axonal degeneration [53] , neuronal infection and axonal transport of virus may not result in axonal injury. a recombinant virus vector has been shown to be axonally transported in neurons without tissue damage [13] . conversely, infections in the neurons or axons are not necessarily required to induce axonal injury as seen in the human demyelinating disease, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (pml), which is caused by jc virus infection of oligodendrocytes. although the lesions of pml are characteristically described as demyelinating, the sparing of axons is only relative and accumulation of app was detected within the areas of demyelination [28] .retrovirus infection also induces axonal injury without infection in the neuronal cell body and axons. although myelin pallor, multinucleated giant cells, and neuronal loss are well-established pathological findings in human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) encephalitis, axons have long been considered to be unaffected in hiv encephalitis until the terminal stages. by app immunostaining, axonal damage was demonstrated not only in hiv encephalitis [28, 66] , but also in hiv-positive asymptomatic patients [5] . raja et al. [66] demonstrated that the prevalence and abundance of app-positive staining axons paralleled the severity or pallor of myelin staining in the cerebral white matter, where oligodendrocytes were neither reduced in number nor infected. giometto et al. [28] showed that the appearance of the immunostaining varied from globular (or ballooned) structures to bundles of parallel rods [28] . the globular structures co-localized with areas of poor myelin staining in the deep white matter and were indicative of chronic lesions. the presence of bundles was predominantly in the peripheral regions of the white matter, including the gyri, and correlated with acute changes. the authors hypothesized that axonal changes could contribute to retrograde neuronal degeneration and loss, where neurons are not the target of hiv infection. similarly, adle-biassette et al. [2] suggested neuronal apoptosis occurred via axonal retrograde degeneration in hiv infection, since there was a topographical correlation between neuronal apoptosis, microglial activation, and axonal damage.human t-lymphotropic virus 1 (htlv-i) is another retrovirus that causes axonal degeneration and myelin pallor without infection of neurons. iwasaki [34] reviewed the neuropathology of htlv-i-associated myelopathy (ham) or tropical spastic paraparesis (tsp), using myelin and phosphorylated nf staining. in long-standing lesions, both myelin and axons degenerated equally, while tissue appeared spongy due to the swelling of the myelin sheaths with a concomitant preservation of axons at the margin of the lesions. although ham/tsp requires differentiation from the spi-nal form of ms, severe symmetrical degeneration of the lateral funiculi accompanied by wallerian degeneration of long tracts is unique to ham/tsp and not found in ms [34] . using app immunostaining, umehara et al. [93] also found axonal damage not only in active inflammatory lesions, but also in inactive chronic lesions without any relationship to inflammation. app-positive staining axons had intact myelin sheaths while myelin abnormality without axonal changes was rarely found. therefore, the authors suggest that axonal injury is not secondary to demyelination, but the primary instigator.herpes simplex virus (hsv) type 2 has been reported to be transported axonally and to cause demyelination with minimal axonal damage. hsv 2 can produce multifocal cns demyelination in infected mice and gray matter lesions, if found, are relatively minor. if neuronal cell bodies are infected, virus subsequently appears in axons and virions are axonally transported. using electron microscopy, martin [46] observed virus particles in a very small portion of axons in demyelinating lesions, but not in surrounding zones of normal white matter. axonal abnormalities were infrequent, relative to the dominant demyelinative pathology. martin [46] proposed that neuronal infection and axonal transport of virus may lead to foci of oligodendrocyte infection with destruction and cns demyelination close to or distant from the infected neuronal cell bodies (fig. 2a) . here, virus may spread cell-to-cell or extracellularly: (1) from an axon to multiple oligodendrocytes via the inner tongue process of the glial sheath; or (2) from the cell body of one oligodendrocyte to the next oligodendrocyte, which are apposed to one another in longitudinally oriented interfascicular rows. thus, as previously suggested by martin [46] , the relatively minor gray matter lesions in ms may be important in and not secondary to demyelination. as we will discuss later, axonal transport of virus ( fig. 2b ) and oligodendrocyte infection ( fig. 2c ) are seen in tmev infection where a similar pathomechanism of lesion development is observed.some viruses, including tmev and polyomavirus, are known to induce both axonal injury and demyelination. murine hepatitis virus (mhv) belongs to the genus coronavirus, family coronaviridae. mice and rats infected with neurotropic strains of mhv (e.g., jhm and a59) develop demyelinating disease, and are used as experimental animal models for ms [31] . using antibody against nonphosphorylated nf, dandekar et al. [18] observed a modicum of axonal damage with extensive viral replication, but without demyelination, in mhv-infected rag1 -/mice that are defective in recombinase activating gene 1 expression, and thus lack mature b or t cells. adoptive transfer of spleen cells from immune mhv b6 mice into mhv-infected rag mice resulted in demyelination with increased axonal damage. macrophages or microglia were abundant in areas of demyelination and axonal damage, but viral antigen was present at lower levels than in mice not receiving transferred immune spleen cells. this suggests that both direct virus infection and mhv-specific immune responses contribute to axonal injury in mhv infection. theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus tmev is a non-enveloped, icosahedral, positive-sense, single-stranded rna virus, belonging to the genus cardiovirus, family picornaviridae. tmev is a common cause of asymptomatic enteric infections in mouse colonies. tmev is subdivided into two subgroups, gdvii and to. the gdvii subgroup is neurovirulent and its representative strain is the gdvii virus. the to subgroup is less virulent, and da and bean viruses are its representative strains. serological evidence indicates that mus musculus (family muridae, subfamily murinae) is the natural host of tmev [42] , although anti-tmev antibodies have been detected in a different subfamily microtinae, including meadow, water and bank voles [19] . 112 i. tsunoda, r.s. fujinami intracerebral infection of mice with the gdvii subgroup causes a fatal polioencephalomyelitis [89] , and was once widely used as an animal model for poliomyelitis (fig. 3a) . on the other hand, intracerebral infection of mice with the to subgroup causes a biphasic disease (fig. 3a) . during the acute phase, 1 week after infection, tmev predominantly infects neurons in the gray matter and causes acute polioencephalomyelitis mainly of the brain. although infected mice recover from the acute disease, mice develop an inflammatory demyelinating disease in the white matter of the spinal cord 1 month after infection. during this chronic phase, the anterior and lateral columns, including the ventral nerve exit zone, are first involved, and the posterior column changes occur usually as a later event. here the cuneatus fasciculus is demyelinated, but the gracile fasciculus and the corticospinal tract are relatively spared [92] . although the reason for the predilection of the cuneatus fasciculus is unclear, this may reflect the observation that small-diameter fibers are relatively preserved compared to larger fibers in tmev infection [50, 76] . small diameter axons are present within the corticospinal tract and the center of the posterior column while larger diameter axons comprise the lateral part of the posterior column [56] . in the demyelinating lesion, tmev has been reported to persist in oligodendrocytes, astrocytes and microglia/macrophages, but not neurons ( [61] , reviewed in [88] ).oligodendrogliopathy and myelinopathy caused by the to subgroup of tmev in general, virus infection causes damage in the nervous system by two mechanisms: direct infection of neuronal cells and immune-mediated tissue injury, immunopathology. the mechanisms leading to tmev-induced demyelinating disease are also believed to involve either virus-induced pathology or immunopathology in the cns, both depending on viral persistence (table 1 ). since oligodendrocytes, the myelinforming cells, are infected with tmev during the chronic phase [104] , direct lytic infection could result in demyelination. in contrast, virtually all types of immune responses have been proposed to play important roles in the pathogenesis of demyelination and in virus clearance. one possibility is that the demyelination is caused by a similar immune-mediated mechanism to experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (eae), another animal model of ms, in which cd4 + th1 cells mediate a delayed- [52] . tmev-induced cd8 + t cells have been suggested to function as autoreactive cytotoxic cells or regulator cells [73, 85] . antibody against tmev cross-reacts with galactocerebroside, and passive transfer of anti-tmev antibody can augment demyelination in eae [100] . intracerebral inoculation with a tmev-infected macrophage cell line induces acute focal demyelination [89] and depletion of macrophage ameliorates tmev-induced demyelination [61, 71] .apoptosis is involved in the pathogenesis caused by a variety of viruses such as poliovirus and influenza virus [4, 25, 54, 55] . accumulating evidence has suggested that apoptosis may serve the innate host defense mechanism against intracellular pathogens, thereby curtailing their further spread to surrounding tissues. on the other hand, because of the post-mitotic nature of neurons, apoptotic neuronal death would result in permanent loss of cerebral functions, precipitating disease. in addition, apoptosis of the oligodendrocyte can lead to demyelination. oligodendroglial apoptosis has been demonstrated in several demyelinating diseases, including ms [44, 57, 96] , eae, [62, 87] and the twitcher mouse, a murine model of globoid cell leukodystrophy [83] . during the acute stage of both da (to subgroup) and gdvii virus infection, both infected and uninfected neurons have been demonstrated to die by apoptosis, using terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dutp-biotin nick-end labeling (tunel) [91] . the number of apoptotic neurons is much greater in gdvii virus-infected mice than in da virus infection. although elimination of virus-infected host cells by apoptosis prior to the assembly of infectious virus could inhibit viral replication, the absence of an inflammatory reaction [4] , another feature of apoptosis, may favor viral spread in gdvii virus infection, leading to fatal encephalomyelitis. during the chronic phase of da virus infection, tunel-positive nuclei were co-labeled with oligodendrocyte and macrophage/microglia markers, but not with viral antigen or the astrocyte marker, glial fibrillary acidic protein (gfap) [74, 91] , while tunel-positive cells were co-labeled with gfap in bean virus (to subgroup) infection [60] . interestingly, oligodendrocyte apoptosis is detected in the white matter as early as 1 week after infection either in gdvii or da virus infection (fig. 3d) . in vitro tmev infection results in apoptosis of neurons in explant cultures of the murine cerebellum [6] , neuroblastoma cell line [91] , macrophage cell lines [27, 35] , and microglia [104] , but not of astrocytes [104] .axonal transport of tmev tmev shifts from infection of gray matter in the brain during the acute phase to white matter in the spinal cord during the chronic phase. although the mechanism of the transition is unknown, one hypothesis is that the virus first spreads from the neuronal cell body of the gray matter to axons in the white matter by axonal transport, and then infects neighboring cells, such as oligodendrocytes and microglia. tmev has been demonstrated to use axonal transport in vivo. viral antigens have been detected in axons, dendrites and the neuronal cell body by immunohistochemistry (fig. 2b ). wada and fujinami [97] showed that the limbic system is important for the spread of tmev in the brain. using footpad inoculation of mice with the gdvii virus, martinat et al. [47] showed that gdvii virus infection in the spinal cord was prevented by sectioning the sciatic nerve, and was delayed by treatment with colchicine, which inhibits fast axonal transport. since viral rna was first detected in the spinal cord 2 days after footpad inoculation, the authors estimated the rate of transport in the sciatic nerve at approximately 20 mm/day, which is consistent with fast axonal transport.although an early ultrastructural study by dal canto and lipton [17] demonstrated primary demyelination, myelin destruction with intact axons, in sjl/j mice infected with da virus, they also reported a few dystrophic axons occasionally detected on days 100 and 214 post infection. in this study, it was not shown whether axonal injury was accompanied by mononuclear cell (mnc) infiltration or demyelination. recently, axonal damage during the late chronic phase of tmev infection has been studied by moses rodriguez's group in sjl/j mice infected for 6-9 months with da virus (reviewed in [95] ). using plastic-embedded 1-µm sections, mcgavern et al. [50, 51] demonstrated spinal cord atrophy in the anterior and lateral columns, but not in the posterior column. a significant reduction in spinal cord areas was observed at 195-220 days after infection, in which a 25% reduction in the anterior and lateral columns was detected, compared with the 12% area reduction seen at 45 and 92-100 days post infection. a significant decrease in medium to large myelinated axon fibers was also detected in normally myelinated areas on days 195-220. neurological deficit correlated with demyelination, spinal cord atrophy, and axonal loss in the nawm. axonal loss was examined in regions with minimal pathology, because automated calculation of axonal area frequencies was not possible in regions with demyelination or other extensive pathology [51] . since resistant c57bl/10 mice infected for 195 days showed no spinal cord atrophy compared with uninfected sjl/j mouse spinal cord, the authors suggested that the atrophy was the result of a chronic demyelinating disease, but not the result of neuronal infection during the acute phase, which is seen in both resistant and susceptible mice. analyzing a single demyelinated spinal cord lesion ultrastructurally, the same group showed results similar to the previous studies [76] . they also found increased intra-axonal mitochondria, which can be an indicator of axonal injury, in normally myelinated, remyelinated, and demyelinated axons. in addition, ure and rodriguez [94] demonstrated that retrograde fluoro-gold labeling from t11/t12 of rubrospinal, reticulospinal/raphespinal and vestibulospinal neurons was reduced in mice 9 months, but not 1 month, after da virus infection. they suggested that the majority of neurons in descending populations had lost their normal connectivity to t11/t12, which was either due to axon or neuron degeneration or to functional impairment of retrograde axonal transport. in this study, it is unknown whether da virus infects these neurons during the acute phase. the precise mechanism of axonal damage during the late chronic phase of tmev infection is not clear. rivera-quinones et al. [67] have suggested a role for major histocompatibility complex (mhc) class i-restricted cd8 + t cells in the development of axonal injury, since axons were relatively preserved in class i-deficient mice compared to susceptible sjl/j mice, signifying a role for immune-mediated pathology.although axonal damage has been demonstrated in both ms and tmev infection, it has been interpreted to be solely secondary to myelin destruction. recently, however, we demonstrated that the axonal injury heralds demyelination in tmev infection [90] . using nonphosphorylated nf immunostaining, we found obvious axonal injury in the white matter of the spinal cord of da virus-infected mice 2 weeks post infection, approximately 2 weeks earlier than the onset of demyelination. the number and distribution of damaged axons correlated with that of microglia/macrophages, but not that of viral antigen. during this subclinical phase, prior to the onset of clinical signs and demyelination, axonal injury was seen in regions where subsequent demyelination usually occurs such as the ventral root exit zone [87] . similarly axonal damage was rarely seen in the posterior column where demyelination is not usually observed [92] . in gdvii virus infection, severe axonal damage was observed in nawm within 1 week post infection (fig. 3b,d) . the distribution of damaged axons in the white matter did not correlate with the presence of t cells or viral antigens, which was mainly present in the gray matter. this suggests that neither t cells nor direct virus attack on axons is necessary for the induction of axonal injury. axonal damage was also detected without myelin damage in vitro in myelinated mouse cerebellar explant cultures infected with da variant ds [6] . we do not know whether the axonal damage in this early phase of tmev infection is permanent or reversible; functional axonal damage would not necessarily be followed by fragmentation and degeneration. an et al. [5] found accumulation of app in the cns of hiv-positive individuals without aids. they suggested that this axonal damage might be reversible and the axonal flow re-established and the accumulation of app could disappear. it appears that hiv dementia can partially be reversed and brain metabolic changes visible on mrs in aids patients disappear after retroviral treatment [28] .during the preclinical stage of tmev infection, axonal injury and oligodendrocyte apoptosis with microglia activation can be seen only after special staining techniques in otherwise nawm. unexpectedly, this situation parallels in some aspects the pathological changes observed in sci.the initial mechanical tissue disruption of sci is followed by a period of secondary injury that increases the size of the lesion. this includes chronic demyelination of fiber tracts away from the injury [9, 10] . during the acute stage, a central region of hemorrhagic necrosis characterizes the lesion. later time periods, however, are characterized by the apoptosis of a substantial number of oligodendrocytes, which occurs along the fiber tracts undergoing wallerian degeneration extending into regions far remote from the lesion [1, 15] (fig. 4) . the oligodendrocyte death seems to be associated with axonal degeneration induced by the injury. the later stage lasts for a surprisingly long time, at least 3 weeks [98] .since apoptotic oligodendrocytes are sometimes directly apposed by activated microglia, the oligodendrocyte apoptosis may be due to toxic factors from the microglia, such as tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α. however, it is not known whether oligodendrocyte death or microglial activation comes first. microglia can also show condensed and fragmented nuclei that are positive for tunel [79] . some of these profiles might represent microglia that have phagocytosed apoptotic bodies from other cells or apoptosis of microglia, resulting in controlling microglial number. tunelpositive microglia/macrophages are also detected in tmev infection [91] .inside-out versus outside-in models for virus induced demyelination… 117 fig. 4 . axonal injury and delayed oligodendrocyte apoptosis in sci. sci induces axonal degeneration at the distal part of the spinal cord from the transection site. along the fiber tracts undergoing wallerian degeneration, microglial activation and oligodendrocyte apoptosis can be detected even in the regions far remote from the transection site. oligodendrocyte apoptosis can lead to demyelination of not only transected axons but also intact axons, since a single oligodendrocyte myelinates multiple axons. in the latter case, demyelinated axons can appear as typical 'primary' demyelination,' morphologically. in areas where ascending and descending fiber tracts are intermixed, both tracts may undergo demyelination, if apoptosis occurs in individual oligodendrocytes that ensheath multiple axons in both groups (sci; spinal cord injury)the mechanism of oligodendrocyte apoptosis is unclear and still controversial. saito et al. [75] showed the expression of apoptosis-related molecules, p53, p21, bcl-2, and bax, as early as 30 min after experimental sci. another hypothesis for the oligodendrocyte death is glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity. in an in vitro model of isolated rat dorsal column compression, li et al. [41] demonstrated a toxic efflux of glutamate through the reversal of na + -dependent glutamate transport, most likely occurring from axons. they also showed that myelin damage was prevented by glutamate receptor blockade or glutamate transport inhibitors, suggesting that glutamate spillover from the lesion can damage oligodendrocytes [41] . oligodendrocytes are known to be vulnerable to excitotoxic signals mediated by glutamate receptors (ampa and kainite) [49] .the apoptosis of oligodendrocytes could lead to demyelination of not only damaged axons but also intact axons, since a single oligodendrocyte myelinates multiple axons. indeed, demyelinating axons that appear ultrastructurally intact are present after sci. this is the typical neuropathology of 'primary' demyelination, but not of myelin damage 'secondary' to axonal trauma [63] .an alternative mechanism for oligodendrocyte apoptosis in sci is that the oligodendrocyte may respond to loss of trophic elements from axons as axons undergo degeneration. clinical and experimental evidence support the hypothesis that a failure of cell communication between the axon and oligodendrocyte is involved in axonal or oligodendroglial pathology [3] . in the pns, demyelination in uremic neuropathy and friedreich ataxia may well be axonally induced [20] . similar cellular events occur in experimental permanent axotomy in cats where nerves proximal to the permanent axotomy sequentially undergo axonal atrophy and myelin wrinkling. this is followed by secondary segmental demyelination, and finally myelin ovoid and ball formation [20] .the survival of the oligodendrocyte depends on the presence of axons at least during development [8] . apoptosis of oligodendrocytes occurs selectively in transected neonatal optic nerves in which the axons degenerate [65] . the cell death does not occur in optic nerves from c57bl/wld mice, wallerian degeneration slow mutant mice (formerly known as c57bl/ola) [65] , which show prolonged survival of the distal stumps of transected axons. this prevents the normal influx of monocytes into transected nerves in both the cns and pns. purified neurons, but not neuron-conditioned culture medium, promote the survival of purified oligodendrocytes in vitro [65] . therefore, the axonal signal that regulates oligodendrocyte survival is contact mediated. this supports the hypothesis that there is competition for axon-dependent survival signals by oligodendrocytes that normally helps adjust the number of oligodendrocytes to the number of axons that require myelination.conversely, griffiths et al. [30] suggested that myelinated axons could require local oligodendrocyte support. although myelin proteolipid proteins (plp) and its dm20 isoform are the major membrane proteins of cns myelin, the plp gene knockout mice develop normally and assemble compacted myelin with morphologically normal oligodendrocytes. unexpectedly, the mice develop widespread axonal swellings and degeneration, associated with predominantly small-caliber nerve fibers. the authors hypothesized that glial ensheathment provides a necessary signal that induces the axonal dependency on glial support [30] . mutations of the plp gene cause the dysmyelinating diseases pelizaeus-merzbacher disease and spastic paraplegia type-2 in 118 i. tsunoda, r.s. fujinami man [77, 102] . in tmev infection, a decrease in plp mrna expression not only in infected but also uninfected oligodendrocytes in the spinal cord has been reported [58, 59, 70, 101] . oligodendrocytes have also been suggested to play a role in maintaining normal axons during development [11] .demyelination develops from outside to inside, or from inside to outside?if the initial step of demyelination is either the loss of contact between the axon and the oligodendrocyte or cell-to-cell transmission of virus from the axon to the oligodendrocyte, lesions are most likely to be seen first in the innermost part of myelin, the inner loop. however, oligodendrocyte damage can also result in degeneration in the most distal part as suggested by a dying-back process. in the demyelinating disease induced by cuprizone, oligodendrocytes can undergo a dying-back process, with degeneration starting in the most distal part, the inner loop of the oligodendrocyte cell processes. this eventually progresses proximally to involve the perikaryon, with resulting demyelination (dying-back (oligodendro)gliopathy, [45] ). rodriguez [68] demonstrated a similar ultrastructural disease picture during the early stages of da virus infection (11, 28, 45 days after infection) prior to the degeneration of the myelin sheaths. although ultrastructural abnormalities were seen in the inner oligodendroglial loops, viral antigen was expressed in both the inner and outer loops [69] . using electron microscopy, rodriguez et al. [72] found a widening of the inner myelin lamellae and degeneration of the inner glial loops in biopsy brain specimens from clinically definite ms patients. the presence of early degeneration in the inner myelin sheaths and in the glial loops of oligodendrocytes was noted in most biopsy specimens. such changes were not described in biopsy cases of ms by others [82] .kirk [36] also demonstrated vesicular degeneration most frequently in the inner myelin sheaths in a single case of sp-ms. a similar observation was made in myelinassociated glycoprotein (mag)-deficient mice [40] . in ms lesions, loss of immunoreactivity against mag is seen in nawm [33] . since mag is localized in periaxonal regions of the myelinated fiber, this finding also supports the hypothesis that the damage in the inner loops precedes that of myelin or oligodendrocytes. in contrast, dal canto and lipton [17] suggested that demyelination in tmev infection develops from the outside to inside, demonstrating vesicular disruption at not only the inner but also the outer border of myelin sheaths due to stripping of myelin by invading mnc, as seen in eae [39] . in support of this, dal canto and barbano [16] found preferential disappearance of myelin basic protein (mbp) compared to mag. the disappearance of mag never preceded that of mbp in demyelinating lesions. a uniform widening of the myelin lamellae beginning with the outer layer has been observed in some, but not all [86] , immune-mediated demyelinating diseases of the pns and cns, including paraproteinemic neuropathy [64] and eae [39] , respectively. therefore, in tmev infection, there is an apparent paradox. does lesion development progress from the inside to the outside, or from the outside to the inside?we have reviewed the evidence that axonal injury can lead to demyelination, where the lesion develops from the inside to the outside. a model for lesion development in inside-out versus outside-in models for virus induced demyelination… tmev infection with this inside-out model is presented in fig. 5 . tmev infects neurons in the gray matter of the brain and induces degeneration in their processes, the axons, in descending tracts that run mainly in the anterior and lateral columns of the spinal cord. here, induction of axonal degeneration can be protective to the host, since this will prevent virus from spreading axonally. tmev is transported axonally which may result in axonal damage. axonal transport could also lead to direct cell-tocell infection at the inner loop of myelin that attaches to the axon. tmev can further spread centripetally from a distally infected site to the oligodendrocyte body. since a single oligodendrocyte myelinates multiple axons, tmev will spread centrifugally, at 120 i. tsunoda, r.s. fujinamiinside-out and outside-in models in tmev infection. the lesion first develops from the inside to the outside. tmev infects neurons in the gray matter of the brain, and is transported axonally, leading to axonal injury in the white matter of the spinal cord. virus further infects the inner loop of the myelin, and spreads centripetally to the oligodendrocyte cell body, from which it spreads centrifugally to multiple myelin sheaths, resulting in oligodendrocyte apoptosis and demyelination. axonal injury disrupts cross-talk between the axon and the oligodendrocyte and induces microglia activation, contributing to oligodendrocyte apoptosis and demyelination. activated microglia/macrophages phagocytose damaged and/or infected axons, myelin, and oligodendrocytes and present viral and neuroantigens. at this time point, the lesion develops from the outside to the inside. autoimmune and anti-viral immune responses attack myelin specifically or in a bystander fashion, causing primary demyelination. severe inflammatory reactions further damage axons secondarily, which results in wallerian degeneration in the distal part of the axonal transection sites. this secondary axonal injury triggers the second cascade reaction of demyelination, forming a vicious cycle this stage, from the oligodendrocyte cell body to its distal processes, then to myelin sheaths, and eventually to axons again. fascicular oligodendrocytes are located close to each other, and this will also contribute to spread from one oligodendrocyte to the other. infected oligodendrocytes and myelin will be phagocytosed by microglia/macrophages, resulting in demyelination and persistent infection in and/or viral antigen presentation by microglia/macrophages. on the other hand, axonal degeneration itself induces oligodendrocyte apoptosis either by activation of microglia or the loss of support from axons. in most areas of white matter in the lateral and anterior columns, ascending and descending fiber tracts are not discrete bundles but are intermixed or overlapped so that individual oligodendrocytes ensheath axons in both groups. if either the ascending or descending fiber tracts degenerate to the extent where an oligodendrocyte undergoes apoptosis from loss of trophic support, axons that survived the initial injury may undergo demyelination. activated microglia will release toxic cytokines, such as tnf, and this too will enhance demyelination. at this time point, lesions can develop from the outside-in (table 1) , although the original lesion developed from the inside-out. activated microglia/macrophages phagocytose degenerated oligodendrocytes, myelin and axons, whether they are infected with tmev or not. then, microglia can produce chemokines and up-regulate adhesion molecules in the cns, leading to recruitment of t cells. t cells will recognize neuroantigens or viral antigens presented by the activated microglia/macrophages. this will lead to a delayed-type hypersensitivity response to virus or induction of anti-myelin autoimmunity via antigen spreading. cns tissue damage could also result in the release of neuroantigens into the systemic circulation that would also contribute to further induction of autoimmune t cell and b cell responses. these autoimmune t cells and autoantibodies might attack myelin from the outside-in. therefore, the inside-out and outside-in models are not mutually exclusive and may act in synergy.in this review, we proposed a new model for the pathogenesis of demyelinating diseases, inside-out model, in which lesions develop from the inside to the outside; primary axonal injury triggers demyelination that leads to immunopathology. if virus is transported by the axons, this will lead to infection in neighboring cells, including oligodendrocytes and macrophages, contributing to lesion development. after initial destruction, virus antigen and neuroantigen will be released and presented by cns antigen presenting cells, resulting in the induction of delayed-type hypersensitivity responses and autoimmunity. at this time point, the myelin is attacked from the outside, leading to secondary axonal injury (outside-in model). thus, the inside-out and outside-in models can collaborate in a vicious cycle or initiate a cascade of events. therapeutic strategies targeting each step, including axonal injury, inflammation and demyelination, in these models will be important to prevent disease progression, particularly in primary and secondary progressive ms, and their animal model, tmev infection.to prevent transmission from an infectious patient to other patients, personnel, visitors and the environment and to protect patients with impaired immune defence against infection [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] .• all patients having contagious disease that can easily be transferred directly or indirectly via contact, blood and body fluids, air/droplets or via equipment, textiles and surfaces. • all patients with significant reduced infection defence or otherwise infection vulnerable and who should be protected against infection.hospital management should ensure necessary capacity and type of isolating units: contact-and air-droplet isolates and protective isolates. updated isolation routines, adequate protective equipment-including ppe-routines for disinfection of rooms and surfaces and disinfectants and hand hygiene facilities should be available. department management should implement isolation procedures, train the use of ppe, control the use of routines and provide sufficient stock and capacity of ppe and means for disinfection and hand hygiene.the staff should follow current guidelines for treatment of patients with infections and for patients that should be extra protected against infections.the isolation unit is usually located in a separate isolation ward or building and has defined as negative air pressure systems (in pascal), separate ventilation with disinfection of air extraction, a properly interlock function and also direct access from the outside. the waste water is decontaminated (autoclave). the patient room has sluice systems and bathroom with through-put decontaminator or autoclave with direct entrance from the patient room.personnel involved in treating high-risk infections should be specialized in isolation work and be healthy, not immunosuppressed, and if possible should be vaccinated, if vaccine is available. the staff should be bound to the ward/unit while isolation treatment takes place. fewest possible should participate in the isolation work. the staff should come and go directly to the high-risk unit and should not stay, work or visit other wards during the isolation period.the infection ward should have restricted admission with registering (name, address, date, time, etc.) and follow-up of all staff and visitors that attended the department. [1, 7, [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] see chap. 21.isolation units for airborne infections should be safe enough for high-risk cases, if used properly [1, 9, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] . there should be no offices, laboratories, other patient wards or other regular human activities under, over or around this isolation unit. the unit should be located in a separate ward, preferably in a separate building with direct access via an external sluice and internal access through a negative air pressure sluice with sufficient areal for donning and doffing and for a safe treatment of infectious equipment and waste.• each isolate should be 35-40 m 2 , including sluice (6 m 2 ), decontamination room/bathroom (5-6 m 2 ) and patient room (20-25 m 2 ). there should be a minimum of 2-m free zone around the patient's bed on both long sides and at the foot end. • there must be direct access from the patient room to the decontamination room/ bathroom. • interlocked doors must be included in the sluice system. opening of the doors should be in direction from negative pressure to the positive pressure room to avoid air leaks. if the negative pressure increases in the room, the door will close even tighter. • no through-put cabinet from the disinfection room/bathroom, because it can create imbalances in the air pressure.• through-put autoclave/decontaminator from disinfection room to the sluice may be recommended if secured and controlled against air leakage. • graduated negative air pressure is quality ensured by measurements, pressure manometer and control of ventilation. • exhaust from the isolation unit must be disinfected in a satisfactory manner so that it does not expose personnel, patients or passers-by to infection. exhaust is usually sent out from the disinfection room, via a separate disinfection unit where the used air is treated with uv-irradiated hepafilters, and sent out over the roof (see below). • waste water, sewage and other waste should be disinfected/autoclaved before it is discharged outside the isolation area. if the isolate is not a unit for collecting and treating infectious waste/liquid, the faeces, urine and other body fluids are treated locally with 5% chloramine in 1 h before being discharged to the public sewage system. [1, 9, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] there should be written guidelines for air pressure and air flow. negative pressure should be defined in relation to adjacent rooms and to outside pressure. pressure conditions are checked outside of the patient unit, before entering the unit. there should be an increasing negative pressure from the sluice through the patient room to the disinfection room. the following negative pressure in pascal is recommended in the unit: the negative air pressure must withstand fluctuations in the pressure outside the building, for example, during high winds with increased pressure against the building. it should not be related to pressure fluctuations within buildings. the unit must be tight to prevent air leakage and pressure variations.• no air leaks. all ventilation ducts must be completely sealed without any air leaks (e.g., all-welded steel pipe) and with a separate (over roof) air input and outlet for each isolation unit. disinfection systems for air extraction/exhaust should be placed as close as possible to each isolation unit so that contaminated air does not go far in the piping on the way out. exhaust air must be sterile after the disinfection process. externally placed pipes for air inlet and outlets from isolates must be protected from strong winds that can create unfavourable pressure conditions. the air inlet/outlet to other parts of the hospital must also be protected against contamination from the isolates. therefore, separate isolate buildings are the best solutions. • air change. minimum of six changes of fresh air per hour in the patient room.this involves the replacement of all air in approximately 70 min. avoid short circuit of the air currents. • clean inlet air-hepa-filtered and backlash secured-is introduced from the ceiling or top of the wall of the patient room in such a way that the least possible turbulence occurs during normal use. • exhaust air is contaminated and should be disinfected and hepa-filtered closest possible to the isolation unit. all air from the isolation unit goes out via the separate exhaust system; from the patient's room through grates on lower end of the door to the disinfection room. the exhaust air is disinfected close to-or in the isolate to avoid contaminated air in the piping. exhaust air is never drawn directly out from the patient room or from the sluice because of risk of unfavourable air currents and increased infection burden on personnel. exhaust air must be sterile after treatment and sent out via pipe over roof. • gassing of ventilation pipes with disinfecting gases (formaldehyde, chlorine dioxide, hydrogen peroxide, etc.) must be implemented in a regular manner.assuming the ventilation duct is completely closed and separately for each unit, various types of gas could be used. if leakages are suspected, it may be difficult to use formaldehyde gas (allergy) and chlorine dioxide gas if other part of the building is to be used. the type of gas used must be chosen according to documented effect of the infectious agent, for instance, ebola infection. chlorine gas and hydrogen peroxide dry gas are among the safest gases used today. there is currently no gas which disinfects tubercle bacilli. • continuous electricity supply must be ensured in the isolation unit and the ventilation and negative pressure system.all fixtures and equipment must be disinfected with strong disinfectants, including disinfecting gases, and must be cleaned easily and satisfactorily. note! disinfectant gas can affect instruments and equipment. there should not be wood, tile or other building materials that are easily chipped or cracked, with storage niches for infectious agents. there should be handwashing and suspension of automatic dispensers of disinfectants and paper towels in the sluice, patient room and disinfection room, to avoid unnecessary contamination of doorknobs, etc.thermal disinfection/autoclaving of waste water from the unit should be done the closest possible to the unit to prevent other wards/departments be charged with infectious agents. the container, tank and piping must be absolutely tight and robust for heat/cold/corrosive agents and for ground movements. the drainage system must be shutdown, if needed. air systems connected to the drain/sewer/water must be connected to isolation unit's exhaust system for full inactivation of infectious materials and must be completely sealed.in isolation units with collection of infectious waste water in tank for further disinfection/autoclaving, it is particularly important to ensure safe and risk-free isolation conditions. this means that infected air, liquid and waste should not be spread to nearby areas, even under accidents in the decontamination process. all supply pipes to collection tanks must be sealed, controllable and withstand disinfectants. the sluicing function to such special areas for collecting and decontamination must be ensured in accordance with regulations for the airborne infection isolation units. in case of technical accidents in the collection and treatment rooms, the air should be disinfected with gases before technical personnel enters.technical staff, handling medical equipment, including collection tanks and autoclaves, shall be specially trained in infection control and must be able to use a sluice function with the use of ppe, when entering these disinfection areas.the sluices should be roomy with plenty of space for larger equipment, handwashing/hand disinfectant, through-put disinfection machine/autoclave, etc.there should be a separate out sluice for doffing (undressing), bags for contaminated waste/equipment and opportunities to disinfect/autoclave used ppe-or parts of it-and other equipment. room for a separate shower in the out sluice system should be considered and a room for disinfection of equipment to be reused (e.g. goggles, shoes, etc. that can be disinfected in chloramine 5% in 1 h or autoclaved).the sluice system should be adapted for separate gas disinfection via sealed and tight pipes and interlocked system that can be implemented systematically daily or as needed, without affecting the patient in the isolation room.inter-locking. one of the doors in the sluice/anteroom must always be kept closed. preferably use controlled closures for all doors. [1, 9, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] • a quarantine unit should include some large patient rooms where it is a place for intensive treatment, acute surgery, dialysis and other invasive treatments, x-ray, microscopy of infectious materials, some important biochemical analyses, etc. [1, 9, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] • waste, reusable equipment, etc. from the patient or disinfection room should be autoclaved in the through-put autoclave (or disinfection machine) from the disinfection room or patient room to a clean sluice where it can be taken out and treated as noninfectious. all equipment from patient unit must be autoclaved or disinfected in an appropriate manner. equipment can be decontaminated at high temperature (>90° c) in an instrument washing/decontamination machine or submerged in a bath of chloramine 5% 1 h (or peracetic acid or household bleach 10%), depending on the agent in question. s. • in-sluicing and donning (dressing) is done in a clean sluice before entering the unit, with clean, new clothes and clean, new ppe every time. reuse of disposal ppe is not recommended. • out sluicing needs plenty of space for washbasin and suitable hand disinfectant, for doffing (undressing) and for the use of at least three waste bags (disposal, textiles and reusable equipment). ppe must be removed carefully, following guidelines, and placed in a waste bag which is then placed directly in through-put autoclave. reusable equipment (goggles, shoes, etc.) that can be decontaminated/autoclaved are placed in separate containers for reuse. then shower with, for instance, chlorhexidine (hibiscrub) disinfectant in disposable packages, optionally soap in disposable packages. the shower head is set low and with weak force to avoid aerosols against the face. after the shower is finished, the entire cabinet interior, including the floor, is treated with hot water (>75 °c). self-disinfecting shower unit (after use) is advantageous (gas or disinfectant liquid). used towels are put in the textile bag. new, clean clothes are taken on in a clean wardrobe. only the hospital's clothing and shoes are used. [1, 9, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] • gown-disposable, with tight-fitting cuffs and discarded after each use. it should have long sleeves, be tight around the neck, long and liquid tight. the opening should be on the back; it should be tied back, never on front. option: disposable coveralls with hood or full and tight costume. • cap/hood-surgical-covering all the hair and ears. keeps the hair in place and covers the ears. respiratory protection is set on the outside of the cap. • respiratory mask, p3-level, check leakage with leak test (to be learned). in special cases, a turbo equipment (papr, powered air-purifying respirators) or fresh air/compressed air system is used. remember that battery and reusable parts should be disinfected between each use. • "phantom hood" (surgical large disposable hood) is placed gently over the head and covers the neck and cheeks. • face protection. tight-fitting goggles if high risk. face shield with danger of splatter of infectious material. • gloves with long "cuff", double gloves to make work in isolation easier. latex gloves are denser than vinyl gloves. • shoe covers/room-bound shoes that may be autoclaved after use or boots that are submerged in chloramine bath or other disinfectant after each use. • special leg covering up to the knee at high risk, serious infection.for out sluicing: [1, 9, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] follow the hospital's procedure that must be learned, trained and supervised. check if waste bags and equipment for undressing are available in the sluice out. all work in the sluice out, like assistance with undressing, takes place only with full dressed ppe. as a rule, there are two people when undressing; a person who can advise and provide assistance, double pack infection bags and take care of equipment to be autoclaved. the assistant uses full, clean ppe. gloves and hand disinfectant must be used before any handling of the equipment. all undressing must occur very carefully and quiet to minimal re-aerosols of microbes from the ppe.remove the individual infection equipment in such a way that you do not contaminate yourself or the environment. carried out in this order:1. hand disinfection while the gloves are on. 2. room-bound shoes/boots are tilted off and put foot straight into clean shoes.reusable shoes or boots are put in a separate container for autoclaving or disinfection. shoe covers-if used-are carefully removed one after another and placed gently in the waste bag. rinse the shoes on chloramine inserted diaper lying on the floor. 3. hand disinfection while the gloves are on. 4. gloves-double gloves are removed simultaneously-learn the method. grab the left glove at the wrist (not higher up) and gently turn inside out when doffing. the inside of this glove is usually clean and can be used as a "cloth" placed on the right hand to grab through to remove (roll off) the other glove. learn the technique. for left-handed do the opposite. place gently in the waste bag. 5. hand disinfection. 6. put on clean gloves for further undressing-not over the cuff. 7. gown-learn the method, open closure on the back (neck first). pull the cuffs over gloves and roll the gown gently along from the side and from above downwards without touching the outer side. place gently in the waste bag.8. hand disinfection while the gloves are on. 9. goggles: take back and bend the body forwards to avoid contact with the skin, hair and cloths while taking off the goggles carefully. place in container for autoclaving of reuse. 10. face shield/visor-loosen from behind as mask and take off bending forward. 11. gloves-learn the method to take off without recontamination (see above).placed gently in the waste bag. 12. hand disinfection. 13. "phantom hood"; take back on the lower part of the hood that has been covered by the gown, and with both hands tear it up along the seam behind while bending the body forwards to avoid contact with the skin, hair and cloths; take off the hood slowly, and put it in the waste bag. 14. hand disinfection. 15. respiratory protection mask-grasp the elastic back on the head; bend the body forwards to avoid contact with the skin, hair and cloths; take off carefully, and place the mask in the waste bag. 16. hand disinfection. 17. the surgical cap/hood-which was under masks and phantom hood; take off from behind, bend the body forwards to avoid contact with the skin, hair and cloths and place the cap in the waste bag. 18. hand disinfection. 19 . showers and dressing of new clothes as described above.autoclaved or heat disinfected (85-90 °c for 10 min) or submerged in disinfectants (chloramine 5%, household bleach 10% or peracetic acid) before normal processing.option: all textiles are treated as infected and put in a container for used textiles. contaminated/wet fabrics are packed in plastic before placing in waterproof textile bag. the outside of the bag is decontaminated and washed with 5% chloramine before double packed with a new clean bag in the sluice. the outside will then be clean during transport for further treatment. the type of the infectious agent and local possibility determine further treatment of textiles (heat washing, chemicals, autoclaving, burning).excess equipment should be removed before the patient arrives. used equipment should be autoclaved in a through-put autoclave before the normal treatment.option: disinfected in the isolation unit's disinfection room. equipment that can withstand heat is heat disinfected in decontaminator or instrument washing machine. heat-sensitive components like thermometers are disinfected in 5% chloramine or other disinfectants for 1 h.used equipment should be autoclaved in a through-put autoclave before normal treatment.option: decontaminated in the isolation unit's disinfection room (85-90 °c) or double packed and brought to the decontamination room in the ward for decontamination-and then processed as usual. disposable equipment is treated as infectious waste.infectious waste is autoclaved in through-put autoclave, before processing as ordinary waste.option: all waste is double packed and treated as special infectious waste. the outside of the bag is decontaminated and washed with 5% chloramine before double packed with a new clean bag in the sluice. the outside will then be clean during transport for further transport and treatment. infectious waste is brought directly to incineration without intermediate storage.follow general guidelines. the boxes may be autoclaved in through-put autoclave, before processing as ordinary waste.option: boxes are double packed and treated as special infectious waste. the box must not be filled more than about ¾ full. see labelling for filling level. the outside of the bag is decontaminated and washed with 5% chloramine before double packed with a new clean bag in the sluice. the outside will then be clean during transport for further special transport and destruction. infectious waste is brought directly to incineration without intermediate storage.in most cases it is not recommended to bring the patient out of isolation during the period of active infection. special solutions should be made for these. if transport out of the isolate is necessary, everything must be planned carefully in advance. death bodies are wrapped in body bag, double packed in the sluice and sent directly to the pathologist or burial. remember information in advance!follow general guidelines and contact serving microbiological laboratory or the national institute of public health before transport of sampled biological materials form the patient! sampling/preparation for transfer of infectious sample material should be provided in the patient room or its disinfection room. sample vials and outside of the package must be clean before transport. blood samples from patients with blood-carrying infection are packaged in special cases (sleeves) before transport. the outer package is put on in the sluice. nb! a good cleaning and disinfection of the workplace! note on the outer bag suspected high-risk agent with red ink! special transportation! contact receiver in advance, and ask how to bring the samples to the laboratory. send no samples as post in pneumatic tube!only essential transport is allowed, depending on infectious agents. patient, cloth and stretcher/bed should be clean during transport. bandages must be clean, and drains, etc. must be covered and free of leaks. staff transporting and receiving the patient must be informed about the infection in advance and guided on individual infection prevention and the use of ppe. patients with respiratory infection should wear surgical mask or respiratory mask (p1-p3 level) outside the isolate. the transport should not go through wards or crowded areas and avoid the use of a lift. internal transport in hospitals is not recommended in certain highly infectious and severe illnesses.in agreement with the patient library, the patient can borrow books that can be discarded. the books are kept in isolation. all books are treated as infectious waste by termination of the isolation.restricted admittance and use the same guidelines and ppe (donning and doffing) as for the staff. handwashing is required when the sluice is left. limit visits to a minimum, especially with highly infectious diseases such as sars.the cleaning and disinfection is performed by trained personnel with required attire and use of ppe. regular detergent, water and clean equipment are used if no other routine is ordered. bucket and squeegee are disinfected in the decontaminator of the isolation unit; shaft is disinfected chemically in 5% chloramine (or household bleach) in 1 h and kept in the unit during the entire treatment. use only disposable mops and cloths placed in yellow plastic bag in yellow infectious waste bag and autoclaved in the isolation unit. discard as infectious waste after appointment.option if not autoclave/decontaminator in the isolation unit: infectious waste bag is treated exterior with 5% chloramine and double packed in new yellow thick plastic bag in the sluice. special infectious waste is brought directly for burning/autoclaving. in case of spills, the nursing staff should immediately remove the spill and disinfect the area with 5% chloramine 1 h (covered by plastic) before cleaning.before regular disinfection of the isolation unit after terminated isolation, it is recommended to treat the unit with hydrogen peroxide dry gas, three cycles, using a spore control. only trained personnel are participating in the work with disinfection, and they use mandatory infection control equipment. the nurse, in cooperation with infection control personnel, is responsible for informing the staff about what should be disinfected and how.bedding, curtains, drapes, etc. should be autoclaved, if possible, before sending it to laundry or to incineration. floors, walls, ceilings, all horizontal surfaces, ceiling suspension, lighting in ceilings, etc., handles, dial string (changed), levers, buttons, switches, bed, waterproof mattresses, bedside tables and other fixtures and equipment (tv, telephone, computer, etc.) are disinfected with 5% chloramine (or household bleach 10%) for 1 h.textiles, reusable equipment and waste: follow described above recommendations. unused disposal equipment that has been inside the isolation unit is disposed of as infectious waste.after manual disinfection, all rooms and ventilation systems are gassed once more. this is done in collaboration between the ward, housekeeping/technical and infection control personnel. to treat with gas disinfection before and after manual disinfection is recommended to reduce the infectious airborne agent (aerosols and re-aerosols) in the unit.after the recommended effect period of the disinfectant, the rooms are cleaned with ordinary detergent, water and clean equipment.there are many discussions concerning the degree of airborne transmissions and how to protect personnel, especially against dangerous infections; see the background information [1, 9, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] (fig. 19.1) .isolation regimens should not prevent treatment but be included in the diagnosis and treatment.nb! good hand hygiene is important! it prevents the spread of infection! coronaviruses are considered to account for about 10% of all cases of common cold (gwaltney 1985; mclntosh et al. 1974; stott and garwes 1990 ), yet their distribution in the ciliated epithelium and their multiplication there has not been studied, either in an in vitro system or in situ. the same is true of ciliated epithelia infected with viruses of other kinds. although human nasal and bronchial epithelium have been studied electron microscopically during episodes of common cold (carson et al. 1985; giorgi et al. 1992; rautiainen et al. 1992; winther et al. 1984) , or other viral infections (cornille et al. 1984; konradova et al. 1982) , the viruses within the epithelial cells causing the infections seem to have eluded the investigators. certain changes in the infected ciliated nasal epithelium have been reported, such as a detachment of ciliated cells from the epithelium (ramphal et al. 1979; turner et al. 1982; winther et al. 1984) , or a loss of cilia from the ciliated cells (rautiainen et al. 1992 ), but the mechanisms by which the viruses cause these effects remain unknown.replicating coronaviruses have been studied in some cell cultures, such as human fetal diploid lung cells (oshiro et al. 1971) , human wi-38 cells hamre et al. 1967) , canine kidney cells (takeuchi et al. 1976) , feline kidney cells (everman et al. 1989) , feline embryonic lung cells (beesley and hitchcock 1982) , and chick kidney cells (chasey and alexander 1976) ; these cells are non-ciliated. virions are recorded in several components within these cells: endoplasmic reticulum, perinuclear cisterna, golgi apparatus, lysosomes, and cytoplasmic vesicles. budding viruses have been found in the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum intruding into its cisternae.during the last 15 years, i have examined the nasal or bronchial epithelium from several hundred persons with respiratory tract disease, suspected to suffer from the immotile-cilia syndrome (afzelius 1979) . in a single case, the biopsy contained a multitude of virus-infected cells. the viruses have the morphological characteristics ofcoronavirus and were seen at several sites in the ciliated cells. the infection has apparently caused a loss of most of the cilia from the ciliated cells.a 2.5-year-old girl was examined because of her chronic rhinitis and bronchitis. the girl showed no signs of common cold at the time of the biopsy nor, according to the mother, on the days following the biopsy. a brush biopsy (rutland and cole 1980) was taken from concha inferior of the nose and immediately immersed in a fixative consisting of 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 m cacodylate buffer, ph 7.0. fixation time in this case was 9 days, followed by post-fixation in 1% osmium tetroxide in the same buffer. after a brief rinse, the sample was dehydrated in ethanol, embedded in an epoxy resin, agar 100 (agar scientific, cambridge, england), sectioned, and section stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. sections were examined with a jeol 100 s electron microscope. no second biopsy was taken, as it was considered to be of no benefit to the patient.the nasal epithelium in the examined brush biopsy contained a mixture of ciliated cells and mucus-producing cells in about the same ratio as is found in healthy persons. it is impossible to decide from a brush biopsy whether some ciliated cells have detached from the epithelium as a consequence of the infection, since all brush biopsies will show cell fragments and isolated cells, in addition to a morphologically intact epithelium. however, ciliated cells remained in the epithelium at the time of biopsy in a number that seemed normal.some ciliated cells were devoid of virions, others contained a few virions, and still others contained hundreds or thousands of them. in all blocks studied from this subject, a heavily infested cell could be seen side by side with one that had few virions or none. goblet cells were always free from virions and none were seen in the mucus outside the mucus cells. the basal cells underlying goblet cells and ciliated cells were also devoid of virions, as were leucocytes, mast cells and other migrating cells. the virus thus showed a considerable cell specificity in its association.virions were seen at the following sites in the ciliated cell or at its surface: some virions adhered to the microvilli or to the apical cell membrane between microvilli and cilia (fig. l) . a number of virions can be seen in pockets in the plasma membrane; these pockets may penetrate deeply into the cell body and contain a row of virions (fig. 2) . the apical cytoplasm of some cells had large vesicles that contained a great number of virions. no virions were seen in the rough surfaced endoplasmic reticulum, or in the perinuclear cisterna, or in the nucleus or mitochondria.all infected cells also contained vesicles with a diameter of 0.1-0.2 gin, each with a single or a few virions that were embedded in a matrix of medium high electron density (fig. 3) . (an alternative and less likely interpretation of these images is that the vesicles in reality represent cross-sections of deep, winding invaginations of the cell surface and that the virions hence lie in invaginated portions of the extracellular fluid.) most vesicles were seen in the apical cytoplasm, but some were seen in deeper parts of the cell, in particular in and near the golgi apparatus.some cells (fig. 4) contained a further virion-containing structure characterized by the following features: large size, 1-4 gm; a superficial location in the cell; a great number of contained virions; a matrix of such a low electron density that the club-shaped surface projections of the coronaviruses are clearly visible (fig. 5) . the structures will here be called 'apical vesi-cles'. in a longitudinal section through the cell there may be four or more apical vesicles. each virion contained electron-dense material, 70-80 nm in diameter, and was surrounded by a triple-layered membrane. the surface projections (peplomers) are 20 nm long.the golgi zone is the second zone of the cell that contained many virions. it was located just apical to the nucleus and at a depth of about 20-30 gm from the free cell surface. most golgi cisternae in the infected cells had lateral bulbs with one or a few virions (fig. 6) . it is only at this location where budding viruses were seen: a membrane of the golgi vacuole then made an invagination and dense material could be seen to be accumulated at the membrane (fig. 7) . occasionally an electrondense, thread-like material could be seen in the vicinity of such a budding virion; possibly it is nucleocapsid material (fig. 7) .cytosomes with a content of viruses or virus-like particles could also be found in the cytoplasm, mainly in the apical half of the cell (fig. 8) . some particles were compact, whereas others appeared to be empty. these cytosomes may represent lysosomes with virions in varying degrees of degradation. particles of the same 'empty' type could also be seen in some apical vesicles ( fig. 9) or extracellularly, along the microvilli of the ciliated cell (arrows in fig. 4) .although a single cell may contain thousands of virions, mainly in the apical vesicles, there were no signs of the infected cell being moribund or dead; organelles and cytoskeleton rather gave the impression of a cell with intact synthetic activity. however, some degenerative changes could be seen, which affect the cilia. in some cells a single axoneme had migrated into the cell body, whereas the neighbouring cilia remained at the cell surface (fig. 10) .in other cells all axonemes were relocated to sites within the cell body (fig. 11) , whereas in still other cells the ciliary basal bodies had migrated into the cell and had lost the axonemes (fig. 12) . the apical surface of such cells had microvilli but only few free cilia. mucus vacuoles could sometimes be seen in the apical cyto- plasm of these cells. they could, however, be distinguished from the goblet cells both by their lacking glycocalyceal bodies in the glycocalyx (afzelius 1984) and their content of some basal bodies and also of virions, which were never seen in the goblet cells.the electron micrographs do not permit a rigorous reconstruction of the sequence of events during infections of the nasal epithelium with a coronavirus. infected cells were a chance finding, rather than the result of a planned experiment or of a study with several consecutive biopsies taken at different stages of an infection. it was thus not possible to use the present material for an immuno-electron microscopical study, which presumably would have given more detailed data on the route of the infecting virus particles and their multiplication.in studies where the ultrastructural effects of common cold viruses have been examined, no virions have been seen in mucosal cells and isolated virions only have been reported from extracellular sites (carson et al. 1985; dourmashkin and tyrrell 1970) . on the other hand, many virions are seen in nasal washings of patients during naturally acquired colds (larson et al. 1980; mclntosh et al. 1967) . i have also attempted to locate virions in the nasal mucosa from some patients during episodes of a common cold but been unable to find any. the reason for these negative results is unknown; the number of virions in the mucosa may be small or their presence of short duration. in contrast, several studies have been published of coronavirus-infected cells in in vitro systems beesley and hitchcock 1982; chasey and alexander 1976; david-ferreira and manaker 1965; everman et al. 1989; hamre et al. 1967; mcintosh et al. 1967 ; os- et al. 1971) , or in an in vivo system (takeuchi et al. 1976) , although none to my knowledge on a ciliated epithelium.in the present study, cells at different stages -or different degrees of severity -of virus infection have been seen. a possible sequence of events is as follows. coronaviruses contact the microvilli of the ciliated cell and enter it in apical membrane invaginations. from there they are taken up in small vesicles and transported to the golgi apparatus, where virus multiplication takes place. they are then transported back to the apical cytoplasm and are stored there in the large apical vesicles before release into the nasal lumen. the formation of the apical vesicles causes the basal bodies to be displaced from the cell surface and to retract into the cell. as a consequence thereof the cells become deciliated and the patient will experience rhinorrhoea. alternatively, the invading virions are degraded and uncoated in the large apical vesicles before being transported to the golgi apparatus.this scheme of virus replication differs somewhat from that seen in studies of cell cultures. coronavirusinfected cells are reported to contain virions in the perinuclear cisterna and in the endoplasmic reticulum, where they also replicate (becket et al. 1967; beesley and hitchcock 1982; chasey and alexander 1976; hamre et al. 1967; takeuchi et al. 1976 ). these compartments were free from virions in the present case and budding was seen only in the golgi apparatus.it has also been suspected that a virion (notably a myxovirus) in some way might exploit the sweeping action of a cilium in order to enter the cell (dourmashkin and tyrrel11970) . the hong-kong virus (a rhabdovirus) is also claimed to adsorb to cilia, although not to enter the cells, in chicken embryo tracheal culture (blaskovic et al. 1972) . the images obtained in the present case rather indicate the microvilli to be the site of a first contact and the apical cell membrane to be the site of viropexia.in some previous studies of cells infected by coronavirus a 'condensed tubular network' (oshiro et al. 1971 ) or a 'reticular inclusion' (david-ferreira and manaker 1965) has been described and suspected to represent an accumulation of virus precursors. such tubular aggregates have not been seen in the present case, although occasionally a small coil of electron dense material is seen near the budding virus in the golgi apparatus.in conclusion, the coronavirus of the examined patient displayed a strict cell specificity and the virions upon entering the cell were restricted to a few cell compartments only. the virions seem not to have damaged the ciliated epithelium unduly except for a partial deciliation of some cells.the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has once again aroused people's concern about coronavirus. seven human coronaviruses (hcovs) have been discovered so far, including hcov-229e, hcov-nl63, hcov-oc43, hcov-hku115, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. existing studies show that the cardiovascular disease increased the incidence and severity of coronavirus infection. at the same time, myocardial injury caused by coronavirus infection is one of the main factors contributing to poor prognosis. in this review, the recent clinical findings about the relationship between coronaviruses and cardiovascular diseases and the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms are discussed. this review aimed to provide assistance for the prevention and treatment of covid-19.advances in the relationship between coronavirus infection and cardiovascular diseases.hcov-229e and hcov-oc43 [35] were discovered in the 1960s, and hcov-nl63 [22] and hcov-hku1 [26] were later discovered in upper respiratory tract infections, asthma, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia. there is evidence showing that infant, elderly and immunocompromised patients are more likely to be infected with high mortality rates [37, [62] [63] [64] . these infected patients are more likely develop severe disease states [65] [66] [67] [68] .varghese et al. [37] retrospectively analyzed the clinical data of 261 children with hcov infection (including 229e, hku1, nl63, oc43) andfound that approximately 16.5% of the children had cardiovascular disease. hcov-infected children with cardiovascular disease are more likely to receive respiratory support and enter a pediatric intensive care unit (picu), suggesting that the underlying cardiovascular disease increased the severity of hcov infection in the children. cabeça et al. found that children with heart disease are more likely to be infected by hcovs [69] . the presence of congenital heart disease was a significant risk factor for severe coronavirus infection in children who were less than five years old [70] ( table 1) .hypotension was found in a small number of patients with these four hcov infections [70] (table 2 ). there is no relevant evidence showing that hcov infection can cause heart injury. however, kim et al. reported that hcovs were detected in children with kawasaki disease, which is characterized by acute systemic vasculitis in childhood and may induce severe cardiovascular complications [71] . serological tests suggest that hcov-229e may be involved in the occurrence of kawasaki disease [72] . therefore, we still need to pay attention to cardiovascular complications when facing these four kinds of hcov infection.the severe acute respiratory syndrome [27] that broke out globally in 2003 is different from the human coronavirus described previously. it is a severe acute respiratory infection with clinical manifestations of fever and dry cough, with the lungs as the main locations of lesions. some patients quickly develop acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiple organ failure with high mortality [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] .there is much relevant evidence showing that pre-existing comorbid conditions are one of the major determinants of fatality [76, [78] [79] [80] [81] [82] [83] . it has been reported that the presence of cardiovascular diseases, such as hypertension and heart disease, is associated with adverse outcomes and mortality in sars patients [84] [85] [86] [87] . wong et al. reviewed the medical records of fatal cases and found that 60% of the patients who died had comorbid conditions such as hypertension and coronary artery disease [88] . chen et al. found that patients with combined hypertension and cerebrovascular diseases are more likely to develop ards [89] . another study by hu et al. showed that the incidence rates of critical conditions and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome ( mods ) among sars patients with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases were 1.8-fold and 1.9-fold higher than those of patients without underlying disease, suggesting that cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases are major risk factors for sars patients to devolve into critical conditions and mods and eventually lead to death [90] (table 1) .regarding the cardiovascular complications of sars patients, it was found that sars patients had subclinical diastolic impairment without contraction involvement, and this damage may be reversible upon clinical recovery [91] . another study by yu et al. found that cardiovascular complications, including hypotension and tachycardia, are common in sars patients but are usually self-limiting. bradycardia and cardiac hypertrophy were less common, and arrhythmias were rare [92] . acute myocardial infarction can also be seen in a few sars patients [93] . sars-cov was reported to be found in 40% (7/18 patients) of heart samples from patients who died of sars during the toronto outbreak [76] , which might explain the myocardial damage discovered in sars patients [89] . there are reports indicating that sars-cov also attacks small blood j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cardiovascular disease increased the mortality of mers [108] . banik suggested that sufficient attention should be paid to mers patients with combined underlying diseases to reduce the occurrence of serious complications and mortality [109] (table 1) .heart damage was also reported in mers patients [110] . mers-cov was found in the kidneys of deceased patients but was not detected in the heart tissue, and the heart showed no significant histological changes [111, 112] . however, an animal model study clearly stated that mers-cov rna could be seen in cardiac tissue, implying direct cardiac pathology [113] . the mechanism of heart injury in mers infection remains unclear and requires more research.covid-19, which broke out at the end of 2019, is a disease caused by infection with sars-cov-2 [1, 2, 4] . similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 is a β-cov [2] . covid-19 is similar to sars and mers and manifests as extensively pathological viral lung inflammation [1] .although similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 has its own characteristics [1, 114] . early cases suggest that covid-19 may not be as severe as sars and mers. however, the rapidly increasing number of cases and increasing evidence of human-to-human transmission suggest that sars-cov-2 is more contagious than sars-cov and mers-cov and has a lower fatality [3, 9, [115] [116] [117] . up to april 27, 2020, the overall mortality of covid-19 was 6.9% globally [5] . but the fatality rate is different in different regions and times, ranging from 0.7% to 13.5% [5, 118] .the symptoms of covid-19 infection appear after an incubation period of approximately 6.4 days [119] . fever, fatigue, and dry cough are the main manifestations of covid-19, and a few patients have symptoms such as nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat, and diarrhea [2, 9, 120, 121] . patients with severe cases often experience dyspnea and/or hypoxemia one week after onset [122] . severe cases of covid-19 progress rapidly to acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock, and metabolic acidosis, which is difficult to correct, and coagulopathy [10] .current case reports show that sars-cov-2 infection may have cardiovascular symptoms in addition to the typical respiratory symptoms. a small number of patients have atypical clinical manifestations and may start with cardiovascular symptoms such as chest tightness, palpitations and chest pain. a study by liu et al. found that 7.3% (10/137) of patients had palpitations as the first symptom [123] . it was also reported that 2% of patients experienced chest pain during hospitalization [11] . in addition, wang et al. found that 16.7% of patients with covid-19 had arrhythmias [10] .according to relevant studies [9] [10] [11] 124] , the proportion of covid-19 patients with comorbid cvds, such as hypertension, coronary artery disease and cerebrovascular disease, was larger than that of patients with other comorbidities or without comorbidities, suggesting that patients with cvd may be more susceptible to sars-cov-2 infection. moreover, the incidence of cvd in patients with severe or fatal cases with covid-19 was higher than that in patients with nonsevere cases or in those who survived [12, 13, 124] . according to the reports of the chinese center for disease control and prevention, 15.7% of the deaths were hypertension, and 9% had other cardiovascular diseases, further suggesting that underlying cardiovascular diseases may be one of the important risk factors for poor prognosis in patients with covid-19 [8] . it can be seen not only that the number of covid-19 patients with cardiovascular disease is large but also that these patients have poor tolerance to severe pneumonia and are more likely to develop severe cases (table 1) .cardiac complications such as electrocardiography abnormities, diastolic dysfunction, and acute myocardial injury were reported in patients with covid-19 [124] [125] [126] [127] . cases of severe myocarditis with reduced systolic function have been reported after covid-19 [128] [129] [130] . and sars-cov-2 infection-related myocarditis is likely associated with myocardial injury [60, 128] . according to the study by li et al., the most common organ damage outside the lungs was heart injury[13]. serum myocardial necrosis markers such as hypersensitive troponin i (hs-tni) and creatine kinase (ck) increased to varying degrees in patients with mild and severe cases of covid-19 [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [131] [132] [133] [134] . however, the risk of heart injury was higher in patients with severe cases, approximately 22.2% to 31% [9, 12, 126, 133, 134] , than in patients with mild cases, approximately 2% to 4% [9, 10] . the percentage of heart injury in covid-19 patients who died, approximately 28% to 89% [12, 13, 132] , was higher than that in those who survived. n-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (nt-probnp) levels were also reported to be increased[13, 134, 135] . increased hs-tni and probnp expression levels may be risk factors for severe illness and high mortality of covid-19 [133] [134] [135] . furthermore, it was found that high hs-tni levels were associated with increased levels of inflammation (neutrophils, il-6, crp, and pct) and decreased levels of immunity (lymphocytes, monocytes, and cd4+ and cd8+ t cells), suggesting that cardiac injury may have something to do with the cytokine storm resulting from an overaggressive host immune response [131, 132] (table 2) .two recent studies published in jama cardiology reported the cardiovascular complications of covid-19 in detail [60, 136] . shi et al. found that cardiac injury was a common condition among hospitalized patients with covid-19 in wuhan, china, and it is associated with higher risk of inhospital mortality [136] . guo et al. reported that myocardial injury was significantly associated with fatal outcome of covid-19. myocardial injury was associated with cardiac dysfunction and arrhythmias. inflammation may be a potential mechanism for myocardial injury [60] (table 2 ).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f covid-19 may induce new cardiovascular diseases and / or aggravate potential cardiovascular diseases. the short-term and long-term cardiovascular effects of covid-19 and the effects of specific treatments are unclear and need further investigation.as the epidemic spread, sars-cov-2 evolved multiple subtypes. in a recent study, researchers proposed the subdivision of the global sars-cov-2 population into sixteen well-defined subtypes by focusing on the widely shared polymorphisms in nonstructural (nsp3, nsp4, nsp6, nsp12, nsp13 and nsp14) cistrons, structural (spike and nucleocapsid) and accessory (orf8) genes [137] . six virus subtypes were predominant in the population, accounting for more than 97% of the samples isolated from around the world. and the subtypes showed some geographical structure with two clusters: a smaller one comprised of isolates mostly sampled from western hemisphere (subtypes ii, vi, ix, x and xi) and a larger one whose isolates were sampled from western and eastern hemispheres (subtypes i, iii, iv, v, vii, viii, xii, xiii, xiv, xv and xvi) [137] . the researchers believed that the genetic structure determined for the sars-cov-2 population provides substantial guidelines for maximizing the effectiveness of trials for testing the candidate vaccines or drugs [137] .in another earlier study, population genetic analyses of 103 sars-cov-2 genomes indicated that these viruses evolved into two major types (designated l and s), that are well defined by two different single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) [138] . the l type (~70%) is more prevalent than the s type (~30%), but the s type was found to be the ancestral version. the l type is more aggressive and spread more quickly. and it was more prevalent in the early stages of the outbreak in wuhan. but the frequency of the l type decreased after early january 2020 for more severe j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f selective pressure placed by human intervention on the l type [138] . contrary to the l type, the s-type, which is evolutionarily older and less aggressive, might have increased in relative frequency due to the weaker selective pressure [138] .it was also reported that among the 27 viruses isolated from wuhan, 26 (96.3%) were l type, and only 1 (3.7%) was s type [138] . however, among the other 73 viruses isolated outside wuhan, 45 (61.6%) were l type, and 28 (38.4%) were s type [138] . this comparison suggests that the l type was significantly more prevalent in wuhan than in other places. and recent studies about the clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients with covid-19 in wuhan [9] [10] [11] 139] or outside wuhan [134, 140, 141] have showed that the mortality of covid-19 patients and the proportion of patients with cardiac injury outside wuhan was lower than that in wuhan (table 3) . although there were many reasons for the different incidence of cardiac injury and outcome of covid-19 in and outside wuhan, such as the shortage of medical resources in wuhan, the role of different sars-cov-2 subtypes cannot be ignored. the relationship between sars-cov-2 subtypes and the mortality of covid-19 or the cvd complications need for further immediate, comprehensive studies that combine genomic data, epidemiological data, and records of the clinical symptoms of patients with coronavirus disease 2019.according to the references above, we can see that patients with underlying cvd may be more likely to become infected with coronavirus, and cvd may be one of the risk factors for poor prognosis and high mortality of cov infection. few studies, however, have explored the mechanisms underlying these associations. we believe that the possible mechanisms may be related to inflammation.cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, coronary heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease are all metabolic-related diseases. it has been reported that metabolic syndrome can downregulate the key mediator of the host's innate immune response to pathogenesis, affecting the function of the innate and humoral immune systems [142] . chronic low-grade inflammatory disease has been widely recognized as a feature of coronary heart disease, and its occurrence is closely related to inflammation [143] . the occurrence of hypertension is associated with oxidative stress, inflammation and the activation of the immune system [144] . il-6, il-1 and tumor necrosis factor α (tnf-α) levels are higher in patients with hypertension than in patients with normal blood pressure [145] . this may explain why patients with underlying cardiovascular disease found in the clinic are more susceptible to infection.kulcsar et al. showed that mers-cov infection can lead to prolonged respiratory tract inflammation, immune cell dysfunction, and changes in the expression profile of inflammatory mediators [146] . lymphopenia and increased inflammatory mediators were found in sars-cov-2 infection [147] . immune disorders caused by sars-cov infection have also been reported [148] . these may lead to the exacerbation of the original cardiovascular disease, which is related to the death of some patients found in the clinic due to heart failure [88, 103, 132] . according to information released by the shanghai municipal health and family planning commission, the first covid-19 death in shanghai was in an individual who was 88 years old with a severe history of hypertension and cardiac insufficiency. an analysis of the cause of death suggested that the patient died of heart failure and systemic multiple organ dysfunction. therefore, sars-cov-2 infection was just an inducement for exacerbations [124] .overall, the heart and lungs are inseparable in the normal physiological functions of the human body. on the one hand, comorbidities and complications of the heart increase the risk of pneumonia infection and exacerbation; on the other hand, pneumonia infection may aggravate existing cardiovascular diseases, such as increased blood pressure, increased heart failure, and the recurrence of myocardial infarction.fever is a common symptom in patients with coronavirus infection [9, 27, 149] . fever promotes the immune functions of humans and some animals and decreases the pathogenicity of some microbes. antibody production, t-cell activation, neutrophil function, and macrophage oxidative metabolism have been reported to increase in the presence of fever [150] [151] [152] [153] [154] . however, to avoid excessively elevated body temperature affecting normal physiological functions, the body will activate sympathetic nerves and regulate circulatory function, which will increase the heart rate and cardiac output [155] . an increase in heart rate over a long period of time will lead to increased myocardial oxygen consumption and decreased cardiac output, which may cause ischemia or heart failure [156] . many diseases with fever symptoms may be complicated by myocarditis, such as spotted fever rickettsioses infection [157] , severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome [158] , drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms [159] , dengue [160] [161] [162] , complicated scrub typhus [163] , herpes simplex virus infection [164] , enteric fever [165] .a decrease in cardiac function may occur in febrile illnesses, but whether myocardial damage is due to fever or the underlying infection is not known [166] . weissinger et al. found that in pigs with a bacterial infection with elevated body temperature, serum ck, lactate dehydrogenase (ld), j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f and gamma-globulin (gg) levels were increased. the administration of antibiotics to these pigs and lowering their body temperature reduced ck and ld levels, but gg levels remained elevated, suggesting that the infection did not decrease. this study indicated that the levels of ck and ld were elevated due to fever caused by infection [167] . k l et al. discovered that a longer duration of fever was related to the occurrence of pericarditis after myocardial infarction [168] . therefore, heart injury in coronavirus infection may be related to fever .severe pneumonia can cause significant gas exchange disturbances and lead to hypoxemia. hypoxia reduces the energy production required for cell metabolism and increases the body's anaerobic digestion. acidosis and oxygen free radicals accumulated in the cell destroy the phospholipid layer of the cell membrane. as hypoxia continues, the intracellular calcium ion concentration increases significantly, leading to a series of cell damage processes, including apoptosis [169] . at the same time, hypoxia can also induce inflammatory reactions, such as the infiltration of inflammatory cells and the release of cytokines, leading to further tissue ischemia, and may even cause myocardial infarction[13, 170, 171] .previous lessons from coronavirus and influenza have shown that viral infections can cause acute coronary syndrome [172, 173] , arrhythmia [174] , and exacerbation of heart failure [175] , mainly due to a combination of significant systemic inflammation response and localized vascular inflammation at the arterial plaque, along with other effects [176] [177] [178] . evidence has shown that sars-cov induces the expression of proinflammatory cytokines such as monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (mcp-1), transforming growth factor-beta 1 (tgf-beta1), tnf, il-1 and il-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 6 and interferon-β (ifn-β) in sars patients and experimental animal models infected with sars-cov [179, 180] . tnf and il-1 family and il-6 family cytokines are considered proinflammatory mediators of heart failure, and they have obvious negative inotropic effects, which may explain heart failure complications in sars infection [181] . the acute heart injury might be due to the cytokine storm resulting from an overaggressive host immune response to sars infection [30] . there is evidence indicating that myocardial inflammation induced by sars-cov is mainly mediated by macrophages and the resultant production of chemokines [95, 96] . the nuclear factor-κb (nf-κb) signaling pathway associated with the induction of proinflammatory cytokines is activated in sars-cov-infected mice. treatment with drugs that inhibited nf-κb activation led to a reduction in inflammation in both sars-cov-infected cultured cells and mice and significantly increased mouse survival after sars-cov infection, indicating that the activation of the nf-κb signaling pathway represents a major contribution to the inflammation induced after sars-cov infection and that nf-κb inhibitors are promising antivirals in infections caused by sars-cov and potentially other pathogenic human coronaviruses [182] .sars-cov-2 appears to affect themyocardium and cause myocarditis [128] . myocardial injury is likely associated with infection-related myocarditis and/or ischemia [60] . increases in inflammatory factors such as crp, il-1 and il-6 were also discovered in sars-cov-2 infection [131, 132, 147] . wu et al. believed that sars-cov-2 may cause heart damage by the cytokine storm [131] . evidence has shown that sars-cov-2 may mainly affect t lymphocytes, especially cd4+ t cells, resulting in a significant decrease in lymphocyte numbers [183] . the extent of lymphopenia and an increase in inflammatory cytokines are related to the severity of the disease [147] . critically ill covid-19 patients had higher levels of il6, il10, tnfα, lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), and c-reactive protein than patients with mild covid-19 [9, 139, 184] , suggesting that inflammatory indicators are an important factor in the early diagnosis of severe covid-19.most patients with coronavirus infection are in an inflammatory state, which places the patients in a hypercoagulable state. for example, covid-19 leads to an increase in d-dimer levels in 40% of patients, a decrease in activated partial thromboplastin time (aptt) in 16% of patients, and a decrease in pt in 30% of patients, further increasing the risk of embolism [11] . hypercoagulability induced by inflammation might contribute to plaque rupture, with subsequent thrombosis and myocardial injury [185] . therefore, clinicians should pay attention to covid-19 patients with coronary heart disease to prevent myocardial injury and myocardial infarction .septic shock can be seen as a serious complication in sars, mers and covid-19[13, 76, 103] . approximately 6.2% of sars-cov-2 infections are complicated by shock [126] . it was reported that left ventricular dysfunction occurs in approximately 20% of patients within 6 hours after the onset of septic shock, and the incidence can increase to 60% by 1 to 3 days after the onset of septic shock [186] . myocardial dysfunction and cardiovascular inflammation might lead to elevated creatine kinase and troponin [187] , which might explain the high hs-tni in deceased patients .in addition to the abovementioned accompanying symptoms, anxiety and stress can also lead to adverse reactions such as accelerated heart rhythms and elevated blood pressure, especially in critically ill patients [188, 189] . health anxiety could be found in coronavirus-infected patients [190] .generally, everyone experiences health anxiety to some degree, and the associated vigilance to a potential health-related threat can be protective.however, excessive health anxiety can be detrimental [190] . the literature indicates that stress can activate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f and sympathetic nervous system, leading to an increase in peripheral glucocorticoid and catecholamine levels [191] . high plasma catecholamine levels are associated with an increased risk of heart failure. altered autonomic activity during depression can lead to arrhythmias. the activated sns alters cardiac wall contractility and increases apoptotic pathways in cardiomyocytes, contributing to cvd development .although there is no relevant study on covid-19 patients suffering from anxiety, medical workers have been reported to be anxious after direct contact with the patients [192, 193] . a study by sun et al. showed that some chinese showed acute posttraumatic stress symptoms during the covid-19 outbreak [194] . therefore, psychological counseling should be conducted on patients in a timely manner, and anxiolytic drugs could be used when necessary .as mentioned above, sars-cov was reported to lead to myocardial infection with a marked decrease in ace2 expression, which may be responsible for myocardial dysfunction and adverse cardiac outcomes in patients with sars [99] . direct sars-cov infection of cardiomyocytes may also lead to myocarditis and impaired myocardial function. coronavirus-induced myocarditis and its subsequent progression to dilated cardiomyopathy have been described in rabbit models [195] . sars-cov was found in heart samples from patients who died of sars [76] .pathological findings showed a marked increase in macrophage infiltration in patients with sars-cov in the heart, with evidence of myocardial damage. mers-cov was not detected in the heart tissue, and the heart showed no significant histological changes in mers patients [111, 112] .however, an animal model study clearly stated that mers-cov rna could be seen in cardiac tissue, implying direct cardiac pathology [113] .although myocarditis was reported in sporadic autopsy cases [128] , there is still no clear pathological evidence supporting that sars-cov-2 can directly cause heart damage .the most frequently used drugs during hospitalization are glucocorticoids and antiviral drugs, as well as antibiotics. the secondary qt interval prolongation caused by the use of drugs during hospitalization cannot be ignored. antiviral drugs (lopinavir, ritonavir), antibiotics (azithromycin, moxifloxacin, levofloxacin), antifungal drugs, glucocorticoids and some antiarrhythmic drugs, there is a potential risk of prolonging the qtc interval [196, 197] . drug-associated qt prolongation is associated with increased arrhythmic and non-arrhythmic mortality and it therefore continues to be an important metric of drug safety [198] .a small study in france enrolling 26 treated patients and 16 non-randomized controls showed that hydroxychloroquine alone or in combination with azithromycin shortened the time to resolution of viral shedding of covid-19 [199] . based on this study, clinicians in many countries have begun using these medications in clinical practice, and multiple randomized trials are being initiated. but there were occasional case reports of hydroxychloroquine prolonging the qt interval and provoking torsade de pointes when used to treat systemic lupus erythematosus [200] [201] [202] [203] . the widely used antibiotic azithromycin was gradually recognized as a rare cause of prolonged qt, severe arrhythmia, and increased risk of sudden death [204] [205] [206] [207] . although there were no reports of arrhythmia death caused by the use of hydroxychloroquine, the use of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin should also be noted [208] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o factive support with expected management based on early prognostic indicators may improve recovery. appropriate treatment of heart failure, arrhythmia, acute coronary syndrome and thrombosis are still important. with continued global cooperation on multiple methods, specific evidence-based treatment strategies for covid-19 will emerge. in order to protect the wider population, antibody testing and effective vaccines will be needed to make a history of covid-19. and some treatment related issues need attention.firstly, the use of acei / arb drugs was controversial in the earlier phase of covid-19 epidemic. but recently published studies suggested that there is no need for patients with hypertension to stop using acei / arb or switch to other antihypertensive medicine [60, 61, 209] . some conjectures [210] based on the disease mechanism in the early stage of the outbreak that acei / arb may increase the infection of new coronavirus and the aggravation of covid-19 by increasing the expression of ace2 have been denied by more and more clinical evidence. we see that the continuous treatment of covid-19 patients with hypertension with acei / arb will not only cause the deterioration of the condition, but also continue to exert cardiovascular protection and even improve the prognosis [60, 61, 209] .secondly, we should pay attention to the application of hydroxychloroquine [200] [201] [202] [203] and azithromycin [204] [205] [206] [207] for their side effects of prolonging the qt interval. other drugs used to treat the covid-19 patients, such as antiviral drugs (lopinavir, ritonavir), antibiotics (moxifloxacin, levofloxacin), antifungal drugs, glucocorticoids and some antiarrhythmic drugs, can cause the qt interval prolongation and should attract more attention. reference by sapp et al. would help to minimize risk of drug-induced ventricular arrhythmia during treatment of covid-19 [211] .thirdly, a recent study from jama reported that the mortality rate of patients with mechanical ventilation treatment was 88.1% [212] . multiple studies around the world have shown that the mortality rate of covid-19 patients using ventilator was still high [213] [214] [215] . and it was believed that the ventilator should be used more cautiously in patients with covid-19, which can reduce the mortality of patients using the ventilator by more than 50% [216] . new guidelines should be established for when to use a ventilator for patients with covid-19. we advocate the application of staged breathing support methods to delay the use of ventilator. simple oxygen treatment like nasal oxygen supply may be safer and more effective.fourth, methylprednisolone are the classical immunosuppressive drugs, which are important to stop or delay the progress of the pneumonia, and have been proved to be effective for the treatment of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). in recent study [217] , wu at al. found that the administration of methylprednisolone appeared to reduce the risk of death in covid-19 patients with ards. however, of those who received methylprednisolone treatment, 23 of 50 patients died. this is a rather high mortality of ~50%. the indication, timing, dosage and duration, the application of methylprednisolone needs further investigation.fifth, the early report showed that remdesivir was highly effective in the control of sars-cov-2 infection in vitro [218] . but recent study published in lancet showed that remdesivir did not reduce the mortality of covid-19 patients [219] . however, another clinical trial showed that remdesivir accelerates recovery from advanced covid-19 [220] . another clinical trial showed that there was no significant difference in clinical outcome between the 5-day and 10-day course of remdesivir [221] . these data suggested remdesivir does not reduce the mortality of covid-19 patients, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f but have an effect on shortening the course of disease in mild patients. and early medication may be better. the application of remdesivir needs further researches.clinical data indicate that comorbid cardiovascular disease will aggravate the severity of coronavirus infection, leading to a poor prognosis.coronavirus may cause myocardial injury, and the prognosis of patients with complicated myocardial injury is poor. the mechanism of coronavirus causing myocardial injury and drug treatment options remain to be further studied.the authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f abbreviation: ck, creatine kinase; ldh, lactate dehydrogenase; hs-tni, hypersensitive troponin i; ckmb, creatine kinase-myocardial band isoenzyme; probnp, pro brain natriuretic peptide; crp, c-reactive protein; il, interleukin; tnt, troponin t. 6 (3.6%) 9 (6.7%) death 6 (15%) 11 (11%) 5 (7.5%) 6 (4.3%) 1 (0.3%) 2 (1.2%) 1 (0.7%)small cartilages and small muscles connecting each cartilage, besides its air conduction function. needless to say, the air passing through the entire air conduction portion is fully conditioned air, e.g., cleaned, moistened, and warmed appropriately, arriving at the respiratory portion. the air conduction portion from the bronchus to the terminal bronchiole is called the bronchial tree, which also has a typical respiratory epithelium on their luminal surface. the typical respiratory epithelium consists of several cell types: (1) tall columnar cells are the most abundant ones and have numerous cilia on their apical surface; (2) mucous goblet cells, looking like a typical wine glass, have many polysaccharide-rich mucin droplets on their surface; and (3) there are some miscellaneous cells.functionally, all cilia of the tall columnar cells are fully covered by spreading out the polysaccharide-rich mucous droplets produced by mucous goblet cells, forming the mucociliary blanket. the sticky mucin component laid on the cilia adsorb chemical substances, tiny particles, and even microorganisms, which are removed effectively by one-way movement (from inside to outside) of the mucociliary blanket. therefore, a substantial amount of mucous fluid drains from the bronchial tree into esophagus, a pathway to the gi tract that is the crossroads in the laryngopharyngeal area between the respiratory and gi tracts, every day in humans.the respiratory portion starts from the last and smallest bronchiole, called respiratory bronchioles, which have alveoli intermittently on their way to the terminal portion of respiratory pathway, the alveolar sacs, which are composed of numerous alveoli. wide networks of capillaries cover the external surface of each alveolus, forming the blood air barrier, consisting of the alveolar epithelium and endothelium of its covering capillary, and the fused basal laminae present between them ( fig. 5 .2). o 2 (blue arrows) in the air inhaled into alveoli gets through the blood-air barrier into the capillary, while co 2 (red arrows) transported from cells to the alveolar capillary is penetrated to the alveolar space through the blood air barrier, which consists of alveolar epithelium, fused basal lamina, and capillary endothelium structures of the respiratory system conclusively, o 2 in the alveoli moves into blood capillaries through the blood air barrier, while co 2 in the blood capillaries is transported to the air spaces in the alveoli through the blood air barrier, eventually evacuated to the outside of the body.there is no doubt in the fact that the direct initiating factor of the common cold is low temperatures, i.e., coldness, especially relative coldness, which means a sense of feeling cold due to an unexpected sudden change in the temperature from high to low. here, coldness does not mean an absolute extremely low temperature routinely experienced in both arctic areas year-round. therefore, although the outdoor temperature can be higher than 30 °c, people attending a meeting in a room where the air-cooling system is operating well with the indoor temperature kept around 24-25 °c cannot help but feel cold for a relatively long time, and they can catch the common cold. generally speaking, traditionally, the incidence rate of the common cold during the hot summer has been very low. in the korean proverb, "even the dogs do not catch colds in may and june of the lunar calendar." understanding that may and june in the lunar calendar indicate a midsummer time, it means that korean people rarely catch cold in the midsummer time. however, nowadays, the rate has become relatively high such that it is very common to see cold patients during the summer time because air-cooling systems are found everywhere. it is no wonder to see that the incidence rate of the common cold is not particularly high in the arctic areas where absolute coldness persists year-round, as well as during the cold winter time, when severe cold temperatures persist, because they do not usually feel cold due to routinely being exposed to severe coldness as wells as having low viral colonization due to severe low temperatures. actually, relative coldness means the temperature at which people feel cold in real life. when people feel cold or chilly, a couple of responses take place in their body to keep the core body temperature constant (37.5 °c). first, vascular constriction around the inlet area of air occurs, typically the mucous membrane of the nasal cavity, resulting in a reduction of mucus secretion containing various antiviral soluble mediators, such as interleukins, tnf-α, ifn-γ, and so on, and followed by an explosive increase in the nasal viral flora such as adenovirus and rhinovirus by their rapid proliferation. the nasal viral flora proliferates easily in the relatively cold weather, which causes the relative humidity to become low. a relatively low temperature and dryness are good conditions for viral proliferation and invasion to the body. dryness usually causes injuries in the nasal mucosa, which supplies the route for the initial viral invasion. when the human physical defense system weakens or is broken and viral proliferation increases, the balance between the human body defense system and the viral flora tends to shift to the viral flora, resulting in catching the common cold. that is the reason why there are common cold or flu outbreaks in the late fall season and the transitional season from the hot summer to the cold winter. when the common cold starts just after a prolonged exposure to relative coldness, the first symptom of the common cold is usually a runny nose, which functions to wash out the increased viral flora so that the number of virus infected cells decreases. moreover, people in good physical condition ordinarily do not catch the cold, while people who are not healthy ordinarily due to prolonged fatigue, overwork, or insomnia usually catch the cold. once people catch the cold, the next symptoms after a runny nose are a sore throat and systemic fever. a sore throat means that tissue invasion by the proliferated viral flora has started, followed by inflammation which usually consists of four classical signs of redness, swelling, pain, and heat. systemic fever is a very important innate defense. the higher the body temperature is to some extent, the lower the proliferation rate of the virus is. therefore, normal body temperature itself (37.5 °c) is a very important body defense against bacterial or viral infection. actually, bacterial or viral proliferation is strongly inhibited by high temperatures (higher than 37.5 °c). because it takes a little time (minimally 2-3 days) to activate the adaptive, specific immunity for invading bacteria or a virus, the body defense system uses the high fever as a non-specific defense tool immediately upon viral infection, which works in a very short time. that is the reason why early use of antipyretic agents should not be done for a high fever occurring in the common cold or flu. however, a high fever should be cautiously controlled by pediatricians in the case of youngaged people in whom brain damage is likely to be caused by febrile convulsions. acute symptoms of the common cold are usually terminated within 3 days, at the longest 5-7 days, before the specific adaptive immune system is fully active, unless a secondary bacterial infection is also present. there are a couple of reasons why actually vaccines for the common cold are not available. one is that the common cold comes from an imbalance between the human defense system and the normal viral flora, which normally reside at the initiation part of the respiratory system such as the nasal cavity and nasal or oral pharynx so that they usually do not induce new immunity against the normal floral virus. the second reason is because there are more than 200 viruses that cause the common cold. the third reason is because the common cold has been called a self-limited disease in which it takes just a few days to be cured so that mainly the innate immunity must work but the adaptive immunity does not need to be activated for the eventual termination of the common cold.one more thing is to be considered seriously; the common cold and flu are totally different. the flu is never a severe cold. clinically, it is not easy to tell the flu from a common cold, although there have been some differences in clinical symptoms. briefly, the main symptoms of the common cold are runny nose, mild fever, cough, and sometimes sore throat, while those of the flu are high fever, myalgia (muscle pain), headache, sore throat, and generalized weakness (lethargy) ( table. 5.1).unlike the common cold, which is usually not infected by a foreign pathogen but is just a kind of battle between the body defense system and the normal flora of viruses residing in the upper respiratory system, the flu is a disease caused by an influenza virus infection. thus, the common cold takes place at any time year-round whenever people feel coldness for a relatively long time, while flue outbreaks occur only during some restricted periods (in korea from october to april of the next year) when the influenza virus is prevalent.in march 2003, the who reported officially that a new unidentified fatal disease has appeared in hong kong. it was discovered that the disease is a kind of variant of the common cold caused by a variant coronavirus, which supposedly originated from musk cats raised by some farmers in guangdong, china, in november 2002. the coronavirus is a single-stranded rna virus and has a species specificity as the causative viral agent of infection. however, a genetically modified coronavirus of the musk cat has a new capability to infect beyond the interspecies barrier. it was not just the matter of crossing the interspecies barrier. even though its genetic structure has changed, it is just one of the new causative agents of the common cold, which causes people to become infected with the common cold. unfortunately, some of the patients infected by this variant coronavirus have died. the autopsy of the dead cases revealed that the specific cause of death was viral pneumonia, which rarely occurs in routine common cold patients. since then, the common cold caused by the variant coronavirus is called severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). epidemiological data show that the mortality rate of sars has reached around 10% (about 780 people dead out of about 83,000 patients), which is high enough to cause people to panic, considering that the mortality rate of the original common cold is near zero.at the end of march 2009, a new strain of type a influenza virus was reported for the first time from a 10-year-old child admitted to one clinic located in san diego, usa, with the chief complaints of high fever, cough, and vomiting. it turned out to be a novel swine-origin influenza a (h1n1) virus that caused the infection. thereafter, this novel flu has spread out to the whole world, resulting in the occurrence of more than 130,000 patients and dead cases of more than 800 people. fortunately, this novel flu could be controlled successfully by the administration of tamiflu, which does not have any treatment effects on the seasonal flu despite having the same serotype (h1n1). therefore, many researchers think that the actual mortality rate of this novel swine-origin influenza a might be more than 10%. influenza virus has two kinds of antigens, which consist of hemagglutinin (h) and neuraminidase (n). hemagglutinin has 15 subtypes (h1~h15), while neuraminidase has 9 subtypes (n1~n9). a combination of h subtypes and n subtypes makes theoretically 135 sub-serotypes of influenza a virus such as h1n1, h3n2, h5n1, h7n9, and h15n9. according to scientific reports, humans are usually infected by unfortunately, this principle has been broken, welcoming a new millennium, in 2000. in late 2003, shocking news was reported that some people living in east asia had been infected by a highly pathogenic avian influenza (ai), for which their serotype was h5n1, which had never been reported before in human medical history at that time. even worse, this h5n1 avian influenza showed an extremely high mortality rate (about 70%), even though its infectivity is low. however, there is good fortune in this misfortune because infection cases between humans have not been identified yet. recently (spring 2013), a new serotype of ai has appeared in some areas of china, for which the serotype is h7n9. according to some reports presented at the meeting of "options for the control of influenza" held in cape town from september 5 to 9, 2013, this new ai is expected to have a higher infectivity and toxicity than h5n1 ai, and in the fall of 2013, a pandemic of this new ai was forecast by the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) of the usa.in korea, for the last 20 years, the number of people taking a couple of grams of vitamin c daily has increased steadily such that in 2017, it was presumed that about 15 million people were taking a megadose of vitamin c daily. the most frequent cases, which i have observed by telephone or e-mail interviews, have been many people taking a megadose of vitamin c for more than 4-5 years, and for a couple of years, they have never caught a cold, which they used to suffer from one to two times a year when they did not take a megadose of vitamin c. twelve years ago, i was asked to meet a ceo who was in his mid-50s and suffered from multiple episodes of a cold yearly for more than 30 years. he was admitted regularly to a hospital for 1 month due to pulmonary complications from the cold. immediately after meeting with me, he started to take a megadose of vitamin c daily. since then, he has never caught a cold for more than 10 years. this longitudinal study has very meaningful value in estimating the effects of vitamin c on the common cold, even though it is only a single case. clinical studies on the effects of vitamin c on colds presented by some clinicians have shown generally negative results. regular vitamin c consumption may decrease the duration of cold symptoms but does not affect the symptom severity or act as a prophylaxis (heimer et al. 2009 ). the failure of vitamin c supplementation to reduce the incidence of colds in a normal population indicates that preventing a cold by taking routine megadoses of vitamin c is not rationally justified for community use. however, evidence suggests that it could be justified in people exposed to brief periods of severe physical exercise or cold environments (douglas et al. 2007 ). their conclusion is that vitamin c does not have a curative or preventive vitamin c against the common cold effect on colds but shortens the duration of the illness. the common cold is a selflimited viral disease. for a curative treatment, the optimal dose of vitamin c and the right method of administration should be considered. according to a pharmacokinetic study of vitamin c after oral administration, it is most desirable to take vitamin c every 6 h because vitamin c has a 6-h cycle of metabolism as mentioned in chap. 1, the introduction. actually, when it is orally administered, it reaches peak concentration in the peripheral blood 3 h after the administration, and it comes back to the basal level of concentration 6 h after the administration. however, almost all clinical experiments on the effects of vitamin c published so far have been performed on a single dose of vitamin c. furthermore, the daily vitamin c dose used in the above published papers was less than 1000 mg. in addition, it is actually impossible to perform clinical experiments that can confirm if vitamin c can cure or prevent a cold because a cold has a short period as a self-limited disease. once cold patients visit the clinic for treatment, the number of viruses is too high to be controlled by any potent medication such that the balance between the host and the virus is shifted to the virus and the patient usually becomes severely ill. during such an active phase of the cold, no drug can stop the disease process of a cold from occurring in the upper respiratory tract. vitamin c can prevent the onset of a cold if people follow a strict regimen taking a megadose of vitamin c three times daily because it can inhibit the initial phase of viral proliferation, when the number of viruses is not so high and still controllable by the host defense system (furuya et al. 2008) . that is the case with tamiflu, which has been used for successful prevention of the swine flu (h1n1). the correct method of administering tamiflu is to take it within 48 h after the occurrence of fever. if it is taken 48 h or later after a fever occurs, it has no effect on the treatment of swine flu. considering the operating mechanism of tamiflu, which binds to the hemagglutinin protein of the influenza virus and inhibits viral attachment to the host cell resulting in failure of viral replication using the replication machinery of the host cell, tamiflu does not cure the cold but prevents it because tamiflu blocks the initial proliferation of the influenza virus.there have been some reports on the effects of vitamin c on the flu (li et al. 2006; sladkova and kostolansky 2006; banerjee and kaul 2010) . to observe the effects of vitamin c on flu, an in vivo experiment using gulo(−/−) mice, which are unable to synthesize vitamin c like humans because the gene encoding l-gulono-γ-lactone oxidase is knocked out artificially, has been performed by my research team. the experimental animals were divided into three groups with six mice in each group: group 1, wild-type, normal mice; group 2, gulo(−/−) mice without supplementation of vitamin c; and group 3, gulo(−/−) mice with supplementation of oral vitamin c. the mice in each group were infected with h3n2 influenza virus, and then, the survival rate was checked. all the mice in the three groups showed symptoms of the flu such as fever, rhinorrhea, lethargy, and so on. interestingly, 5 days after infection, 80% of the mice in group 2 were dead, while no mice in groups 1 and 3 died (fig. 5.3) .the autopsies showed that the lung tissues from the dead mice were loaded with so much influenza virus, indicating that the mice in group 2 died of viral pneumonia. however, the lung tissues from the mice in groups 1 and 3, which did not die from the infection, did not have the influenza virus (fig. 5.4) (kim et al. 2013) . (kim et al. 2013) these results strongly suggest that vitamin c in a living body might prevent influenza virus from spreading down from the upper respiratory tract to the lower respiratory system such as the bronchi, bronchioles, and alveoli, even though the mechanism involved in the preventing process has not been elucidated yet. however, vitamin c deficiency causes inhibition of camp-dependent secretion of chloride in the mouse airway epithelium so that the epithelium does not maintain fluidity on their surface (our unpublished data) (fig. 5.5) .the dryness of the mucosal epithelium facilitates viral proliferation and invasion. furthermore, vitamin c deficiency dramatically decreases svct expression on the mucosal epithelium of respiratory tracts, leading to an abolition of the prevention effects of vitamin c from flu infection (our unpublished data) (fig. 5.6 ).in addition, levels of interferons (ifns) in the bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) fluid (fig. 5.7) , which have very critical roles in the defense of viral infection, are markedly low in vitamin c insufficiency group. however, levels of representative pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tnf-α and il-1α and il-1β in bal fluid, are transepithelial voltage (vte) and short-circuit current (isc) analysis. vitamin c deficiency causes inhibition of camp-dependent secretion of chloride in the mouse airway epithelium so that the epithelium does not maintain fluidity on their surface, resulting in facilitation of viral invasion and proliferation significantly high in vitamin c insufficiency group. inflammatory cells are also markedly increased in bal fluid ( fig. 5.8 ) (kim et al. 2013) .these all in vivo data provide the immunological evidences that daily supplementation of high-dose vitamin c can prevent influenza infection and that, in extreme case, it can save the life. (2). vitamin c deficiency increases production of several pro-inflammatory cytokines such as il-1α (a), il-1β (b), and tnf-α (c), especially during h3n2 influenza infection, and it also causes increase of the inflammatory cells in bal fluid (d). wt, normal mice group; gulo(−/−), mice group which cannot produce vitamin c like humans; gulo(−/−) + vc, gulo(−/−) mice group fed with daily vitamin c in the drinking waterthe recent outbreak of the coronavirus disease (covid-19) has caused over 752,000 confirmed cases and 36,000 deaths as of march 30, 2020 [1-4]. despite a proactive policy of identifying and treating patients with infected symptoms, it remains resource intensive to screen the general population that is at risk for infection [5,6]. moreover, inequality of health care systems among different areas brings challenges to cover remote areas, which are also at risk of the covid-19 infection. therefore, a new way of surveilling the general population could contribute to our understanding of covid-19 [7]. the wide use of the internet throughout china, and in the rest of the world, may be sufficient to provide such information. participatory disease surveillance has been increasingly investigated in recent years as a promising tool to complement traditional facility-based surveillance platforms [8]. it has the advantage of providing quick coverage of a large population during a disease outbreak. therefore, an online survey may be valuable in monitoring disease trends in communities and providing information for making policies.in this paper, we report the results of the first online questionnaire about covid-19, released on january 24 and with data collected up to february 17, 2020. our study aims to investigate how a history of contact and fever (both defined according to relevant medical guidelines) have evolved during the early phase of government lockdown policies and whether an online questionnaire can be used to identify certain risk factors related to fever among those reporting history of contact.the first version of the questionnaire was developed on january 24, 2020. by that time, little evidence was known about covid-19. our anonymous questionnaire was primarily developed from the following 3 sources: (1) the diagnosis and treatments of covid-19 (third version) guideline; (2) clinical courses of the first 17 death cases, both of which were released by the national health commission of china; and (3) the article that first analyzed the clinical features of 41 cases of covid-19 [9-11]. the guideline requires a suspected case to satisfy the following criteria: any history of contact including living in wuhan or having travelled to wuhan within 2 weeks of disease onset, being in contact with any person with a fever and respiratory symptoms from wuhan within 2 weeks of disease onset, or belonging to a cluster of infected cases; and clinical manifestations including a fever (defined as a body temperature ≥37.3 °c [99.1 °f]), imaging evidence of covid-19, normal white blood cell count, or leukopenia or lymphopenia. a confirmed case is further established by positive findings of real time polymerase chain reaction or viral gene sequencing. the descriptions of the guideline are in good consistency with the clinical features of the first 17 death cases and later 41 infected cases reported on january 24, 2020 [9,10]. therefore, our questionnaire evaluated the risk of covid-19 in the general population from the following aspects:we did not include laboratory examinations (eg, real time polymerase chain reaction, lymphopenia, white blood cell count) or thoracic imaging results (eg, multiple patchy consolidation and interstitial changes) in our questionnaire because, in general, these would unlikely be obtained by the general population.by february 17, 2020, we had developed and released three versions of the chinese questionnaires to the public. they were essentially similar, with the following three major revisions:after completing the questionnaire, the respondents would be classified into one of the following 4 risk groups and given different suggestions:the questionnaire was developed using a professional online questionnaire website wenjuanxing (questionnaire star) [12]. it is the most popular website for online surveys in china with over 4.2 billion questionnaires recycled and over 59 million users as of february 21, 2020. questionnaires were distributed online by wechat (the most popular instant messaging app in china) and sharing the link of the questionnaire. since our aim was to have an overview of situations in china during the covid-19 outbreak, we did not target any specific groups of respondents. distribution and filling out the questionnaires were voluntary, making our study a convenience sampling study.according to the world health organization guidelines on ethical issues in public health surveillance, a surveillance study in emergency outbreak situations is exempted from ethical review and oversight [13]. indeed, our online questionnaire was designed on january 23, 2020, when the lockdown of wuhan city was officially announced and released on january 24, so it could not await the formal approval of an ethical review committee. all users were informed at the beginning of the questionnaire that their questionnaire data would be used only for medical education and research purposes. if the informed consent was rejected by the users, they could still continue the questionnaire and obtain their results.the questionnaire was released on january 24, 2020, and recycled on february 17. all questionnaire results were downloaded from the website for our analysis. in addition to the items of the questionnaire, the downloaded data also included the date of submission for all respondents as well as the respondents’ location at the city level.we also collected population data of each province from china statistical abstract 2019 published by the national bureau of statistics of china [14]. the number of confirmed cases was followed up with on a daily basis since the release of the questionnaire using the netease news website, the largest chinese hub for real time collection of data and news related to covid-19 [15]. the statistics of confirmed cases per province used in this study were collected until midnight of february 11; at that time, clinically diagnosed cases without positive real time polymerase chain reaction results were also included in the official confirmed number of cases.count data were expressed as number (percentage). skewed continuous data (time to complete questionnaire) were expressed as median (iqr). geographical distributions were drawn using microsoft excel visual basic. a pearson correlation analysis was used to analyze the relationship between two variables of interest (mainly between date and percentage of respondents of interest per day). comparison of respondents’ basic characteristics between the inside and outside of wuhan was performed using a chi-square test or a fisher exact test if the sample size was <40. risk of fever in respondents with history of contact was evaluated using a risk ratio (rr) and 95% ci. all statistical analyses were performed using stata 14.0 (statacorp) and matlab r2018b (mathworks). statistical significance was defined as a two-tailed p value <.05.by february 17, 2020 at 2:33 am, a total of 19,449 individuals completed the questionnaires, 98.02% (n=19,064) from china. after removing 385 questionnaires from overseas countries, 575 lacking informed consent, 55 missing age, 31 missing temperature, 38 missing comorbidities, and 4 missing symptoms information, 18,161 anonymous questionnaires were analyzed. overall, it took median 52 (iqr 41-67) seconds to complete the questionnaire. most questionnaires were accessed by clicking on the link of the questionnaire (n=11,337, 62.42%) and by visiting the wechat mini-app (n=6800, 37.44%).figure 1a shows the geographical distributions of the questionnaire respondents in china. the questionnaire covered all 34 province-level administrative regions. for hubei province, 68.48% (n=1171/1710) of the respondents came from wuhan city, which was most affected by covid-19. a positive relation was found between the number of respondents and the population size per province (figure 1b), demonstrating good coverage of the questionnaire across china.table 1 summarizes the demographics and basic characteristics of respondents. the population in wuhan had similar ages and comorbidities compared with those outside of wuhan. age was negatively correlated with the number of respondents (r2=0.95, p<.001). as expected, history of contact was more frequent among the respondents living in wuhan. the percentage of fever was significantly lower among respondents inside versus outside wuhan. symptoms were reported in a rather high percentage of respondents. when restricting the symptoms to at least one main symptom and one secondary symptom, the number of respondents with symptoms dropped to 12.62% (n=2292/18,161).a history of contact was reported by more than one-eighth of respondents. however, the high percentage might have been confounded considering that all respondents living in wuhan city had a history of contact according to the definition of the official guideline, so we excluded these respondents from our analysis and divided the remaining respondents by every 8 days into 3 phases: phase 1 was from january 24 to 31, phase 2 was from february 1 to 8, and phase 3 was from february 9 to 16. despite heterogeneous responses of different provinces, the proportion of respondents reporting a history of contact had markedly decreased over these 3 phases in most provinces (figure 2a, b, and c). this observation was further confirmed by correlation analysis between the proportion of respondents reporting a history of contact and date in areas outside of wuhan city and hubei province (figure 2d). these findings indicate the efficacy of current policies adopted to reduce the history of contact among the general population since the lockdown in wuhan and other areas on january 23, 2020.body temperature was measured in 77.49% (n=14,073/18,161) of respondents, with a higher percentage in wuhan city (n=990/1171, 84.54%) and hubei province (n=1431/1710, 83.68%). overall, fever was reported in less than one-tenth of the respondents. unexpectedly, a lower percentage was found for wuhan city and hubei province. this might be due to covid-19 developing to a further stage in wuhan, and fever cases were identified early and sent to hospitals without access to the internet. we further analyzed how the percentage of respondents with fever evolved with time. the trend seemed to peak on around february 8, 2020 (figure 3).analyzing the relationship between fever and history of contact may help develop population-based strategies for prevention purposes. for the respondents living outside wuhan, we found a significant relation between any history of contact and fever (rr 1.31, 95% ci 1.13-1.52, p<.001). travelling to wuhan, having any close contact with a confirmed case, and having at least 2 confirmed cases at the workplace in the past 2 weeks conferred a significantly higher risk of fever (rr 1.47, 95% ci 1.23-1.77, p<.001; rr 1.98, 95% ci 1.67-2.24, p<.001; and rr 2.12, 95% ci 1.74–2.58, p<.001, respectively). moreover, there was a significant positive relation between the number of officially confirmed cases and the number of respondents reporting a fever (r2=0.41, p<.001) or the number of respondents reporting a fever and a history of contact (r2=0.35, p<.001) on a province basis. regarding risk stratification based on history of contact and fever, most respondents (n=14,264/18,161, 78.54%) were classified in the very low-risk group, followed by the moderate-risk group (n=1883, 10.37%) and the low-risk group (n=1428, 7.86%), whereas only 1.24% (n=225) were classified to the high-risk group.furthermore, comparison of fever rates among groups of various characteristics was likely to help identify risk factors (figure 4). males were at a higher risk of fever than females (p<.001). there was a positive trend between age and fever (p<.001). respondents reporting fatigue and headache or myalgia were more likely to report fever (p<.001). comorbidities showed various associations with fever, among which history of lung diseases seemed to confer a higher risk of fever than the others. however, the relationship needs to be further validated by studies with larger samples because of a relatively small number of respondents in each group.to the best of our knowledge, this is the first large-sample online surveillance of the covid-19 outbreak in the general population. our major findings include: the questionnaire had a good coverage of all provinces of china in a relatively short period of time (about 3 weeks); the history of contact among the population outside of wuhan and hubei province significantly decreased during the early phase of the government lockdown policy; fever reported by respondents significantly increased in the short-term of the disease outbreak and levelled off in 2-3 weeks; and, among those with history of contact, some factors (male, advanced age, and history of lung diseases) seemed to be associated with a higher risk of fever.an online questionnaire is likely to serve as a complementary way of disease surveillance in the general population, especially during the emergent outbreak of an infectious disease [5]. it takes the advantage of low costs and efficient delivery to all areas, even the most remote areas where internet access is better than health care resources [16,17]. our questionnaire was completed by 385 chinese respondents from 38 overseas countries, including developed (the united states, japan, canada, and the united kingdom), developing (brazil, russia, india, and south africa), and underdeveloped countries (laos, uganda, and cambodia). translation of the questionnaire to other languages may further increase the coverage across the world and improve surveillance of the covid-19 outbreak and comparable epidemics.compared with the conventional way of disease surveillance, the online questionnaire covers the population with generally less severe conditions but, nevertheless, is at risk of infection [7,18], taking into account that this population helps to establish the full spectrum of covid-19 epidemiology. it may also facilitate the early triage and diagnosis of high-risk groups when combined with other digital health measures such as online physician consultation, which has been widely adopted since the covid-19 outbreak in china. for the low-risk population, the questionnaire can also be adapted to reduce unnecessary anxiety and hospital visits, and thus, greatly relieve the workloads of health care facilities, especially when an emergent public health event occurs [19].the questionnaire approach is advantageous compared with other approaches of online disease surveillance using data from google trends, twitter, or facebook [20-22]. it provides richer information of the respondents, as most items can be designed according to medical guidelines and characteristics of target populations. therefore, it is a more active approach than other infosurveillance methods using social media. the information such as symptoms, history of contact, and comorbidities provided by an online questionnaire can be further combined with vital data such as body temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, oxygenation level, and activity level obtained from wearable devices to have a more comprehensive and reliable estimation of respondent’s risk of disease [23]. for the high-risk group identified using an online questionnaire, a case can be further confirmed by sending a home-testing kit and instructing the respondents to perform a rapid diagnostic test, as shown in the goviral study [24]. additionally, self-reported data from an online questionnaire can be linked with electronic medical records to build a long-term monitoring system [8].an online survey is likely to be used to observe the trends of disease prevalence in communities and, thus, support government policy evaluation. in our study, the date february 8, 2020, when the percentage of fever respondents peaked, was 16 days following the lockdown of wuhan city, which was close to the 14 days of the maximum incubation period of the coronavirus [25]. the delay of the fever peak might be associated with delayed quarantine policies in other cities in china. overall, our data supported the efficacy of current policies (quarantine, social distancing, and isolation of infected populations) for containing the spread of covid-19 from wuhan city to the other areas of china [6,26,27]. however, the period and efficacy of quarantine may differ by country [28]. it depends on not only government policies but also local culture and more importantly active support from the general population. for other countries, which may not have quarantine policies as strict as china, the time to fever peak is probably longer among the general population. moreover, integration of the survey data into a model for real time and long-term forecasting of disease trends is likely to provide richer information for making policies [29]. of note, our questionnaire is more applicable to those living in china than abroad. the definition of history of contact has mostly relied on contact with a confirmed case from wuhan. however, this can be further modified according to the earliest and generally most severely affected area of a country of interest, such as lombardy in italy.our survey also indicates that some factors such as male, an advanced age, and a history of lung disease are likely to relate to a higher risk of infection, and thus, these groups should be under close observation. indeed, these risk factors identified from our study are consistent with the clinical features of infected cases in previous publications [9,30-33]. by quickly disseminating an online questionnaire during the early phase of a disease outbreak, risk factors can be identified at a much earlier phase rather than when enough severe cases have been collected and analyzed using a conventional surveillance method. this further allows for earlier protection of vulnerable groups from potential infection and, thus, reduces the number of cases. internet-based surveillance approaches based on twitter have been demonstrated to detect ebola, avian influenza, and thunderstorm asthma at an early stage, even before the first official report [20-22].the approach undoubtedly has the bias of sampling primarily internet users and their relatives. as a consequence, the population included in our study is relatively young. a previous study demonstrated that both too young (age 0-10 years) and too old (age older than 81 years) populations are underrepresented in an internet-based monitoring survey [34]. a better coverage of the general population with high representativeness generally requires a more complicated study design together with robust supports from an official institution [8]. the questionnaire can also be distributed through other web platforms such as sina weibo (the most popular microblogging website in china) and news media (netease and xinhua), which have a wider reach of respondents in china. furthermore, this study does not include a follow-up for individual patients. this choice was made to respect the respondents’ privacy. however, in future studies it may be acceptable to allot an individual code to each individual, thereby allowing follow-ups; although, systematic follow-ups will remain a problem with internet questionnaires. follow-ups may be further compromised by the lack of internet access when the individual is hospitalized.unlike hospitals, which diagnose covid-19 using a comprehensive set of laboratory and imaging examinations, we did not include diagnostic tests such as real time polymerase chain reaction or lung computed tomography results in our questionnaire. therefore, evaluating the respondents’ risk of viral infection from the history of contact, body temperature, symptoms, and comorbidities may have the risk of underestimating some patients who are asymptomatic or presymptomatic, which are not uncommon [35,36].based on this study, we have updated our fourth version of the chinese questionnaire [37] and released the english questionnaire [38] (also see multimedia appendices 1 and 2 for word format files). both questionnaires follow the attribution 4.0 international license, meaning that they are free to be shared and adapted under the condition that this work has been properly cited. considering privacy purposes, the survey data of this study can be obtained from the corresponding author at request.this study shows that an online questionnaire may help monitor current prevalence, evaluate government policy, and identify high-risk populations during the covid-19 outbreak. the online questionnaire approach can also be adapted to monitor other types of infectious diseases depending on areas of interest.a cluster of 27 cases of pneumonia of unknown aetiology was reported by the chinese health authorities in wuhan, hubei province, china on 31st december 2019, and subsequently the china centre for disease control and prevention (cdc) reported a novel coronavirus as the causative agent of this outbreak on 9th january 2020 [1, 2] . the virus is phylogenetically in the sars-cov clade and is called 'severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2' (sars-cov-2). the disease associated with the virus is referred to as coronavirus disease 2019 . the pathobiology of covid-19 remainssince the initial identification of the virus in china, global spread has been rapid and subsequently, who announced the covid-19 outbreak a pandemic on the 12th march 2020 [7] .in view of this, the world faces a severe and acute public health emergency. while sars-cov-2 continues to spread, the number of deaths continue to increase globally. covid-19 is transmitted via droplets and fomites during close unprotected contact between an infector and infectee [8] . airborne spread has not been reported for covid-19 yet, however, it can be envisaged if certain aerosol-generating procedures are conducted in health care facilities, including mortuaries during autopsies [8] .to date, there are about 102 deaths of confirmed covid-19 cases in malaysia as of the end of april 2020 [9] . the first death was reported on 17 march 2020 in johor and was from a cluster of cases thought to be initiated by the gathering of a large group of people for religious purposes. as shown in the distribution of covid-19 deaths in malaysia (table 1) , deaths due to covid-19 occur in the older members of the population with co-morbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, stroke, chronic diseases and heart related problems. from the data, it is documented that covid-19 deaths are concentrated in cities like kuala lumpur, johor and selangor in peninsular malaysia as well as sarawak in east malaysia ( table 2) .although the number of deaths reported in the country is not increasing in a hyperbolic curve pattern, there is a dire and urgent need to be well prepared to manage the dead from this outbreak. this is important not only for the healthcare workers but also for the first responders in particular. this document aims to provide an overview on ways to augment the local collective capacity to manage the deceased when our normal capacity and capability in managing the dead could be overwhelmed, based on the prevailing regulations and legislation in the country. there is a need to improvise procedures and guidelines for management of the dead within the existing regulations in order to find a balance between medicolegal requirements and the safety of the personnel managing the bodies of the deceased with suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection; at the site of death, during transport, during postmortem procedures, storage and preparation of the body before and during burial or cremation as well as environmental cleaning and disinfection, involving various agencies in the country.the mode of transmission of the virus is thought to be largely by inhalation of respiratory droplets although acquisition via the skin surface is another possibility [3] . based on current evidence, the covid-19 virus is transmitted between people through droplets, fomites and close contact, with possible spread through faces [7] . estimation of mortality and healthcare demand based on data from china have given rise to the urgent need for the ministry of health malaysia to take prompt early public health measures and interventions. at the same time, responding to the increasing number of covid-19 cases in the beginning of february of this year, the national institute of forensic medicine (ipfn) malaysia has also taken the initiative to prepare for the management of the dead for all covid-19 suspected or confirmed cases.immediately after the outbreak in wuhan, china began to spread, many organizations and institutions around the world started to release guidance on considerations related to the safe handling of bodies of deceased persons with suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection. among these are guidelines by the european centre for disease prevention and control [2] , guidance on postmortem examinations for mortuary workers in suspected covid-19 cases by the royal college of pathologists (rcpath) [3] , technical recommendations for healthcare and deathcare workers by the international committee of the red cross (icrc) [5] , interim guidance on the infection prevention and control for the safe management of a dead body in the context of covid-19 by the world health organization [7] and many others. similarly, the national institute of forensic medicine (ipfn) malaysia has also produced a guideline on management of the dead for all covid-19 suspected or confirmed deaths within the hospital as well as from outside the hospital (brought-in-dead cases by police). this guideline consists of various sections including guidelines on body transport from emergency departments or wards to the mortuary, postmortem examination, handling of the body and religious/ritual body preparation and disposal.to strengthen the principles of management of the dead from this outbreak, sufficient training must be provided not only for the healthcare workers, but also to the first responders who are also at risk when managing the dead. in this preparation phase, the ipfn malaysia has taken the initiative to engage the royal malaysia police (rmp) to create awareness on the risk of covid-19 infection and safety precautions that must be adhered prevent infection to all rmp ground officers during the investigation of a body found at the scene. training sessions were also given to the rmp on proper hand hygiene and washing, donning and doffing of the standard full personal protective equipment (ppe) which consists of a surgical mask, double surgical gloves, face shield, impervious gown or apron with full sleeve coverage, shoe covers and surgical cap [10] . concurrently, personnel working in the mortuary are given refresher hands-on and practical training on the use of the powered air-purifying respirator (papr) as well as donning and doffing of the standard full ppe in all forensic medicine centers in the country. deployment of resources and personnel to fully utilize and maximize local capacity are put in plans at in malaysia, the leading agency in an inquiry into death is the rmp. section 329 of the criminal procedure code (cpc) specifies the police are bound by law to investigate all sudden death reports including homicide, suicide and accidental deaths [11] . the police then arrange for a postmortem examination to be conducted as stipulated in section 330 of the same code. similarly, under the same act, section 331 states that the mandate to conduct a postmortem examination of a body is given to a government medical officer, which includes a forensic pathologist [11] . the police, as first responders to a scene of incident, will invariably come in close contact with the dead. due to the fact that covid-19 virus carriers can be asymptomatic, the police or emergency responders are particularly vulnerable to infection. hence, the role of the public health officers under the provision of the prevention and control of infectious diseases act 1988 will be to assist the police at the scene for all suspected or confirmed covid-19 cases before transporting the deceased body to mortuary.as covid-19 cases increase by multiplies affecting populations in large areas in the country and in conjunction with disease spread being declared a pandemic by world health organization (who), malaysia enforced its prevention and control of infectious diseases act 1988. as part of the measures to curb the spread of the disease, the prime minister of malaysia announced the implementation of the movement the public health officer at the scene of incident, after being notified of a suspected or confirmed covid-19 body, supervises and guides the police officers at the scene on proper donning and doffing of the standard full ppe before attending to the deceased body. the body is wrapped in three layers. first the body is wrapped in a layer of white cotton linen, the body is then placed in a cadaver body bag. the body with its two layers is then put in another cadaver body bag (the third layer) and the outer surface is disinfected with 0.5% sodium hypochlorite. subsequent to the transportation of the body to the mortuary, area decontamination of the scene as well as the hearse is performed by the public health officer.postmortem examinations are performed in the bio-safety level 3 (bsl-3) autopsy suite in the ipfn, adhering strictly to the protocols and precautions on the use of recommended full ppe with papr as stated in the guidelines for handling infectious disease cases, including sample collection. after examination, the body is then wrapped in three layers (as described above) to prepare for disposal.preparation of the body and its release to the next-of-kin is conducted under the supervision of the public health officer. claimants or next-of-kin are prohibited from performing normal religious or ritual practices including opening the sealed coffin or touching the body. the only allowable religious or ritual practices are the funeral prayer for non-muslims and tayammum (dry purification) for muslims, performed on the outer body bag layer by the islamic authorities under the supervision of the health authorities. all probable or confirmed covid-19 positive bodies are not allowed to be embalmed and it is recommended they are taken for burial or cremation directly from the mortuary, preferably within the same day of the postmortem examination. the family of deceased individuals are able to accept the limitations due to the current pandemic.a severe pandemic is the incident most likely to create a need for an excessive death number contingency planning. during a pandemic, there is potential for a significant increase in the number of deaths in a relatively short period of time, placing pressure on local service providers with responsibilities relating to managing the deceased [14] . for this reason, a contingency plan for surge capacity to manage excess deaths in a pandemic needs to be put in place. when the situation has transitioned into the mitigation phase, whereby the containment of the virus in the community has failed and the increase of the death rate has gone beyond the local forensic capacity, the directive 20 is activated under the command of the national disaster management agency (nadma). directive 20 is a government issued directive that includes policy and mechanisms to provide direction in relation to national natural disaster and relief management, including the outbreak of disease [15] . the main purpose of the directive is to put in place a comprehensive emergency management program which seeks to mitigate the effect of various hazards, to prepare measures which will preserve life and minimize damage to the environment, or respond during emergencies and provide assistance, and to establish a recovery system to ensure the affected community to return to normalcy [15] .when there are large scale deaths the emergency management capability will comprise the first responders as stipulated in the directive 20, namely the royal malaysia police (rmp), malaysia civil defence forces (apm) and the malaysia armed forces (atm). the nadma oversees the whole operation, and the coordination of the above mentioned first responders' agencies as well as the distribution of any financial assistance, equipment, transport, or ppe requirements. they also manage any temporary field mortuaries, cold body storage, manpower, religious burials or cremations. the implementation of the protocols and the measures to address these issues were a smooth transition administered by nadma and ipfn malaysia under the purview of the directive 20. ipfn malaysia has provided input to assist with the management of the dead for the national emergency. all first responders are given training on safety precautions and the risk of covid-19 infection while managing mass deaths at the scene. at this time, when mortuaries are overloaded with infectious remains threatening the health of the entire community, examinations will cease for all covid-19 related deaths. however, there is still a requirement to perform postmortem examinations within the context of legal considerations for homicides and suspicious deaths during a disease pandemic. the management of the dead from covid-19 should not impede the medicolegal investigation of the death where required by the authorities and legislation but additional health and safety precautions should be adopted for the necessary postmortem procedures.this type of facility, identified by nadma and situated at various locations, functions as temporary mortuary centre for all covid-19 deaths in the country. it is a holding area for all the dead whereby its security is maintained by the rmp, apm or atm and is equipped with cold body storage containers in which bodies are properly tagged, documented and stored. the centre should be big enough to accommodate thousands of bodies as well as be able to function as the administration centre, rest area and accommodation for first responders' personnel working around the clock.for unknown bodies, buccal swabs will be taken for dna profiling to keep as a record for future identification. the body will then be subjected to religious body preparation and last rites. all procedures are done by trained personnel in full ppe.temporary controlled burial is a method for a long-term temporary storage of unidentified bodies. the temperature underground is lower than at the surface, therefore providing natural refrigeration [16] . it is done by performing a burial procedure for all human remains, where each body will clearly be marked with gps, to facilitate future exhumation in the event of the identification of the next-of-kin [16, 17] . temporary controlled burial was used as a practical solution to deal with a large number of unidentified decedents, presumed victims of a human trafficking ring along the malaysia-thai border, in 2015, when authorities exhumed one hundred and sixty three unidentified bodies from clandestine graves [17] . temporary controlled burial provides a fundamental solution for unidentified victims to be treated with dignity and respect as well as an opportunity to be identified in future.there remain large uncertainties in the underlying determinants of the severity of covid-19 infection and how these translate across settings. however, clear risk factors include age, with older people more likely to require hospitalization and to subsequently die as a result of infection, and underlying co-morbidities including hypertension, diabetes and coronary heart disease serving to exacerbate symptoms [4] . variation in these factors between countries, namely the economic status, age-specific contact patterns and social mixing will have material consequences for transmission of sars-cov-2. due to the different legal requirements and mortality rate between countries, there is no one-size-fits-all approach on the management of the dead. the essential ways to react to such situations are rapid decision making by the relevant higher authorities and flexibility of the purview of the existing regulations in terms of managing the dead in a resilient direction.as the number of active positive covid-19 cases in malaysia has continued to rise since march 2020, the national institute of forensic medicine (ipfn) malaysia has had to prepare for the worst case scenario of a sudden multiplication in the number of deaths due to covid-19, which may overwhelm the capacity of the forensic service. in preparation for possible large scale deaths from this pandemic, ipfn malaysia has improvised procedures and guidelines for management of the dead within the existing regulations in order to achieve a balance between medicolegal requirements and the safety of personnel managing the bodies of the deceased with suspected or confirmed covid-19 infection.it is impossible for ipfn malaysia to work and plan in isolation and thus local collective contributions from various government agencies has been assembled to maximize the capacity to manage the dead based on the prevailing regulations and legislation in the country. in the initial phase, a guideline on management of the dead for all covid-19 suspected or confirmed deaths within the hospitals as well as from outside the hospitals (brought-in-dead cases by police) is produced and sufficient training is delivered not only for the healthcare workers, but also to the first responders who are also at risk when managing the dead due to covid-19. when mortuaries are overloaded with infectious remains, adopting the concept of a quarantine centre to locate covid-19 patients if their numbers become overwhelming, there is a need to relocate the remains of all decedents who were infected with covid-19 to a temporary mortuary centre, known as the covid-19 centralized body facility.this paper aims to share malaysia's strategies for management of the dead in different phases of the covid-19 pandemic, whereby every opportunity and assistance must be given to suffering families and communities to mourn their loved ones. these steps include allowing next-of-kin the chance for a modified but safe religious or ritual last rites and a dignified temporary controlled burial for unidentified victims. in times of crisis and emergency, the dead can still be managed with the appropriate level of dignity and respect. as part of the core of the humanitarian forensic approach, everyone in the society must be treated without discrimination in relation to the measures put in place to address this covid-19 pandemic, including the proper management of the dead, particularly the unidentified deceased, who should also be treated with dignity and respect.forensic disciplines contributes equally in the combat of covid-19, integrating law and medicine and working closely with police, funeral directors and other related authorities in managing the dead. issues with storage and decomposition, shortages of staff and appropriately equipped mortuaries and other crippled resources, can cause bodies to accumulate if they are not managed in a timely manner. improvised procedures and guidelines for the management of large numbers of decedents have to be put in place to handle the increased volume of bodies. there is a need to integrate sufficient legal complexities into the social context as well as the consideration of the safety of personnel managing the dead during this unprecedented time. it is imperative to plan and take every necessary step during this pandemic for the management of the dead in the country as a basic human right.1. in times of crisis and emergency, the dead can still be managed with the appropriate level of dignity and respect. 2. management of the dead is flexible where improvised procedures within the structure of the existing regulations can be modified to handle the increased volume of bodies during pandemic.there is no one-size-fits-all approach to the management of the dead. 4. a covid-19 centralized body facility is a temporary mortuary centre for all covid-19 deaths within a country. 5. temporary controlled burial has been adopted as an option that allows the future identification of victims of the pandemic.coronaviruses are mainly associated with respiratory and gastrointestinal disease in humans (drosten et al., 2003; holmes, 2001; ksiazek et al., 2003; peiris et al., 2003; van der hoek et al., 2004; woo et al., 2005) and respiratory, enteric, neurological, or hepatic disease in animals (holmes, 2001) . coronaviruses have also been isolated from bats, poultry and other birds (cavanagh, 2005; chu et al., 2006; poon et al., 2005; ren et al., 2006) . on the basis of antigenic and genetic analyses, coronaviruses are divided into three groups (gonzalez et al., 2003; gorbalenya et al., 2004; snijder et al., 2003) . group 1 viruses include human coronaviruses 229e (hcov-229e) and nl63 (hcov-nl63), canine coronavirus (ccov), feline coronavirus (fcov), porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus (tgev), porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (pedv), and bat coronavirus. group 2 viruses are subdivided into group 2a which includes murine hepatitis virus (mhv), human coronaviruses oc43 (hcov-oc43) and hku1 (hcov-hku1), bovine coronavirus (bcov), porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus (phev), and rat coronavirus (rcov), and group 2b which includes sars-coronavirus (sars-cov). group 3 viruses include avian viruses, such as avian infectious bronchitis virus (ibv), and turkey coronavirus (tcov).members of the family coronaviridae are enveloped, positive-stranded rna viruses with exceptionally large, polycistronic genomes (27-32 kb). the 5′-proximal two-thirds of the genome comprises two open reading frames (orfs), orf1a and orf1b, which encode the replicase polyproteins (pp) 1a and pp1ab (ziebuhr, 2005) . expression of the pp1ab requires a − 1 ribosomal frameshift during translation of the genomic rna (brierley et al., 1987) . the two replicase polyproteins are processed extensively by two or three viral proteases encoded by orf1a to generate up to 16 end-products termed nonstructural proteins (nsp) 1 to 16 and multiple processing intermediates (ziebuhr, 2005; ziebuhr et al., 2000) . the n-proximal region of the polyproteins is processed by one or two papain-like proteases (pl pro ), whereas the central and c-proximal region is processed available online at www.sciencedirect.com virology 369 (2007) 92 -104 www.elsevier.com/locate/yviro by the viral main protease, 3c-like protease (3cl pro ) (ziebuhr, 2005; ziebuhr et al., 2000) . the 3′-proximal one-third of the genome encodes structural proteins and various accessory proteins. genes encoding the four structural proteins present in all coronaviruses occur in the 5′ to 3′ order as spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleocapsid (n) proteins (brian and baric, 2005; lai et al., 2006) . some coronaviruses contain an additional structural protein, the hemagglutinin-esterase (he) protein which is located upstream of the s protein gene (lai et al., 2006) . in contrast to the replicase proteins which are directly translated from the genomic rna, coronavirus structural and accessory proteins are expressed from a nested set of 3′ coterminal subgenomic (sg) mrnas that also possess a common 5′ leader sequence derived from the 5′ end of the genome (pasternak et al., 2006; sawicki et al., 2007) . the common 5′ leader is fused to the 3′ body segments through a mechanism that is presumed to involve discontinuous minus strand rna synthesis to produce subgenome-length templates for subgenomic mrna synthesis, with the transcription regulatory sequence (trs) elements determining the fusion sites of leader and body segments (see recent review of pasternak et al., 2006; sawicki et al., 2007 for details) . equine coronavirus (ecov) was first isolated from feces of a diarrheic foal in 1999 (ecov-nc99) in north carolina, usa (guy et al., 2000) . little is known about ecov and its clinical significance. molecular characterization of ecov and development of diagnostic and prophylactic reagents necessitate sequencing of ecov. in this study, we determined the fulllength nucleotide sequence of the ecov-nc99 strain of equine coronavirus. the viral genome and proteome were analyzed and the predicted features of ecov nonstructural, structural, and accessory proteins were compared to those of other coronaviruses. synthesis of sg mrnas in ecov-infected cells was analyzed by northern blotting. the leader-body junction sequence in each sg mrna was determined and the exact position of trs used for synthesis of each sg mrna was mapped on the genome. the evolutionary relationship between ecov and other phylogenetically closely related group 2a coronaviruses was explored.we report here the full-length genomic sequence of the first ecov isolate, the nc99 strain, and this is also the first reported complete genome sequence of ecov. the nucleotide sequence was determined by directly sequencing 11 overlapping cdna fragments which were rt-pcr amplified from viral rna. the ecov-nc99 genome comprises 30,992 nucleotides (nt), excluding the 3′ poly (a) tail, and has a gc content of 37.2%. the nucleotide sequence data have been deposited in genbank under accession number ef446615.both 5′ and 3′ ends of the ecov genome contain short untranslated regions (utr). the 5′ utr comprises 209 nt (1-209) and includes a potential short internal orf of 8 codons (nt 99-125). four stem-loop structures (i, ii, iii, and iv) were identified in the 5′ utr and a short stretch of nucleotides that are part of the orf1a (see supplementary fig. s1 ). the bulged stem-loop iii (96-115) and iv (189-208) closely resemble the stem-loop iii and iv that have been identified as replication signaling elements in bovine coronavirus and other group 2 coronaviruses (raman and brian, 2005; raman et al., 2003; wu et al., 2003) . the 3′ utr of the ecov genome comprises 289 nt (30, 992) and contains a putative bulged stem-loop structure (nt 30,703-30,770 ) and a putative pseudoknot structure (30,766-30,819) (see supplementary fig. s2 ). similar putative bulged stem-loop structure and pseudoknot structure have been identified in murine hepatitis virus and other group 2 coronaviruses; these have been shown to be essential for viral replication (goebel et al., 2004a,b; hsue and masters, 1997; hsue et al., 2000; williams et al., 1999) .analysis of the ecov-nc99 genome reveals 11 potential orfs (1a, 1b, 2-8, 9a and 9b) as shown in fig. 1 and table 1 . the orfs 1a and 1b encode the replicase polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab. the orfs 2-8, 9a and 9b encode structural and accessory proteins ns2, he, s, p4.7, p12.7, e, m, n, and i, respectively.the replicase orf1a (nt 210-13,499) and replicase orf1b (13,478-21,595) occupy 21.4 kb (69%) of the ecov-nc99 genome. the translation of orf1a generates a precursor pp1a of 4,429 amino acids. similar to other coronaviruses, translation of orf1b involves a − 1 ribosomal frameshift, generating a 7128amino acid pp1ab. the ribosomal frameshift is assumed to be directed by two signals in the orf1a/1b overlapping region: a slippery sequence 5′uuuaaac3′ (nt 13,472-13,478) and a predicted downstream rna pseudoknot structure (nt 13,484-13,559) (see supplementary fig. s3 ). the pp1a and pp1ab proteins are predicted to be proteolytically processed by viralencoded proteases into 16 non-structural proteins (nsp1-16, table 2 ) required for viral replication and transcription. by comparison to other coronaviruses, a number of putative functional domains are predicted in the ecov pp1a and pp1ab and these are summarized in fig. 1 and table 2 (gorbalenya et al., 1991 snijder et al., 2003; ziebuhr, 2005; ziebuhr et al., 2001) . enzymatic activities of nsp3, nsp5, nsp12, nsp13, nsp14 and nsp15 have been experimentally confirmed for some coronaviruses (barretto et al., 2005; cheng et al., 2005; guarino et al., 2005; heusipp et al., 1997; ivanov et al., 2004a,b; ivanov and ziebuhr, 2004; lindner et al., 2005; minskaia et al., 2006; putics et al., 2005 putics et al., , 2006 seybert et al., 2000 seybert et al., , 2005 tanner et al., 2003; ziebuhr, 2005; ziebuhr et al., 2001) . the 3cl pro (catalytic residues his-3333 and cys-3437) is predicted to cleave the c-terminal half of the ecov pp1a and the orf1b-encoded part of pp1ab. the putative pl1 pro (catalytic residues cys-1078 and his-1229) and pl2 pro (catalytic residues cys-1675 and his-1832) are predicted to process the n-proximal regions of the ecov pp1a ( fig. 1 and table 2 ).the most striking differences between the ecov replicase and other group 2 coronaviruses replicases were identified in nsp3. the ecov nsp3 protein has 3 aa deletions and 55 aa insertions compared to the nsp3 proteins of bcov, hcov-oc43, and phev, three viruses phylogenetically most closely related to ecov. these insertions and deletions are clustered at two regions: the ac domain and the region between the pl2 pro and the y domain. the functional significance of these insertions and deletions is unknown as yet; however, the functions of pl1 pro , pl2 pro , and adrp are not anticipated to be affected since insertions and deletions are not located in the functional domains of these enzymes (fig. 1) .orf2 (nt 21,610-22,446) of ecov-nc99 encodes the predicted ns2 protein with 278 amino acids. the ns2 of fig. 1 . schematic diagrams of ecov genome organization. the ecov entire genome organization is depicted (middle). the 5′ leader, orfs 1a and 1b encoding replicase polyproteins are shown, with the ribosomal frameshift site indicated. structural and accessory proteins are also indicated: ns2 protein (encoded by orf2), hemagglutinin esterase (he, orf3), spike protein (s, orf4), p4.7 protein (orf5), p12.7 protein (orf6), envelope protein (e, orf7), membrane protein (m, orf8), nucleocapsid protein (n, orf9a), and i protein (orf9b). predicted cleavage products (nsp1-nsp16) of the replicase polyproteins are depicted (bottom). arrows represent sites in the corresponding replicase polyproteins that are cleaved by papain-like proteases (white arrows) or the 3c-like cysteine protease (black arrows). a number of putative functional domains predicted in the ecov pp1a and pp1ab are indicated. pl1, papain-like proteinase 1 (aa 1059-1275); pl2, papain-like proteinase 2 (aa 1570-1867); x, x-domain which contains adenosine diphosphate-ribose 1ʺ-phosphatase (adrp) (aa 1276-1435); tm, transmembrane domain; 3cl, 3c-like proteinase; rdrp, rna-dependent rna polymerase; z, zinc-binding domain; hel, helicase domain; exon, exonuclease; n, nidoviral uridylatespecific endoribonuclease (nendou); mt, 2′-o-ribose methyltransferase (2′-o-mt). domains ac (aa 846-1058) and y (aa 2310-2796) are described by ziebuhr et al. (2001) . the spike protein (1363 amino acids) of ecov is represented by a black line (top). the n-terminal signal peptide (amino acid residues 1-14 or 17), the heptad repeat 1 (hr1, amino acid residues 991-1902), the heptad repeat 2 (hr2, amino acid residues 1259-1304), the transmembrane domain (amino acid residues 1308-1330), and the cytoplasmic domain (amino acid residues 1331-1363) are depicted. a potential cleavage recognition sequence (rrqrr) at residues 764-768 and the predicted cleavage site between residues 768 and 769 are indicated. the generated cleavage products s1 and s2 subunits are depicted. the positions of the receptor-binding domain on the s1 subunit and the fusion peptide on the s2 subunit are currently unknown. ecov has 67%, 67%, and 45% amino acid identity with the respective ns2 proteins of bcov, hcov-oc43, and phev. the lower amino acid identity with phev may be attributable to the fact that phev has a truncated ns2 protein (vijgen et al., 2006) . sequence analysis revealed that the ecov ns2 protein contains a domain (aa 46-135) with similarity to the putative cyclic phosphodiesterase (cpd, martzen et al., 1999) . the cpd domain has also been identified in the ns2 proteins of other group 2a coronaviruses as well as in the 3′end of the pp1a protein of toroviruses snijder et al., 1991 snijder et al., , 2003 . the ns2 of ecov was predicted to contain 9 potential phosphorylation sites. the ns2 of ecov does not contain a signal peptide and is a non-secretory protein. the function of the ns2 protein in coronaviruses has not been studied in detail. it is known that the ns2 gene is non-essential for mhv replication in transformed cells (schwarz et al., 1990) . however, a recent study showed that a point mutation in the ns2 of mhv led to its attenuation in mice in spite of its wild-type replication in tissue culture (sperry et al., 2005) .orf3 (nt 22,458-23,729) of ecov-nc99 encodes the predicted he protein containing 423 amino acids. nine potential n-glycosylation sites were predicted. signalp analysis revealed a signal peptide probability of 0.802 with a potential cleavage site between residues 17 and 18. it was predicted that the n-terminal 390 amino acids are located outside the cell surface or viral envelope with a transmembrane helix at amino acids 391-413 and an internal domain at amino acids 414-423. the putative active site for esterase activity, fgds (kienzle et al., 1990) , is present at amino acids 36-39 of the he protein in ecov.orf4 (nt 23,744-27,835) of ecov-nc99 encodes the predicted spike (s) protein containing 1363 amino acids. eighteen potential n-glycosylation sites were predicted. an n-terminal signal peptide was identified with a potential cleavage site between amino acids 14 and 15 predicted by signalp-nn or between amino acids 17 and 18 predicted by signalp-hmm. the ecov s protein was predicted to be a typical type i membrane protein with the n-terminal 1307 residues exposed on the outside of the cell surface or virus particle, a transmembrane domain near the c terminus (residues 1308-1330), followed by a cytoplasmic tail (residues 1331-1363). following multiple alignments with the s proteins of other group 2a coronaviruses, a potential cleavage recognition sequence (rrqrr) was identified at residues 764-768 which would predict a cleavage between amino acids 768 and 769, separating the ecov s protein into s1 and s2 subunits (fig. 1) . the ecov s1 subunit is expected to contain a receptor-binding domain whose position has not yet been determined. the s2 subunit is predicted to mediate membrane fusion. two heptad repeat (hr) regions, which are conserved in position and sequence among the three groups of coronaviruses and play important roles in membrane fusion (see reviews of eckert and kim, 2001; hernandez et al., 1996) , were identified in the ecov s2 subunit (hr1: aa 991-1092; hr2: aa 1259-1304) (fig. 1) . the ecov s2 subunit is anticipated to possess a fusion peptide whose position is yet unknown. some coronavirus s proteins have been shown to contain important neutralization epitopes (godet et al., 1994; kubo et al., 1994; yoo et al., 1991) and mutations in the s protein have been associated with altered viral antigenicity and pathogenicity (ballesteros et al., 1997; bernard domains ac and y are described by ziebuhr et al. (2001) . a nucleotide position means the location of the nucleotides encoding corresponding proteins in the entire genome of equine coronavirus-nc99 strain. b pl1 pro , papain-like proteinase 1; pl2 pro , papain-like proteinase 2; adrp, adenosine diphosphate-ribose 1ʺ-phosphatase (formerly known as 'x-domain'); 3cl pro , 3c-like proteinase; tm, transmembrane domain; gfl, growth factor-like domain; rdrp, rna-dependent rna polymerase; zbd, zinc-binding domain; hel, helicase domain; nendou, nidoviral uridylate-specific endoribonuclease; 2′-o-mt, 2′-o-ribose methyltransferase. and laude, 1995; dalziel et al., 1986; gallagher and buchmeier, 2001; leparc-goffart et al., 1997) . whether the s protein of ecov has such properties remains to be determined.orf5 (nt 27,825-27,947) of ecov-nc99 is predicted to encode a hypothetical protein of 40 amino acids with an estimated molecular weight of 4.7 kda (termed p4.7 protein). it was predicted to be a non-secretory protein and did not contain any transmembrane helix. this protein is not closely matched to any known protein based on a search using blastp, psi-blast, or fasta programs.orf6 (nt 28,076-28,405) of ecov-nc99 is predicted to encode a protein of 109 amino acids corresponding to the bcov 12.7 kda non-structural protein (p12.7). this orf overlaps by 15 nucleotides with the orf7 that encodes the e protein. no signal peptide or any transmembrane helix was present. no n-glycosylation site was found.orf7 (nt 28,392-28,646) of ecov-nc99 encodes the predicted e protein containing 84 amino acids. no n-glycosylation site was identified. it was predicted to contain a signal anchor (probability 0.999). one transmembrane domain was predicted at residues 18-36 by tmpred analysis or at residues 15-37 by tmhmm analysis. both programs predicted the n-terminus of the protein to be external to the cell surface or viral envelope. in the case of other coronaviruses, there is increasing evidence that the e protein together with the m protein is instrumental in viral assembly and budding; the cytoplasmic tails of both proteins have an important interactive role in this process (corse and machamer, 2000 , 2003 vennema et al., 1996) .orf8 (nt 28,661-29,353) of ecov-nc99 encodes the predicted m protein containing 230 amino acids. it was predicted to contain a signal anchor (probability 0.947). three transmembrane domains were predicted to be present at positions 25-46, 57-78, and 81-102 by tmpred analysis or at positions 25-44, 49-71, and 81-103 by tmhmm analysis. the n-terminal 24 amino acid residues were predicted to be outside and the c-terminal 127 or 128-amino acid hydrophilic domain was predicted to be inside the virus. one potential nglycosylation site was predicted at position 26 (nfs). the presence of potential o-glycosylation sites was predicted at the extreme n-terminus of the m protein (msstptpapgyt). whether these sites are glycosylated or not needs to be experimentally verified. previous studies have shown that the m protein of group 1 and 3 coronaviruses (e.g. tgev and ibv) are n-glycosylated, whereas the m protein of group 2 coronavirus mhv is only o-glycosylated (de haan et al., 2002; lai et al., 2006) . the m protein is the most abundant envelope component and plays a key role in coronavirus assembly by interacting with the e, s, n and he proteins (bosch et al., 2005; de haan and rottier, 2005 , and references therein). orf9a (nt 29,363-30,703) of ecov-nc99 encodes the predicted n protein containing 446 amino acids. it was predicted to contain 36 potential phosphorylation sites. no signal peptide or any transmembrane helix was present. the n protein of coronaviruses has been shown to be multifunctional, e.g. interaction with the viral rna genome to form a viral nucleocapsid, interaction with the m protein, and the ability for selfassociation (masters, 1992; narayanan et al., 2000 narayanan et al., , 2003 . recently it has also been reported that the n protein may play a role in coronavirus replication (almazan et al., 2004; schelle et al., 2005) .orf9b (nt 29,424-30,044) of ecov-nc99 encodes a hypothetical protein (i) containing 206 amino acids within orf9a which encodes the n protein. it was predicted to contain 10 potential phosphorylation sites. no signal peptide or any transmembrane helix was present. in the case of mhv, expression of the protein i has been detected in virus-infected cells but this protein is nonessential for viral replication and viral production (fischer et al., 1997) .it is generally accepted that the replicase proteins are directly synthesized from the coronavirus genome, whereas the structural and accessory proteins are expressed from a nested set of subgenomic mrnas. however, the number of sg mrnas and the characteristics and expression pattern of the proteins they encode (e.g. a sg mrna may sometimes express multiple proteins) varies for each virus. in order to investigate ecov sg mrna synthesis, northern blot analysis was performed to evaluate the synthesis of genomic and subgenomic rnas in ecov-infected cells. a digoxigenin-labeled rna probe complementary to the 3′ end (nt 30,660-30,946) of the ecov genome was used for a northern blot hybridization analysis. as shown in fig. 2 , nine mrnas were detected in ecov-infected hrt-18g cells at 72 h p.i. absence of such mrnas in mock-infected cells confirms that these mrnas are ecov-specific. according to the estimated sizes of the mrnas, it is reasonable to assume that sg mrnas 2-8 express the ns2, he, s, p4.7, p12.7, e, and m proteins, respectively and that mrna 9 expresses the n protein and probably the i protein as well.there is a general agreement that the trs elements determine the fusion sites of the 5′ leader and the 3′ body segments in coronavirus sg mrnas. in order to determine the precise location of the leader and body trss used for ecov sg mrna synthesis, the leader-body junction and flanking sequences of each ecov sg mrna were determined using sg mrna-specific rt-pcrs (see table 3 and materials and methods for details). the sg mrna sequences were aligned to the leader and corresponding 'body' genomes as shown in fig.  3 . analysis of the leader-body junction sequences revealed that the core sequence of the trs motifs is 5′ucuaaac3′. the leader trs (5′ucuaaac3′) and the body trs (5′ ucuaaac3′) used for synthesizing he mrna, s mrna, and n mrna exactly match each other. there is one mismatch between the leader trs and the body trs (5′ucuaaaa3′) used for generating the mrna of the ns2 protein. there is also one mismatch between the leader trs and the body trs (5′uccaaac3′) used for generating e mrna and m mrna. there are two mismatches between the leader trs and the body trs (5′uuaaaac3′) used for generating the mrna of the p4.7 protein. interestingly, in the case of the mrna of the p12.7 protein, the leader and the body segment is joined at the unusual consensus variant 5′uaaa-cuuuauaa3′. previously it has been shown that the mrna of the p12.7 protein of bcov also utilizes an unusual consensus variant for joining the leader and body segment . from the sequence data, we conclude that the ecov common leader on sg mrnas is the first 64 nucleotides of the ecov genome.phylogenetic analyses of ecovand other coronaviruses were performed based on the amino acid sequences of replicase polyprotein pp1a, the orf1b-encoded part of the pp1ab, s, e, m, and n. phylogenetic analysis clustered coronaviruses into three major groups (g1, g2a, and g3) irrespective of the gene used for analysis (fig. 4) . the sars-cov forms a separate branch and is classified as subgroup 2b (g2b) as suggested previously (gorbalenya et al., 2004; snijder et al., 2003) . phylogenetic analysis clearly demonstrated that ecov falls into the cluster of group 2a coronaviruses and is most closely related to bcov, hcov-oc43, and phev.to further explore the possible evolutionary relationships among ecov, bcov, hcov-oc43, and phev, the genetic distances of ecov, bcov, and phev to hcov-oc43 were determined over the entire genome using the simplot analysis (lole et al., 1999) . as shown in fig. 5 , the bcov strains and hcov-oc43 had lowest genetic distances over the complete genome; the genetic distance between phev and hcov-oc43 was similar to the distance between bcov and hcov-oc43 in most regions of the genome with exception of the spike gene where the genetic distance of phev to hcov-oc43 was significantly greater than the distance of bcov to hcov-oc43; the genetic distance of ecov to hcov-oc43 was significantly greater than the distance of either bcov or phev to hcov-oc43 in the regions of the first half of orf1a, the central part of orf1b, ns2 and he genes; the genetic distance with respect to the spike gene between ecov and hcov-oc43 was similar to the distance between phev and hcov-oc43 but greatly higher than the distance between bcov and hcov-oc43. the genetic distances of bcov and phev to hcov-oc43 observed in this study are consistent with previously reported findings (vijgen et al., 2005 (vijgen et al., , 2006 . vijgen et al. (2006 vijgen et al. ( , 2005 concluded that phev diverged from the common ancestor before bcov and hcov-oc43. our analysis suggested that ecov had diverged earlier than phev from a common ancestor. in summary, ecov had emerged earlier than phev, bcov, and hcov-oc43, notwithstanding the fact that ecov was not isolated until 1999 from a diarrheic foal in usa.in this study, we have determined the first complete genome sequence of ecovand provided the first comprehensive analysis of the ecov genome. completion of the genome sequence of ecov will contribute to our understanding of this virus at the molecular level and also enrich the database of coronaviruses. the sequence data are expected to aid in the development of diagnostic and prophylactic reagents. the sequence data of ecov-nc99 will also help identify and characterize other ecov isolates and enhance our understanding of the molecular epidemiology of coronavirus. neonatal enterocolitis is an economically significant disease for horse breeders. further studies are needed to determine the prevalence of ecov infection in equine populations and the relative role of ecov as a cause of enteric disease in horses.the human rectal tumor cell line hrt-18g (american type culture collection [atcc, crl-11663] ) was grown in dulbecco's modified eagle's medium (dmem) supplemented with 4 mm l-glutamine, 5% fetal bovine serum, and penicillin/streptomycin at 37°c in the presence of 5% co 2 . the equine coronavirus-nc99 (guy et al., 2000) was propagated once in hrt-18g cells to produce the working virus stocks.the complete genome of ecov was determined by sequencing 11 overlapping rt-pcr products encompassing the entire genome (nt 1-3615; nt 3446-5458; nt 4953-6600; nt 5497-9678; nt 9347-13,021; nt 12,451-15,736; nt 15,425-19,307; nt 19,039-22,812; nt 22,566-26,390; nt 26,065-29,662; and nt 29,363-30,992) . viral rna was isolated from ecov stocks using the qiaamp viral rna mini kit (qiagen). viral rna was first reverse transcribed with accuscript reverse transcriptase (stratagene) following the manufacturer's instructions. then, pcr amplification was performed with proof-reading pfuultra highfidelity dna polymerase (stratagene) in a volume of 50 μl: 5 μl pfuultra pcr buffer (10×), 1.0 μl dntp mix (10 mm each), 1 μl of each primer (20 μm), 2 μl cdna template, 1 μl pfuultra dna polymerase, and 39.0 μl nuclease-free water. the reaction mixtures were incubated at 95°c for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles of amplification at 95°c for 45 s, 50-53°c for 45 s, and 72°c for 4.5 min, with a final incubation at 72°c for 10 min. the pcr products were gel-purified using qiaquick gel extraction kit (qiagen). both sense and anti-sense strands were sequenced using the applied biosystems big dye terminator v3.0 sequencing chemistry on abi 3730 dna sequencers (davis sequencing center). partial genomic sequence (9487 nucleotides) of ecov had fig. 5 . genetic distance between ecov, bcov, phev and hcov-oc43. the average genetic distances were calculated over the entire genome using the simplot program with a sliding window size of 400 bp and a step size of 200 bp. each curve represents a comparison of the sequence data of ecov-nc99, the bcov strains, and phev-vw572 to the reference sequence data of the hcov-oc43 atcc strain vr759 (nc_005147). the sequence data of the bcov strains used for comparison are the 50% consensus sequence of six bcov strains: bcov-ent (nc_003045), bcov-alpaca (dq915164), bcov-db2 (dq811784), bcov-mebus (u00735), bcov-quebec (af220295), and bcov-lun (af391542). the linear representation of the ecov-nc99 genome was shown at the top of the diagram. been previously determined by two groups (guy et al., 2000, genbank accession number af251144; wu et al., 2003, af523846 and af523850. h.y. wu, j.s. guy, and d.a. brian, unpublished data, ay316300) . these regions were re-sequenced in this study. to determine the remaining genomic sequence of ecov-nc99, initial rt-pcr and sequencing primers were designed based on multiple alignments of the genomes of bcov (genbank accession number nc_003045), hcov-oc43 (nc_005147), phev (dq011855), and mhv (nc_001846); additional primers were designed based on the results of the first and subsequent rounds of sequencing. all of the primer sequences are attached in the supplementary table s1 .the nucleotide sequences were assembled and manually edited using codoncode aligner version 1.5.2 to produce the complete sequence of the viral genome. orf analysis was performed using vector nti advance 10 (invitrogen). rna secondary structures of 5′ and 3′ utrs and the ribosomal frameshift signals were predicted using the mfold program with the default parameter settings (mathews et al., 1999; zuker, 2003) . potential 3c-like protease cleavage sites were predicted using the netcorona 1.0 server (kiemer et al., 2004) . prediction of signal peptides and their cleavage sites was conducted using signalp 3.0 server (nielsen et al., 1997) . potential n-glycosylation sites, o-glycosylation sites, and phosphorylation sites were predicted using netnglyc, netoglyc, and netphos, respectively (blom et al., 1999; julenius et al., 2005) . prediction of transmembrane domains was performed using tmpred (hofmann and stoffel, 1993) and tmhmm server 2.0 (sonnhammer et al., 1998) . protein similarity searches were performed using blastp version 2.2.16, psi-blast against the protein data bank (pdb) (altschul et al., 1997; schaffer et al., 2001) and fasta version 34.26 against the uniprot protein database with the default parameter settings (pearson and lipman, 1988) . pairwise amino acid comparison was performed using emboss pairwise alignment algorithms with the default parameter settings (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/emboss/align). multiple sequence alignments were performed using clustalx version 1.83 (thompson et al., 1997) . phylogenetic analysis and unrooted neighbor-joining trees were carried out using paup version 4.0b10 with the default parameter settings. bootstrap analysis was carried out on 1000 replicate data sets. the genetic distance between genomes was determined using the simplot version 3.5.1 (lole et al., 1999) .one anti-sense rna probe base pairing to the 3′ end of the ecov genome (nt 30,660-30,946) was developed to evaluate the synthesis of genomic and subgenomic rnas in ecovinfected cells by northern blotting. the ecov rna was amplified using two primer pairs (forward primer 30660p: 5′ agcagatggatgatcccctc3′; reverse primer 30946n: 5′ actgggtggtaacttaacatgctg3′) and the qiagen one-step rt-pcr kit (qiagen). the gel-purified rt-pcr products were cloned into a linearized plasmid vector with overhanging 3′ t residues (pdrive cloning vector, qiagen). the authenticity and orientation of the insert was determined by sequencing both strands of dna with m13 reverse and forward primers. plasmid dna was linearized with bamhi (roche), phenol/chloroform extracted, ethanol precipitated, and resuspended in nuclease-free water. a digoxigenin (dig)-labeled rna probe was prepared using the dig rna labeling kit (roche) according to the manufacturer's instructions.intracellular rna was extracted at 72 h p.i. from ecovinfected hrt-18g cells using the rnaqueous-4pcr kit (ambion). northern hybridization with the dig-labeled rna probe was carried out following the protocols that had been previously described for equine arteritis virus (balasuriya et al., 2004) .the leader-body junction sites of all ecov sg mrnas were rt-pcr amplified and sequenced. briefly, intracellular rna was extracted from ecov-infected hrt-18g cells using the rnaqueous-4pcr kit (ambion). reverse transcription was carried out with an rt primer located downstream to the body trs region in a sg mrna (table 3) using superscriptiii reverse transcriptase (invitrogen) following the manufacturer's instructions. due to the nested nature of sg mrnas, such an rt primer also binds to the corresponding positions in all larger viral mrnas, including the genomic rna. subsequently, cdna was pcr amplified with a forward primer (1p) located in the leader sequence and a reverse primer located just upstream of the rt primer in the body of the mrna (table 3) . amplification was performed in a volume of 50 μl: 5 μl pfuturbo pcr buffer (10×), 0.4 μl dntp mix (25 mm each), 1 μl of each primer (20 μm), 2 μl cdna template, 1 μl pfuturbo® dna polymerase, and 39.6 μl nuclease-free water. the reaction mixtures were incubated at 95°c for 2 min, followed by 35 cycles at 95°c for 45 s, 50-56°c for 45 s, and 72°c for 3 min, with a final incubation at 72°c for 10 min. rt-pcr products corresponding to each mrna species could be distinguished by size differences on agarose gel. pcr products were gel-purified and sequenced to obtain the leader-body junction sequences for each sg mrna.the nucleotide sequence of ecov was deposited in genbank under the accession number ef446615.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), which is caused by sars-cov-2, was officially named by the world health organization (who) on feb 11, 2020. till apr 22, 2020, covid-19 has caused more than 2,584,545 patients worldwide 1 cluster 17, c'3 (not included in this study population) returned shaoyang city from wuhan on jan19, 2020, three relatives of c'3 were identified as covid-19 infection after several days of closely contacted with c'3. none of them had contacted with the other suspected infectors during those days. her sister-in-low (c37) was confirmed on feb 1, 2020, her sister (c44) and mother (c49) were confirmed on feb 4, 2020. but so far c'3 had never developed any symptoms. weather c'3 is an asymptomatic infection did not been identified by pcr test, but the same contact history and the similar onset time of her three relatives indicate that c'3 was an asymptomatic covid-19-carrier. in cluster 19, c'4 (not included in this study population) contacted with her college who traveled from wuhan, and soon confirmed by pcr positive result. as an asymptomatic patient, c'4 infected c92 (c'4's mother), c94 (c'4' s father-in-law) and c102 (c'4' s daughter), c102 also had no symptoms with a positive result of pcr test.the median incubation duration was 6 days, ranged from 1 to 32 days; 8 patients got more longer incubation duration (18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 24 and 32 days) that more than 14 days. median time from onset to confirmation was 6 (rang, 0-17) days ( figure 2 ). as showed in table 2 group was observed. as we followed until feb 23, 2020, 96 (92.31%) had discharged and 1 (0.96%) died, the rest 7(6.73%) patients stayed in hospital.here we report the transmission and clinical characteristic of 104 outside-wuhan patients with covid-19. first, the smoothly increase in the cumulative number of confirmations of the two centers indicates that the timely control measures work well. second, family clusters represent as the major body of infections, transmission along the chain of 3 "generations" was observed. the asymptomatic transmission demonstrated here warned us it may bring more risk to the spread of covid-19. third, no gender difference of patients was found, indicating male and female may have the same susceptibility of this illness. fourth, the differences in demographics and clinical characteristics between imported patients and indigenous cases were not significant.since the outbreak in wuhan, it is unclear how many people truly infected and how many infected people of wuhan has imported to the other cities. screening the potential infectors related to wuhan was implemented quickly by the local governments after the announced of wuhan shutdown. dynamic analysis of 104 cases from two centers in hunan province showed that the imported cases mainly appeared during jan 22, 2019 to feb 5, 2020, then the indigenous cases became the major body, suggesting the initial cases have been founded over nearly 20 days of screening. compared with the accepted article contemporary growth trend in wuhan, explosive increase in the confirmed cases was not observed in the two centers from jan 22, 2019 to feb 12, 2020, indicating that the timely control measures in the two cities worked well.yet fundamental information gaps exist on how to accurately assess the transmission efficiency. while the controversy of sharply increased cases and medical shortage in the early and outbreak stage in wuhan, patients in wuhan may have limitation to fully reflect the true epidemiological characteristics of this illness. evidence has suggested person-to-person transmission of covid-19 via droplets or skin touch 2,3,11 . the data of this study showed a notable feature is clustering occurrence, most patients were infected from their family members, relatives or friends through a close contact. only 11 (10.53%) of this study patients were sporadic cases that hardly identified infector source, suggesting that community transmission of covid-19 is not developed rapidly in the two cities; this also matches the smooth growth of total confirmed cases. of note, strict control measures by the local government produced a powerful effect on the slowing spread.we are eager to know how infectious the virus is. except the confirmed cases, whether the asymptomatic covid-19-carriers has the infectious is unclear. a recent study showed that the viral load in the asymptomatic patient was similar to that in the symptomatic patients 12 . our study directly demonstrated that the asymptomatic patient or viral-carries infected their relatives. three cases (c37, c44 and c49) infected from the accepted article same person (c'3) who ever traveled to wuhan. but until now, c'3 did not develop any symptoms. though we did not take a pcr test to confirm whether c'3 was a virus-carrier, the same contact history and the similar onset time of her three relatives indicate that c'3 was an asymptomatic covid-19-carrier. five asymptomatic patients were found in this study, one patient (c'4) who infected three family members (c92, c94 and c102) provide evidence that the asymptomatic transmission risks the spread of covid-19, which brings more difficult to cut off the epidemic's transmission route. we the others * 23   c1,c2,c3,c4,c8,c9,c15,c20,c24,c27,c29,c30,c33,c38,c46,c50,c62,c63,c64,c67 the lack of a sound explanation for the seasonality of viral acute respiratory tract infections (varis) is a major problem for microbiology [1] [2] [3] [4] . other anomalous features of varis need to be explained too. for example, vari epidemics often erupt very rapidly after ambient temperature drops. the increase may, however, be too rapid and too short-lived to be the result of increased transmission [5] , as discussed below. surveys also show that epidemics often occur simultaneously throughout wide geographical areas [5] [6] [7] (see figs. 1 and 2) . moreover, influenza epidemics often cease very abruptly, even when many susceptible individuals remain in the population [7] .the viruses that cause varis include many unrelated families such as double-stranded dna viruses (e.g. adenovirus), positivesense single-stranded rna viruses (e.g. coronavirus), negativesense single-stranded rna viruses (e.g. respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza, measles, mumps and parainfluenza virus), and positive-sense single-stranded rna viruses (e.g. hand foot and mouth virus, rhinovirus, rubella virus). they differ in their physical forms, with some having a lipid envelope (e.g. coronavirus, influenza, and parainfluenza viruses), which many others (e.g. adenovirus and rhinovirus) lack. some are icosahedral (e.g. adenovirus. rhinovirus and rubella virus) whereas many are spherical, filamentous or variable (e.g. rsv, influenza, and measles viruses). it is notable that the great majority of these diverse and often distantly-related strains share the same seasonality in temperate regions. for example, hope-simpson found in both 1954 and 1955 that the number of people suffering from ''colds" in a sample of 380 volunteers was roughly 50 times greater in february than at the beginning of september [3] (fig. 3) . the common cold is caused by over 200 serologically-distinct strains [8] . it is clear that the great majority of these strains share the same seasonality in temperate regions, since colds in general show such strong seasonality. however, variations in the precise timing of the various respiratory viruses within the cold season have been reported, and it has been suggested that these variations might reflect fundamental differences in the mechanisms of replication or transmission of the viruses involved [4, [9] [10] [11] . for example, rhinovirus is particularly prevalent in the autumn [12] , while rsv and influenza usually cause outbreaks around the turn of the year [12] . several comments can be made here: (1) very few varis have been found that consistently show the opposite seasonality, with more outbreaks in summer than in winter. for example, a study at a children's hospital in mainz, germany, that used modern diagnostic tests found that 7 out of 10 varis displayed normal seasonality, since these 7 showed significant inverse correlations with ambient temperature (p-value < 0.001) [4] . the remaining 3 were weakly inversely correlated with temperature. (a counter-example was reported by hope-simpson [13] , although the tendency was weak: of the type 3 parainfluenza viruses isolated by him over 14 years, 66% were collected in the warm semester.) (2) studies show that the reported variations in the timing of particular varis are in fact rather inconsistent. for example, rsv in children in mainz peaked in spring in 2002 and 2006, but in the winters of the intervening years [4] . ( 3) it is possible that certain varis are more prevalent in, say, spring and autumn as a result of ''interference" by other viral strains during winter. for example, the immune systems of hosts may frequently be activated by certain dominant viruses during the winter months, reducing the likelihood of subsequent infection by less active strains. the patterns of varis in the mainz study suggest the existence of such interference (compare the relatively smooth curve of all respiratory illnesses in fig. 1 in [4] with the irregular occurrences of the individual varis shown in figs. 1 and 2 of that report).these trends imply the existence of important mechanisms concerned with viral replication or transmission that are common to the majority of respiratory viruses, in spite of their widelydiffering physical structures and biochemistry. it seems likely that an explanation of seasonality would have far-reaching practical and economic implications for treating and protecting humans and animals from varis.microbiologists have put forward many explanations of the seasonality of varis. proposed explanations of influenza seasonality, for example, include factors that change host contact rates (school closures, ambient temperature and precipitation), factors that may influence virus survival outside the body (relative humidity, absolute humidity, solar radiation and temperature), and factors that may change the immunity of hosts (humidity, photoperiodicity, temperature, viral interference, as well as deficiency of selenium, vitamin c, vitamin d and vitamin e) [1] . (factors that may change the behavior of viruses at the biochemical level are seldom considered.) the same or similar explanations have been put forward for other respiratory viruses [4, [9] [10] [11] [12] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] . however, these wellknown explanations are very difficult to reconcile with a straightforward observation: the varis in question are present in many tropical regions at intermediate levels throughout the year -often at much higher levels than in the summer in temperate locations [1, 2] . moreover, surveys show that the viral ''species" that commonly cause varis in the tropics are similar to those in other climates. for example, the four most frequently identified viruses in two large hospitals in a tropical location (singapore, 1990 (singapore, -1994 were, in order of prevalence, rsv, parainfluenza, influenza a and adenovirus [10] . (most samples came from hospitalized children.) fig. 1 . graph ii from van loghem's report [5] on the epidemiology of varis in the netherlands in the winter of 1925/26, with ambient temperature superimposed. the graph shows the percentages of persons with colds in seven regions of the netherlands for 37 weeks. the data was compiled from the reports of 6933 correspondents that were submitted by post each week. amsterdam had the largest number of informants (1159) and noord-holland the fewest (581). i have added the daily minimum outdoor air temperature (also averaged over 7 days at weekly intervals) from five dutch weather stations, with the temperature scale inverted (lowest temperatures at the top). note that by far the highest rate of varis was at the beginning of the study (september 1925) , and that varis in different regions are closely correlated with each other and with inverted temperature. these correlations are strongest in the first half of the cold season. correspondents reported coryza, angina, laryngitis, bronchitis and ''influenza". it is likely that a variety of viral ''species" were present. see the main text for discussion of the events occurring during the intervals labeled i1, i2 and i3. ó1928, 2015. this figure was originally published in the journal of hygiene, 28(01), 33-54. a similar study in an oceanic climate (mainz, germany, 1998 found that the four viruses that were most frequently identified among hospitalized children were, in order, rhinovirus, rsv, adenovirus and influenza a [4] . in buenos aires (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) , a city with a humid subtropical climate, they were rsv, influenza a, adenovirus, and parainfluenza [9] . note that rsv, influenza a and adenovirus are present on all three lists.almost all of the explanations of influenza and other vari seasonality mentioned above are associated with parameters that have more extreme values in the tropics throughout the year than in temperate summers. since similar viral species are present in all these locations, it is likely that some strains will migrate from tropical to temperate regions, where (according to the explanations put forward) they should be replicated and transmitted without difficulty during the summer months.the migration of influenza has been investigated in great detail recently using time-stamped viral sequences. these studies show that influenza does indeed frequently migrate from hotter to colder geographical regions. for example, the data of bedford et al. shows that 50% of european a/h3n2 influenza strains were descended from strains that were in tropical or subtropical regions one year earlier [19] . for a/h1n1, b/victoria-like and b/yamagata-like influenza strains, the proportions were 62%, 17% and 32% respectively [19] . a/h3n2 influenza, in particular, circulates continuously in east and southeast asia, and spreads to temperate regions from this network [19, 20] , so we would certainly expect it to have properties that allow it to be active during temperate summers. the predominant direction of migration of influenza in china is also of interest. on a one-year timescale, h3n2, h1n1, and b/yamagata/16/1988-like influenza were more likely to migrate from south to north china than in the opposite direction [19] . (the trend is not universal, however: b/victoria/2/1987-like influenza was more likely to migrate from north to south china [19] .) note also that influenza and other varis often show clear [7] . this remarkable figure requires scientific explanation. the antigenic changes in influenza a virus (occurring at both sites) clearly show that novel influenza strains repeatedly moved across europe during the period shown. there is, however, no evidence of moving ''waves" of influenza because epidemics at the two sites are almost perfectly closely synchronized. note that the shortest route between the two sites covers 1400 km by sea and road, crosses four national boundaries, and passes through some of the most densely-populated regions of europe. this suggests that the virus moved to both sites prior to its manifestation, and a stimulus that was present at both sites triggered the concurrent epidemics. bear in mind, however, that some influenza infections do not cause fevers. influenza may have spread across europe in the form of colds, before being strongly activated by low temperatures to yield febrile illness. these data are most readily explained by the fourth mechanism discussed below (m4), that virions can become dormant at some unknown location in the respiratory tract, and can subsequently be activated by host chilling. m3, which suggests that colder conditions weaken the immune defenses of hosts is also a possible explanation, but the very sudden onset of influenza in both locations is difficult to explain in this way. ó1981. this figure was originally published in the journal of hygiene, 86(01), 35-47. seasonality in the tropics that is not correlated with temperature, humidity or solar radiation, but instead coincides with the rainy season [1, 10] . the strange global and seasonal distribution of influenza and other varis is shown schematically in fig. 4 . these issues were discussed in two recent reviews of influenza seasonality, both of which also noted the lack of a satisfactory explanation [1, 2] .a note on how the shared seasonality of most varis has been dealt with in this paper it is a remarkable fact that almost all varis share the same seasonality in temperate regions. pcr-based studies, discussed below, confirm this common seasonality [9, 4] . it is highly improbable that this common trend is coincidental, and this review will assume that an unrecognized common thread runs through the transmission or replication of respiratory viruses. if it were possible, more consistent conclusions might be arrived at by focusing instead on particular varis, but unfortunately the relevant data are not yet available. i will therefore consider influenza, the best-studied vari, as well as colds and other varis, always bearing in mind that important differences may exist between the various viral species considered.ambient temperature often has a dramatic effect on respiratory disease. in the uk, hajat et al. found that general practitioner consultations by elderly patients for lower respiratory tract infections in one uk city (norwich) increased by 19% for every degree that average temperature dropped below 5°c, observed 0-20 days before the consultation [14] . absolute temperature, however, is not correlated with varis in a simple way. for example, we do not see a vari that is limited to all global regions or seasons where temperatures never rise above, say, 15°c (fig. 4) . instead, evidence from many different sources shows that vari incidence is related to temperature fluctuations. for example, van loghem conducted a very extensive survey of varis in the winter of 1925/26 with 6933 participants from all regions of the netherlands [5] . his data is shown in fig. 1 , together with the temperatures recorded by five dutch weather stations. epidemics of varis in all seven regions were very closely synchronized with each other, and closely showing the highest rates of infection. the figure shows general trends rather than specific data, but it is compatible with e.g. the weekly epidemiological record of influenza a of the world health organization [7] and other studies [1] . the yellow curve shows the path of vertical solar radiation. the strange distribution of varis is shown, with more varis in the tropics throughout the year than in temperate regions during the summer months [1, 2, 20] . it is known that seed strains of influenza a (h3n2) circulate continuously in a network in east and southeast asia (blue arrows) and spread to temperate regions from this network (green arrows) [20] . many studies show that personal chilling increases the prevalence of varis [5, [14] [15] [16] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] , and, since travel away from the tropical regions is associated with a decrease in temperature, it is likely that varis spread more quickly from the tropics to temperate regions (green arrows) than in the opposite direction (dotted red arrow). this is indeed the case for h3n2 influenza [20] . the degree to which viruses remain dormant during the summer in temperate regions (dotted purple arrow) is unknown. (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) correlated with inverted temperature with roughly a one week lag (i.e. lower temperatures were associated with increased varis). these correlations were strongest during the period when temperatures were generally falling, i.e. the first half of the cold season. note also that the highest infection rate, which occurred at the start of the study, coincided with almost the highest temperature in the study. just prior to the start of the study, however, the temperature declined after remaining nearly steady during the summer months -implying that the temperature dip triggered the epidemic. this emphasizes that we need to consider temperature fluctuations rather than absolute temperature levels.milam and smillie found similar patterns on the tropical island of st. john in the virgin islands in 1929, shown in fig. 5 [21] . between mid-afternoon and midnight each day the temperature on the island fell sharply by 5-7°c. when the temperature dipped in the autumn by 1.5°c (green bar) below the summer range, an epidemic of colds was triggered. more recently, jaakkola et al. found that ''sudden declines" in both air temperature and absolute humidity (in the three days that preceded the reporting of the sickness) increased the incidence of influenza a and b in military conscripts in northern finland [22] . paradoxically, the incidence of influenza was lower at very low temperatures, and it was the sudden decline of temperature rather than low absolute temperature (and, the authors suggested, the decline of humidity) that increased the risk of influenza.historical studies have some advantages over modern investigations. the study by van loghem was on a scale that would be difficult today, and he was able to collect data from multiple geographical locations within the netherlands (fig. 1) . the study by milam and smillie has the advantage that the island was very isolated, so that a limited set of viruses was studied (fig. 5 ). modern studies, however, have the great advantage that they can identify the viral species involved. two recent studies in argentina and germany compared weather parameters with hospital admissions of children suffering from known varis [4, 9] . both studies found that the combined number of cases for all pathogens was strongly inversely correlated with outside temperature. viegas et al. plotted the frequencies of rsv, adenovirus, influenza a virus and parainfluenza virus alongside mean temperature in buenos aires [9] . on all plots clear seasonality is apparent, but adenovirus and parainfluenza virus clearly lagged behind inverted temperature, peaking in early spring. du prel et al. presented similar plots and reported that rhinovirus, rsv, influenza a, adenovirus, metapneumovirus, influenza b and coronavirus were all strongly inversely correlated with temperature in mainz, germany (p < 0.001 in all cases). rhinovirus was also correlated with relative humidity (p < 0.001) [4] . this study (and the buenos aires study) used spearman's ranked correlation coefficients to find associations between meteorological parameters and hospitalizations for viral (and bacterial) infections [4, 9] . this tabular information is difficult to interpret, however, because correlation coefficients dramatically underestimate the closeness of a relationship when one of the parameters lags behind the other (e.g. if two data sets are perfectly correlated except that one lags by a quarter of a cycle, the correlation coefficient will be 0). it is therefore possible that associations with temperature were present in mainz for enterovirus, parainfluenza types 1 and 3, mycoplasma and chlamydophila, but not made evident by the correlation coefficients that the authors calculated. for example, rhinovirus in mainz had a spearman rank correlation coefficient with inverted temperature of only 0.42, but inspection of the plots shows a clear relationship, with the first rhinovirus epidemic of each season closely following the first major drop in temperature at the end of summer [4] . we can conclude that both papers show important correlations with weather, although other important relationships may not have been fully revealed by the analysis. it is also apparent that varis caused by completely unrelated viruses share the same seasonality both in a city with a humid subtropical climate, and in a city with an oceanic climate. it is very unlikely that these relationships are purely coincidental, which emphasizes that we should look for common causes of seasonality in these and other varis.studies at the individual level show that physical host chilling can increase the severity of varis. (the possible mechanisms involved will be discussed below.) the eurowinter group showed that shivering outside, being stationary outside, and wearing inadequate winter clothing increased respiratory disease-related mortality, while outdoor exertion sufficient to cause sweating was protective [15] . yanagawa et al. found that 11 of 13 patients recovering from cardiopulmonary arrest who were treated with mild hypothermia developed pneumonia, as compared to 6 of 15 control patients who were maintained at normal body temperature (p-value < 0.02) [23] .costilla-esquivel et al. found a relationship between weather and acute respiratory illnesses in monterrey (mexico), which they were able to model very accurately using only three weather parameters: weekly accumulated rainfall, minimum temperature in the week, and weekly median relative humidity [16] . rainfall and relative humidity were positively correlated with respiratory illnesses, while temperature was negatively correlated. both rainfall and low temperature can obviously cause personal chilling, while high relative humidity is a consequence of the other two.in summary, the available evidence shows that both sudden weather changes and factors that cause individual chilling frequently bring on varis, or increase their severity. this suggests that temperature sensitivity plays a role in seasonality, but the global patterns of varis rule out the possibility that viral activity is controlled solely by absolute temperature. rather, respiratory viruses seems to adapt over a few weeks or months to the ambient temperature, such that temperature fluctuations outside the previous range trigger varis.shaman et al. proposed absolute humidity as a ''physically sound" driver of influenza seasonality in temperate regions [26] . however, unlike say concentrated sulfuric acid or anhydrous salts, influenza virions cannot ''scavenge" low concentrations of water from dry air since virions are produced at moderate temperatures and pressures, and are in equilibrium with physiological fluids during their production. the absolute humidity that virions may be subjected to therefore has little or no significance. instead, (as with most biological phenomena) temperature and relative humidity are the meaningful parameters that should be considered, either singly or in combination.absolute humidity does however have significance in the context of indoor viral survival and transmission. since indoor temperatures in wealthy societies are maintained, by heating systems, at roughly constant levels throughout the year, indoor relative humidity is roughly determined by outdoor absolute humidity. variations in absolute humidity may therefore contribute to influenza seasonality in some instances. several points need to be considered, however: (1) reports of the effect of relative humidity on the survival of influenza virions at room temperature are inconsistent. whereas harper found that roughly twice as many viable pr8 virions were recovered after storage at 50% relative humidity in comparison to 64% [27] , schaffer et al. saw the opposite trend with their wsn virions from cell cultures, with roughly an order of magnitude lower recovery of virions at 50% relative humidity in comparison to 65% [28] . (2) influenza and most other vari epidemics are more frequent in the tropics during the rainy season, when both relative and absolute humidity levels are high [1, 10] . for example, fortaleza in brazil has a single large peak of influenza [1] (and, from personal experience, other varis) that coincides with the rainy season (january to july). (3) animal experiments with guinea pigs show that, while transmission of influenza generally decreased with increasing relative humidity, it actually increased at 20°c when relative humidity moved from 50% to 65% [29] . (animal experiments with influenza are further discussed below.)turning to another common vari, du prel et al. explain the observed correlation of rhinovirus with relative humidity by pointing out that ''rhinoviruses cannot survive in a dry environment", i.e. they suggest that the seasonality of rhinovirus is driven by changes in the survival rate of the virions outside the body [4] . however other interpretations are possible: increased relative humidity is associated with rainfall, which can wet individuals' clothing and cause chilling. moreover, as noted above, indoor relative humidity in temperate climates is much lower in winter than in summer due to the effects of artificial heating in winter [3] . changes in the survival of rhinoviruses due to indoor relative humidity should therefore generate the opposite seasonality if transmission mainly occurs indoors, which seems likely.observations of the incidence of colds in the uk found no correlation with relative humidity or water-vapor pressure [17] . analysis of over 5000 person-years of data in two uk cities demonstrated that ''it is the low outdoor temperature, independent of the humidity, which is associated with the increased number of winter colds" [17] .clearly, correlations of varis with both relative and absolute humidity are at best inconsistent.experiments with guinea pigs suggest that the transmission of influenza a is more efficient at lower temperatures and lower relative humidity [29] . lowen et al. found a 3.5-fold increase in the transmission of human influenza a between guinea pigs at 5°c compared to at 20°c [29] (in fact this was true only at 50% relative humidity; at higher and lower humidity, transmission rates were either similar at both temperatures or higher at 20°c). these differences are in agreement with measurements of the stability of influenza a virions generated in cell cultures in air of different temperatures and humidities [27, 28] . this might suggest that variations in transmission due to weather changes might determine or influence the seasonality of influenza (and other varis) in temperate regions. the results were, however, inconsistent; for example, transmission of influenza at 20°c was higher at 65% relative humidity that at 50% [29] . moreover, a more recent study found that the transmission of influenza between guinea pigs by medium-range aerosol was eliminated at 30°c, although transfer between animals in the same enclosure by short-range aerosol or direct contact was as efficient at 30°c as at 20°c [30] . the authors postulate that the normal mode of influenza transmission varies depending on climate: in temperate regions aerosol transmission may predominate, while in the tropics short-range and contact transmission may be more important. epidemics of h3n2 influenza in the temperate regions are, however, seeded each year from a network of temporarily overlapping epidemics in east and southeast asia [20] . there is therefore no reason why influenza cannot be transmitted by the contact route in the summer months into and within the temperate regions. lowen et al. recognize this difficulty, and they postulate the existence of unknown ''additional factors, other than warm temperature and high relative humidity, which suppress influenza transmission by all routes during the summer months" in temperate regions [30] . although the authors may have identified the important routes of influenza transmission at different latitudes, they have therefore not provided a robust explanation of its seasonality.viruses such as adenovirus [31] , rsv [32] , foot-and-mouth virus [33] and chickenpox virus -all of which can spread via the respiratory tract -are known to become dormant within their hosts. other respiratory viruses show similar behavior, sometimes on shorter timescales. morikawa et al. found human parechovirus, adenovirus, enterovirus, coronavirus 229e and hku1, and rhinovirus in the gargle specimens of eight asymptomatic children using polymerase chain reaction (pcr) tests [34] . the tests required at least 100 copies of the genetic material, suggesting that the viruses in question had begun to replicate [34] . however, the authors noted that it is difficult to interpret pcr results because it is a very sensitive method, and the positive results may reflect an asymptomatic past or concurrent infection, or an imminent infection. their data suggest, however, that at least some were imminent infections: four of the children had positive results when they were asymptomatic that were followed four weeks later by a vari that was associated with the same virus (or a strain that was indistinguishable using the pcr test); rhinovirus was detected in a fifth child who was at first asymptomatic, but experienced the symptoms of a cold caused by rhinovirus one week later. similarly, viral dormancy may explain the sudden arrival of autumn epidemics of rhinovirus in temperate regions; granados et al. studied rhinovirus activity in university students, and showed that asymptomatic rhinovirus activity preceded peak symptomatic activity in september and october and was associated with lower viral load [18] .influenza viruses have been detected several times in the absence of symptoms or an immune response in the host, which seems to indicate that dormant influenza virus is present. foy et al. identified 10 asymptomatic individuals who were shedding influenza b virus but did not respond with antibody by any of the five test methods employed [35] . during the 2009 influenza a (h1n1) pandemic, tandale et al. found that, of 65 asymptomatic individuals with pcr-confirmed h1n1, 12 had not seroconverted [36] . during the same pandemic, papenburg et al. found two asymptomatic individuals with pcr-confirmed infections who had not seroconverted [37] . in vietnam, thai et al. found that, of 11 individuals shown by pcr to have been infected with pandemic h1n1 by other members of their household, one remained asymptomatic and had not seroconverted [38] . the authors commented that this ''may indicate that viral rna remained in the respiratory tract without being internalized and eliciting an immune response". these observations show the reality of influenza persistence in the respiratory tracts of asymptomatic individuals, and are compatible with the suggestion that virions can become dormant, and, later, be reactivated, for example by chilling.observations of varis in antarctic stations after many months of complete isolation can provide evidence that is easy to interpret because varis are rare after the first month of isolation [24] , and only one or a few viral species are active at a time. for example, after 12 months of complete isolation in 1965/6, a geologist (''j.e. h.") at the mawson station picked up a respiratory virus from a visiting field party [24] . 17 days later he and three colleagues were exposed to cold and damp conditions, which brought on vari symptoms including muscle aches and a sore throat in j.e.h. and two of his colleagues. another study at adelaide island in 1969 found that after 17 weeks of complete isolation several men developed colds four days after the air temperature fell in one day from 0°c to à24°c [25] . both studies suggest that chilling caused by particular activities or weather changes can activate dormant virions, giving rise to varis. similarly, muchmore et al. reported parainfluenza shedding by healthy young adults throughout the 8½-month winter isolation period at amundsen-scott south pole station during 1978 [39] . the study recorded two episodes of respiratory illness caused by parainfluenza at the station that year after 10 and 29 weeks of complete social isolation.in principle, any failure or blockage of a biochemical or physical step in the replication or transmission of respiratory viruses might give rise to dormancy. moreover, many respiratory viruses, including coronavirus, influenza, measles and mumps virus, require activation by proteolytic cleavage of viral proteins [40] . this (largely unexplained) phenomenon may provide opportunities for the establishment of dormancy. nevertheless, visualization of the physical whereabouts of the virus, during the weeks or months that dormancy can last, is difficult. the virus might be located on the surface of the cells that line the respiratory tract (for example attached to the cell membrane or the cilia), or within the cells, possibly in the cytoplasm or the nuclei (although it seems unlikely that respiratory viruses are usually incorporated into the host genome as is hiv). there are problems with each of these explanations, but pcr and antarctic studies show the reality of viral dormancy.taken together, the above observations strongly suggest that a variety of respiratory viruses can become dormant in human hosts for much longer periods than those reported in the literature [41] and that they can subsequently be activated by cold, giving rise to varis.if we accept that host chilling (with various causes) triggers vari epidemics and gives rise to vari seasonality in both temperate and tropical regions, four possible mechanisms, m1-4 can be put forward as follows. m1: low temperatures and seasonal events increase crowding of human hosts, increasing transmission; m2: colder conditions allow the virus to survive outside the body for longer, increasing transmission; m3: the susceptibility of hosts increases as a result of chilling; m4: chilling increases the activity of viruses in the respiratory tract. i will now consider the evidence for and against these four possibilities.a popular explanation of vari seasonality is that contact rates are lower in summer when children are out of school, and when people spend more time outdoors. however, in the usa seasonal differences in ''crowding" are minimal since the amount of time spent indoors varies by less than 10% between summer and winter [1] . in the uk, the number of school-days in the coldest six months of the year is less than 10% higher than in the warmest six months, but, like all temperate countries, the uk has marked vari seasonality. moreover, one of the two peaks of influenza activity in singapore [1] actually coincides with the school holidays in june. another negative observation is that festivals and sporting events are not associated with increased varis. for example, during the fifa world cup people spend more time indoors and often crowd together in bars etc. to watch matches on television, but no significant increase is apparent in google flu search activity in any country in the northern hemisphere during the 2014 fifa world cup [42]. lofgren et al. agreed that theoretical and empirical studies do not adequately explain influenza a seasonality, noting in particular that no published studies show directly that variations in crowding give rise to influenza seasonality [1] .another problem for this explanation of seasonality is the simultaneous arrival of influenza [6, 7] and other varis [5] throughout wide geographical areas, often following or coinciding with cold snaps (figs. 1, 3 and 5 ). if cold weather acted on varis only by increasing viral transmission, then as the temperature falls e.g. in autumn, waves of infection should appear and move through populations. we would not expect to see epidemics that arise simultaneously in both neighboring (fig. 1) and distant (fig. 2) populations. this point is discussed in more detail in the next section.in summary, temperature-dependent changes in human crowding may well play a role in the progress of vari epidemics, but there is no evidence that they provide a general or the main driver of vari seasonality.this is currently the most popular explanation of seasonality. the mechanism is, however, almost certainly not the main cause of seasonality, for several clear reasons.firstly, this explanation cannot explain why varis are present in many tropical regions all year round, but virtually absent from temperate regions during the summer months. if respiratory virions can adequately survive outside the body in the tropics, they should have no difficulty in surviving (according to this explanation) in the milder conditions of temperate summers. as noted above, a similar set of viruses give rise to varis that hospitalized children in temperate, subtropical and tropical cities [4, 9, 10] , and they presumably migrate between these locations. seed strains of influenza a (h3n2) spread from east and southeast asia to temperate regions every year [20] , and other respiratory viruses may follow similar routes. (the suggestion [22, 28, 29] that low absolute or relative humidity may increase viral survival does not help, because vari epidemics occur during the rainy season in many tropical locations [1] .) secondly, consider van loghem's data [5] (fig. 1) . while temperatures were generally decreasing (i.e. up to the end of january) varis were very well-correlated with inverted temperature, and extraordinarily well-synchronized across the country, with no evidence of ''waves" of infection moving between different locations, which would be expected if cold temperatures increased transmission during the study. we don't know which viruses were most prevalent in the study, but if any had seasonality that was driven by m2 it is clear that they were not common. hope-simpson made similar observations when he compared influenza epidemics in the uk and in prague, czechoslovakia, showing the temporal correspondence of epidemics at widely separated localities at a similar latitude [7] (see fig. 2 ). in another example, magrassi was impressed by cases of influenza in 1948 among shepherds living in complete social isolation in open country in sardinia, who developed the disease contemporaneously with the inhabitants of towns on the same island [6] .a third consideration is that records of vari epidemics show that they frequently respond to temperature fluctuations rather than absolute temperature levels. for example, the rapid drop in temperature during weeks 6-8 of van loghem's study (pink band, labeled i1 in fig. 1 ) was followed, with a lag of roughly one week, by rapid increases in varis. when the temperature subsequently hovered around 0°c in weeks 9 and 10 (yellow band, labeled i2), however, the number of varis stabilized. if the rapid 70% increase in varis that occurred at temperatures between 10 and 0°c (pink band) was caused by increased transmission we would then expect varis to continue to increase when temperatures stabilized around 0°c. a little later (weeks 12 and 13, blue band, labeled i3) the temperature was well below 0°c, but now it was rising, and the varis fell from their highs, again emphasizing that varis tend to be sensitive to temperature fluctuations rather than absolute temperature.a similar argument applies to the data of hope-simpson (fig. 3) , with the number of colds increasing very rapidly after temperature drops, but falling during two periods of constant low temperatures (yellow bands, labeled i1 and i2) in october and december 1954. milam and smillie's data (fig. 5 ) also showed fast-acting sensitivity to very small temperature drops outside the recent range, with these events occurring at a range of temperatures throughout the year [21] . jaakkola et al. reported that ''sudden declines" of around 5°c preceded the onset of influenza in northern finland [22] , occurring at temperatures above 15°c and also below à15°c. other varis can be considered. an interesting and clear-cut example comes from singapore, where hii et al. studied the strong association of hand, foot and mouth disease (hfmd) with the weather [11] . the risk of the disease increased by 41% for every 1°c that the weekly temperature difference increased above 7°c. the authors concede that the ''exact reasons for the relationship between weather and hfmd are not known" [11] . again, it is difficult to imagine that weather anomalies of the order of 1°c can significantly change the survival of respiratory viruses outside the body (or, indeed, the susceptibility of human hosts to vrtis, discussed in the next section).if the transmission of varis including influenza were driven purely by low temperatures, we would not expect to see the rapid cessation of influenza epidemics in mid-winter [7] , or the low attack rates that have been reported within families for influenza [43] [44] [45] and other varis [5] .in summary, we can see that temperature-dependent changes in viral transmission may well influence the progress of many vari epidemics, but, unless new evidence comes to light, we need to look elsewhere for a general explanation of the seasonality of varis.an interesting and ingenious recent review looked directly at the seasonality of immune responses in humans by investigating antibody responses following vaccination [46] . although the authors found seasonal variation in immunity, it could not explain vari seasonality: seven of the studies of vaccines reviewed reported a stronger immune response in winter than in summer, with only 1 showing the opposite trend. there was no clear trend with regard to the dry and rainy seasons in tropical regions and several other studies showed no trend at all. these data therefore suggest that variations in general host susceptibility do not explain the seasonality of varis.however, this leaves open the possibility that there are variations in host immune defenses that specifically affect the respiratory tract. eccles suggested that host chilling may cause reflex vasoconstriction of the blood vessels of the upper airways, thereby reducing host defenses against viral infection during the winter [47] [48] [49] . mudd and grant [50] and van loghem [5] made similar proposals. two lines of evidence support the idea that chilling reduces host respiratory tract defenses by this or other mechanisms.foxman et al. found that mouse airway cells infected with mouse-adapted rhinovirus 1b exhibited significantly lower expression levels of type i and type iii interferon genes and interferonstimulated genes at 33°c relative to 37°c [51] . this is a very interesting but puzzling result, and the authors offer no explanation of the possible benefits to the mouse. if airway cells possess mechanisms that can reduce infections, it seems strange that they should be down-regulated at lower temperatures. (one explanation is that the interferons severely damage airway cells, and the mouse prefers to deal with the virus with milder defenses unless it reaches sites where it may cause serious illness. a related proposal is that mice permit the growth of viruses in their respiratory tracts in order to raise antibodies against them before the virus can reach the internal organs.) we need to wait for equivalent results in the cells of other species, both in vitro and in vivo, before we can fully interpret these data.other support for m3 comes from a study by the eurowinter group, which found that exposure to cold outdoor air can affect varis in opposite directions [50] : shivering outside greatly increased respiratory disease-related mortality, in agreement with eccles' suggestions. however, outdoor exertion sufficient to cause sweating reduced mortality (p-value = 0.02), although breathing cold air rapidly is known to reduce the temperature of the respiratory tract [52] . this is more difficult to explain, but it seems clear that variations in host defenses are involved. this is discussed in the next section.other evidence, however, does not support m3 (unless it is combined with m4 below). since human immune defenses act well in a wide range of temperatures and climates (the climates of northern scandinavia and southern india for example), we would not expect temperature changes of 1-2°c to have a noticeable impact on host defenses against varis. great sensitivity to temperature fluctuations is apparent, however. for example, consider again chart 1 of milam and smillie's paper [21] (fig. 5) . every night in the summer the temperature dropped by 5-7°c. in the autumn the temperature fell by an extra 1.5°c, which triggered an epidemic of colds. can we believe that the islanders' immune systems could cope well with a regular 6°c drop but succumbed after a 7.5°c drop? note that the absolute temperature after the dipabout 23°c at night -was still very comfortable, and would certainly not cause a vari epidemic in, say, helsinki.note also that there is often a peak of varis in the early autumn, often associated with a rhinovirus epidemic [4, 12, 17] . this peak can be seen, for example in the very high level of colds at the beginning of the study by van loghem, on 19 september, 1925 [5] (fig. 1 ). the number of varis was then much higher than during the rest of the cold season. if we are going to say that the increase in varis in the cold season is due to the increased susceptibility of hosts in cold weather (m3), it is difficult to explain why the human immune system appears to be less efficient in early autumn than in, say, february.another problem for m3 is the abrupt cessation of influenza epidemics. hope-simpson noted that all the major influenza epidemics that he recorded in cirencester, uk, (1951, 1957, 1959, 1969 and 1973 ) rose rapidly to a single peak within four weeks, then abruptly ceased in the following 4-5 weeks (fig. 1 in ref. [7] ). in at least one case it was clear that this was not due to a lack of susceptible persons: the h2n2 subtype arrived explosively for the first time in cirencester in september 1957, with over 100 individuals suffering from acute febrile respiratory diseases by the third week of october. this epidemic abruptly ceased after only six weeks. it is known for certain that many susceptible individuals remained in the town's population at that time because this was the first h2n2 epidemic, and there was another h2n2 epidemic 16 months later, which was almost as large as the first [7] . the abrupt cessation of the first epidemic is therefore unexplained. the other four major epidemics listed above were in midwinter, when (according to this view) the immune system should be at its weakest, suggesting that the virus should spread and the epidemic should continue for more than eight weeks.numerous studies of the common cold in the 1950s and 60s used recycled ''pedigree" viral strains that were collected from volunteers and used to inoculate subsequent volunteers. these studies weigh against m3 because they found that chilling did not increase the likelihood of volunteers getting colds [53] [54] [55] [56] . these studies are discussed below.taken together, the available evidence suggests that temperature-dependent changes in host susceptibility (m3) may play a role in the epidemiology of varis, and may contribute to seasonality. however, changes in susceptibility alone cannot explain many observations of varis and it appears that this mechanism is not main driver of seasonality.lwoff proposed in 1959 that the degree of virulence of viruses is related to their level of temperature sensitivity, i.e. greater sensitivity to heat is correlated with reduced virulence [57] . in 1979, richman and murphy confirmed this association and reviewed its implications for the development of live virus vaccines [58] . they noted that the replication of temperature-sensitive (ts) 1 influenza, parainfluenza, rsv, and foot-and-mouth viruses was consistently more restricted in the lungs of a variety of animals than in their nasal cavities. they also found that both naturally-occurring and synthetic ts viruses were very frequently less virulent than their non-ts counterparts in humans and animals, noting several cases (including influenza and vaccinia virus) where the loss of the ts phenotype resulted in the restoration of the virulence or growth capacity of the virus, both in vivo and in vitro [58] . chu et al. later tested seven h1n1 strains with varying degrees of temperature sensitivity in volunteers and found a correlation between temperature sensitivity and the severity of symptoms, with strains that were more ts being less virulent [59] . it is reasonable to conclude that the ts phenotype facilitates the transmission of the wild virus because it prevents or reduces multiplication of the virus in the lungs or internal organs, which is likely to result in the immobilization, or possibly the death, of the host. one possible explanation of vari seasonality (m4) is therefore that the lower temperatures of winter increase the activity and virulence of respiratory viruses, as a side-effect of their tropism. this may explain why nearly all respiratory viruses share the same seasonality.it is known that there is a temperature gradient in the human respiratory tract, from around 24°c at the glottis to around 35.5°c at the subsegmental bronchi [52] . the temperature in the respiratory tract drops rapidly when the air being breathed is cold, when the host breaths rapidly, or -significantly -when the host is chilled [50, 52] . putting these observations together, a simple explanation (m4) of the seasonality and temperature sensitivity of varis can be proposed:(1) one or several steps in the life-cycle of most ''wild" respiratory viruses are ts. these ts steps might include the release of virions from cells, their binding to cells, their entry into cells, or any subsequent step in their replication (see the biochemical evidence reviewed below). (2) ts virions that bind to cells lower down the respiratory tract (therefore at relatively high temperatures) may remain dormant at some unknown cellular location (which might be on extracellular material, on the surface of, or within, the cells that line the respiratory tract). (3) virions that bind to cells higher up the respiratory tract (therefore at relatively low temperatures) may become active, but will not normally cause a vari because they are active in low numbers at any one time and can be removed 1 in this article temperature-sensitive or ts refers to viruses that are more active at lower temperatures, i.e. they are heat-sensitive.by the host's immune system (or, if a proportion of virions are defective, simultaneous invasion of each cell by several virions may be required to initiate infection). (4) each day the temperature of the respiratory tract varies, and this variation clears certain populations of virions from certain regions of the respiratory tract, leaving other populations intact. (5) if the temperature of the respiratory tract drops suddenly below its normal range, batches of virions that were previously dormant may be activated simultaneously, giving rise to a vari.the virions' binding sites in the respiratory tract might also reflect the correlation, noted by richman and murphy, that more virulent strains tend to be less ts [58] . for example, avian influenza virions that can infect human hosts might be expected to bind to cells lower down the respiratory tract than typical seasonal influenza.an important point is that m4 is sensitive to temperature fluctuations, not absolute temperature, because the temperature sensitivity of viruses may adapt quite rapidly as a result of selective pressures, and they can bind in different regions of the respiratory tract. this can explain the data of van loghem, milam, jaakkola and others, discussed above [5, [14] [15] [16] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] . it can also explain the seasonality of varis, because chilling outside of the range of the previous few days or weeks becomes more likely when the seasonal temperature drops in the autumn. in the spring, by contrast, exceptional chilling becomes less frequent as the seasonal temperature steadily rises.m4 can explain the association of varis with wind and rain in the tropics, since these weather events often result in the chilling of individuals, even when the ambient temperature remains constant. it also provides an explanation for the strange epidemiology of influenza, including the low attack rate of many epidemics within families [5, [43] [44] [45] and the rapid cessation of epidemics when many susceptible individuals remain in the population [7] ; bear in mind that each member of a family has a different history of exposure to viruses and of chilling. for example, some family members may take regular outdoor exercise in the winter, which (i suggest) clears virions from the respiratory tract in small batches (outdoor exercise reduces mortality from varis [15] ). other family members may be exposed to a virus for the first time during particularly cold weather (e.g. in midwinter), so that virions bind and become dormant relatively low down the respiratory tract, and are therefore not activated unless even colder weather follows. still others, who remain indoors much of the time, but are chilled occasionally may be prime candidates for infection (e.g. waiting for a bus in the rain may put individuals at risk -standing still outside in cold weather, and shivering outside, have both been shown to be a dangerous activities [15] ). these trends can therefore explain the low attack rates and lack of transmission within families, as well as the rapid cessation of epidemics.note that the natural temperature sensitivity of respiratory viruses contributes to m4 in two steps; in a first step, it allows virions to become dormant; in a second step, it provides viral activation as a result of chilling.step 2, however, could also be the result of the depression of immunity in the host -m3 above. there is no reason to rule this out, and, in the absence of experimental data, the relative contributions of changes in host physiology and virus biochemistry remain unknown. i noted above that changes in host susceptibility alone probably cannot account for the extreme sensitivity of varis to small temperature drops, but they may contribute. m3 may contribute to the simultaneous arrival of varis across wide geographical areas, and may be at least partly responsible for the arrival varis in tropical regions during rainy seasons. however, it seems unlikely that m3 is the main driver of seasonality.as noted above, experiments carried out in the 1950s and 60s with the common cold failed to find an effect where host chilling increased the likelihood of volunteers getting colds [53] [54] [55] [56] . however, it seems likely that the procedure of recycling viruses used in these studies may have eliminated some of the wild virus's natural temperature sensitivity. m4 therefore offers an explanation of the negative results of these studies, as discussed in detail in the next section.i noted above that the eurowinter group found that exposure to cold outdoor air can have opposite effects according to the situation: shivering outside greatly increased respiratory disease-related mortality (p-value = 0.001), while outdoor exertion sufficient to cause sweating greatly reduced mortality (p-value = 0.020) [15] . (the absolute values of the regression coefficients of mortality due to respiratory disease on these two cold exposure factors were far higher than any others found by the group.) the first point, that shivering increased mortality, could be explained by either m3 or m4 -host defenses could be diminished, or virions could be activated, by cold. the second point, that outdoor sweating reduced mortality, is more difficult to explain. although heat stress may boost the immune system above its normal level, the result would not be noticeably protective if virions are dormant and therefore invisible to the immune system. if they were visible they should be destroyed anyway during the much greater time spent indoors. a roughly neutral effect of m3 would therefore be expected. m4 would suggest that mortality should increase, because outdoor exertion clearly causes cooling of the respiratory tract, due to rapid breathing. the best explanation may be a combination of m3 and m4: the cold air and rapid breathing cools of the respiratory tract, which activates some of the dormant virions that are present. however, the good blood flow to the respiratory tract that is associated with heat stress allows the activated virions to be destroyed by the immune system.there is extensive biochemical evidence for the temperature sensitivity in respiratory viruses, particularly influenza, which is discussed below. this includes temperature sensitivity that is associated with the steps of the uptake of virions into cells [60] , rna transcription [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] (including the ts control of the balance between the synthesis of mrna and replicative products [66, 67] ), and the transport to the cell surface of hemagglutininesterase-fusion protein, the protein that promotes the fusion of influenza c virions with cells [68] .in summary, many observations of varis cannot be satisfactorily explained without invoking the activation of respiratory viruses by temperature drops or host chilling (m4). the evidence is outlined in table 1 . m4 is probably the most important driver of seasonality in varis, although other mechanisms may also contribute to seasonality, especially the increased susceptibility of hosts as a result of chilling (m3). moreover, when we consider different virus families, we can expect variations in both the timing and underlying mechanisms of seasonality.it is widely believed by doctors and scientists that chilling does not affect varis, and that this idea is ''an old wives' tale" [75] . this belief seems to come from numerous studies from the 1950s and 1960s where volunteers who had been inoculated with respiratory viruses were chilled, including three influential reports by andrewes, dowling and douglas [53] [54] [55] . unfortunately, these studies generally used ''pedigree" strains of cold virus that were recycled by being collected from volunteers and used to inoculate subsequent batches of volunteers in later experiments. (volunteers were often kept in quarantine to avoid using natural ''wild" strains that they happened to be carrying [53] .) in these studies it seems likely the researchers selected strains that very quickly caused mild varis in a significant proportion of the volunteers -but without causing dangerous infections. this may well have removed some aspects of their natural temperature sensitivity, since temperature sensitivity might give rise to dormancy and thereby delay infection. this suggests that the results may have differed from those that would have been obtained using wild viruses, which might have shown an effect of chilling. one study, however, by jackson et al., did use wild viruses that the volunteers were carrying [56] . in some of their experiments, volunteers in scant dress were exposed to 15.5°c air for four hours. in others, warmlydressed volunteers breathed air at à12°c for two hours. of those who were chilled, only 10% developed colds in the next 7 days, whereas 12% of those who were not chilled developed colds. however, the authors do not tells us what proportion of volunteers were chilled by breathing cold air and what proportion by wearing scant clothing; breathing cold air while remaining warm can be protective [15] , presumably because viruses are activated but they can be removed by the immune system.more recently, johnson and eccles used wild strains that the participants were carrying by chance, and saw an effect of chilling by immersing the participants' feet in cold water [48] . of the chilled subjects, 28% developed colds, whereas only 9% of the control subjects who were not chilled did.simple experiments along similar lines need to be carried out to resolve these apparent contradictions.in an interesting review of 1975 [69] , preble table 1 four mechanisms, m1-4, that might explain the vari seasonality in temperate regions.school holidays and sporting events are not well-correlated with vari epidemics [1] the simultaneous arrival of vari epidemics throughout wide geographical regions [5] [6] [7] is a problem for this explanation there is little evidence for this mechanism [1, 2] (m2) colder conditions and low relative humidity may allow virions to survive outside the body for longer, increasing transmission the prevalence of varis year-round in the tropics [1, 2, 10, 11] is evidence against with this explanation since viruses (including influenza virus [19, 20] ) frequently spread from tropical to temperate regions the simultaneous arrival of vari epidemics during cold snaps throughout wide geographical regions [5] [6] [7] is also a problem m2 cannot explain why varis respond to temperature dips rather than sustained low temperature [3, 5, 21, 22] . the rapid cessation of influenza epidemics in mid-winter in the presence of many susceptible individuals [7] , and the low attack rate of varis including influenza within families [5, [43] [44] [45] are difficult to explain by m2(m3) chilling may increase the susceptibility of hosts vaccination studies [46] show that the human immune system is not in general weaker during the winter months than in summer it has been proposed that host chilling specifically reduces immune defenses in the respiratory tract [5, [47] [48] [49] [50] this mechanism is supported by a study using cultured mouse airway cells [51] and by the observation that outdoor exertion sufficient to cause sweating reduces mortality from respiratory disease [15] the prevalence of varis year-round in the tropics [1,2,10,11] but not in summers in temperate regions suggests that other explanations of seasonality are also required it is hard to reconcile m3 with the extreme sensitivity of varis to temperature dips [3, 5, 21, 22] the peak of colds in the early autumn, when temperatures have dropped only a few degrees from their summer highs [4, 5, 12, 17, 21, 42 ] is difficult to explain by m3 numerous studies of the common cold in the 1950s and 60s that used ''pedigree" strains weigh against m3 [53] [54] [55] [56] (m4) chilling may increase the activity of viruses in the respiratory tract as a result of their natural temperature sensitivity m4 is compatible with all of the above observations, including the extreme sensitivity of varis to temperature dips [3, 5, 21, 22] (since temperature varies with position in the respiratory tract [52] ) it provides an explanation of the low attack rate of influenza within families [5, [43] [44] [45] , and the rapid cessation of influenza epidemics [7] m4 is compatible with studies using ''pedigree" strains [53] [54] [55] [56] and with antarctic studies [24, 25, 39] it provides a biological explanation of the benefits of temperature sensitivity [57, 58, 69] to the virus, and an explanation of viral dormancy [18, 24, 25, [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] m4 is compatible with the recovery of ts viruses from persistent infections of tissue cultures and animals [58, [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] , and the generation of non-ts viruses in conditions that allow rapid viral replication [59, 74] fig. 6 . the observed effect on temperature sensitivity of natural and (spontaneous) laboratory selection for increased and decreased viral activity. in this schematic 2-d plot the xs indicate the starting levels of activity (virulence) and temperature sensitivity of two hypothetical viral strains. (the xs could also indicate the properties of hypothetical viral proteins). selective pressures are indicated by dotted arrows, while the resulting changes to viral phenotype are indicated by solid arrows. the establishment of persistent viral infections of cell cultures generally requires reduced viral activity so that viral and cell replication can be in balance [58, 69] . the corresponding selective pressure is indicated by the dotted red arrow. unexpectedly, reduced activity is often (though not always) accompanied by the spontaneous appearance of temperature (heat) sensitivity. this is indicated by the solid red arrow. see the main text for examples [70] [71] [72] . the converse trend is equally surprising: when ts viruses are propagated in conditions that allow rapid growth (thereby selecting the most active mutants, dotted blue arrow), heat sensitivity has been lost (solid blue arrow) even when selection takes place at low temperatures (see main text [59, 74] ). (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) speculate that their temperature sensitivity may allow insectborne viruses to target the skin.) similarly, richman and murphy found that persistent infections of cell-cultures with mumps virus and vesicular stomatitis virus frequently yielded ts virus, although they noted that persistent infections could also be established or maintained by non-ts mutations [58] . three more recent reports described the recovery of spontaneously-generated ts strains of influenza a from persistent infections of cell cultures [70] [71] [72] . similar tendencies are seen in persistent infections of animals; footand-mouth viruses recovered from carrier animals are frequently ts, and show evidence of high rates of mutation with frequent amino acid substitutions and rapid antigenic variation [73] .preble and youngner pointed out that since ts strains tend to be less virulent they may allow persistent infections to become established, because a balance between viral and cell replication is required [69] . they do not, however, explain why ts mutations in particular should be selected in persistent infections, as opposed to non-ts attenuating mutations. in most cases the cells were grown in the laboratory at 37°c, so temperature sensitivity should be a disadvantage. if, however, the wild virus from which the laboratory strain was derived was ts, the probability of reverting to the ts phenotype may be relatively high. for example, a protein might lose its ts character by a point mutation caused by a single nucleotide change, so that the ts character could be restored by reinstating the original nucleotide. this may be more probable than other mutations that would attenuate the virus without conferring temperature sensitivity. changes to rna secondary structure (discussed below) may have similar effects. bear in mind that many virus families include species that cause both systemic and respiratory tract infections, and strains may have jumped between these sites many times in their evolutionary history. for example influenza often infects the gut in birds, but it usually infects the respiratory tract in mammals. these considerations suggest that genetic pathways may exist that allow the rapid elimination and reintroduction of temperature sensitivity.if this interpretation is correct, it may explain how respiratory viruses such as influenza, rsv and adenovirus are able to infect hosts throughout the world. a tropical virus might cause serious illness if it arrives in colder parts of the world, because it might infect sites lower down the respiratory tract. since too much virulence may reduce viral transmission (as patients become bed-ridden), natural selection in the temperate site for reduced virulence may increase temperature sensitivity to a level that is appropriate to the virus's new location. a similar argument suggests that viral temperature sensitivity (and virulence) may be adjusted throughout the year by natural selection to a level that is appropriate to the season.the converse trend: the loss of the ts phenotype in conditions that allow rapid replication since ts strains are generally less virulent in vivo [57, 58, 69] , and are associated with persistent infections both in vivo and in vitro [58, 69] , it might be anticipated that the ts character would be lost in in vitro conditions that allow rapid replication of viruses, and this has indeed been observed. chu et al. found a naturallyoccurring ts influenza a strain that was a subclone of the h3n2 strain ningxia/11/72 [59] . when they passaged the strain three times through chicken embryos at a low temperature (33°c), they were surprised to find that a non-ts strain was produced. similarly, oxford et al. [74] found that a naturally occurring ts virus, a/eng/116/78 (h1n1), progressively lost its ts character during five passages at low temperature (33°c). both groups concluded that even at the permissive temperature (33°c) the ts phenotype may confer a selective disadvantage in eggs -which allow rapid replication of influenza virions. again we can speculate that viru-lence and greater viral activity in general is genetically linked to temperature sensitivity as a result of the evolutionary history of the virus.the unexpected loss and gain of temperature sensitivity (in a wide variety of viruses) when increased or decreased viral activity is selected is shown schematically in fig. 6 .numerous studies have found that it is easier to propagate respiratory viruses that are freshly collected from patients by incubation at temperatures below 37°c. rhinoviruses were first isolated at 35°c but a greater variety of rhinoviruses was discovered at 33°c [76] , and this is the temperature that is recommended today for their isolation by the clinical and laboratory standards institute [77] . coronaviruses were first isolated at 33°c [78] although laboratory strains are now frequently propagated at 37°c. naturally occurring influenza strains are also frequently ts. for example, in 1962 stern and tippett [79] propagated four viral specimens from patients with h2n2 ''asian" influenza, all of which were ts. all four gave cytopathic effects in monkey cells and the production of hemagglutinatinin-positive fluids in eggs at 33°c but not at 37°c. subcultures were able to adapt to culture at 37°c but grew more slowly than at 33°c. the authors also found (in 1962) that the fm1 (h1n1, 1947) and pr8 (old-style h0n1, 1934) strains grew more slowly in monkey cells at 37°c than at 33°c. in 1977, kung et al. found that nine of ten isolates of the newly emerged ''russian" h1n1 influenza were ts [80] . oxford et al. found that 17 of 26 recent h1n1 isolates, and 2 of 11 recent h3n2 isolates were ts, producing cultures that gave at least 10 times more viral plaques after incubation at 34°c compared to 38.5°c [74] .takashita et al. found that, in influenza c (c/ann arbor/1/50), roughly half the amount of the hemagglutinin-esterase-fusion protein (hef) was found on the cell surface at 37°c compared to 33°c [68] . (hef in influenza c carries out the functions of both hemagglutinin and neuraminidase in influenza a or b.) moreover, membrane fusion mediated by hef was observed at 33°c but not at 37°c. this was found to be due to instability of the trimeric form of hef at 37°c.in an interesting study, russell saw an ''unexpected" result when he measured the uptake of the triple reassortant influenza virus a/jap/bel into cells [60] . uptake of the virus increased steadily from 0°c, with 100% of the virus entering the cells at 30°c. however, at 34°c and 38°c less a/jap/bel was taken up than at 30°c (fig. 2 of ref. [60] ). this was repeated on two separate occasions using a chicken anti-h2 serum when 100% of virus escaped neutralization at 30°c, compared to 50% at 38°c, suggesting that viral entry into cells was ts.most laboratory respiratory viruses are propagated at 37°c, which may result in the rapid loss of ts characters, especially since viruses mutate very rapidly when they are introduced to new hosts. if, however, temperature sensitivity is a common feature of wild respiratory viruses, we might expect to see remnants of temperature sensitivity in the biochemistry of laboratory strains. it turns out that such remnants are quite common.for several decades virologists have found that maximum rna transcription in influenza viruses occurs below normal body temperature. in 1977, plotch and krug [61] reported that the greatest activity of the rna polymerase of wsn virus was at 30-32°c. this is similar to the optimum temperature of the polymerase of influenza c, which is 33°c [62, 63] . ulmanen et al. [64] found that the rate of transcription by detergent-treated wsn viruses (influenza a) was about 10 times greater at 33°c than at 39.5°c, and also that the binding of a cleaved primer cap (the ''a13 fragment") to the viral cores was ''unexpectedly" much weaker at 39.5°c than at 33°c. scholtissek and rott [65] showed that the optimum for the polymerase of the rostock strain of fowl plague virus was 36°c, five degrees below chickens' normal body temperature (41°c). at least two reports show that temperature affects the balance between transcription and viral replication. kashiwagi et al. looked at the effect of temperature on rna production for five varied influenza a strains [66] . for all strains, vrna unexpectedly decreased when the temperature was increased from 37°c to 42°c. the pa subunit of the viral polymerase caused this thermal sensitivity. in another interesting study, dalton et al. showed that the production of mrna by the pr8 influenza strain is favored at a higher temperature (41°c), with very little vrna being produced at that temperature [67] . a plasmid-based recombinant system showed that as the incubation temperature increased from 31°c to 39°c the amount of replicative rna products (c-and vrna) decreased and a greater accumulation of mrna was observed. the crna that is used as a template to make the vrna formed a complex with the polymerase that was particularly heat-labile, showing rapid dissociation even at 37°c. the authors suggested that the ''switch" that regulates the transition from transcription to replication is dependent on temperature, but made no comments about how shifts in the host's body or respiratory tract temperature may influence this transition.much recent attention has focused on the role of rna secondary structure in influenza a, although discussion of its role in temperature sensitivity has been limited. ''rna thermometers" are rna segments (found in both microorganisms and higher organisms) that respond to temperature changes with three-dimensional conformational changes that alter gene expression [81] . they are frequently (but not always) found in the 5'-untranslated regions of mrna, and can act in both directions -translation can be augmented or suppressed at high temperatures [81] . chursov et al. used bioinformatic techniques to search for pronounced differences between mrna from cold-adapted ts influenza strains and the corresponding wild-type sequences [82] . pronounced differences were found in the mrnas of four viral proteins. the authors suggest that temperature-induced structural changes of mrna may constitute an ''unappreciated molecular mechanism of the cold adaptation/temperature sensitivity phenomena" [82] .little secondary structure is predicted in influenza vrna outside the untranslated 5 0 and 3 0 terminal ends of the vrna strands that form the promoter necessary for the initiation of rna synthesis [83] . however, the positive-sense rna is predicted to have extensive secondary structure, which is conserved, in segments 1, 5, 7 and 8 [83] . since ordered rna is intrinsically ts, and since individual base changes may have a cumulative effect on the overall secondary structure of rna, it is likely that viral temperature sensitivity can be fine-tuned by small sequence changes to untranslated regions of rna. for example changes to the secondary structure of vrna, crna and mrna might all affect temperature sensitivity in influenza.(changes to protein sequences may also be in involved of course.)we can speculate that temperature sensitivity might have profound effects on viral tropism. many or most respiratory viruses possess temperature sensitivity, and we can imagine that a respiratory virus that loses its temperature sensitivity might infect the lungs, gut or internal organs. (some method of limiting virulence other than temperature sensitivity might then be selected that can allow the virus to survive in the long-term.) conversely, viruses originating in the internal organs that develop temperature sensitivity could safely cause severe local infections that would be limited to the upper respiratory tract (possibly in addition to other cold parts of the body such as the feet), without greatly incapacitating the host (incapacitation would limit opportunities for transmission of the virus). obviously the resulting irritation of the respiratory tract might cause coughing, sneezing and runny noses, all of which might help to transmit the virus -in other words a respiratory virus has been generated. influenza infects the gut of water fowl but the respiratory tract of mammals (and birds), and is able to move between these two ecological niches. similarly, some adenovirus serotypes are mainly respiratory, others mainly cause gut-related disease. viruses that are transmitted via skin rashes and blisters that burst, such as chickenpox, measles, smallpox, and hand, foot and mouth disease in humans, and foot-andmouth disease in cloven-hoofed mammals, could also benefit from temperature sensitivity that might allow them to infect the skin preferentially and so to spread by direct contact. (in the diseases mentioned above contact transmission from blisters etc. coexists with aerosol transmission.) several examples indicate that what we think of as respiratory viruses can occasionally cause systemic infections: virulent human influenza strains sometimes give rise to viremia [84, 85] , and three children who were infected with pandemic h1n1 influenza in 2009 (''swine flu") presented with petechial rashes [86] . similarly, 33 patients presented with hemorrhagic cystitis caused by h3n2 influenza a in 1975 [87] .many suggestions have been put forward to explain the seasonality of varis, especially influenza. changes in crowding (m1), and changes in the survival rate of viruses outside the body (m2) cannot be completely ruled out, but they fall short in at least one important respect: they cannot explain why varis including influenza are transmitted in the tropics, especially during wet weather, but are mostly absent from temperate regions in the summer months. an alternative suggestion (m3), that chilled hosts are more susceptible as a result of ts changes to their immune defenses, is a better candidate. a biochemical study using cultured mouse cells supports the idea [51] , and m3 also seems to be part of the best explanation of the protective effect of winter outdoor exercise [15] . however, evidence from vaccination studies, epidemiological evidence that varis respond to small temperature changes throughout a wide range of absolute temperatures (figs. 1  and 3) , and evidence that varis frequently appear simultaneously throughout large geographical regions (figs. 1 and 2) , seem to rule out changes in host susceptibility as the main driver of vari seasonality.this leaves the explanation that might seem most intuitive to the lay-person -that viruses can become temporarily dormant, and are reactivated by chilling, which changes their behavior at the biochemical level (m4). this explanation is seldom considered by microbiologists, who seem to have ruled it out on the basis of historical reports from the 1950s and 1960s, which concluded that chilling does not bring on varis [53] [54] [55] [56] . however, there is now so much clear evidence that chilling does increase varis that we need to look more closely at those historical experiments. i suggest above that they were flawed because they generally used ''pedigree" viral strains which were passed by the investigators from volunteers to subsequent batches of volunteers in later experiments. obviously the investigators would have thought carefully about the choice of strains that they used; they certainly didn't want to put the volunteers at risk, so mild strains needed to be selected. however they naturally wanted their experiments to fit into the time available -for example andrewes worked with volunteers who each stayed at his unit for 10 days, and his experiments did not start until the volunteers had been in quarantine for three days. the incubation period of the strain that he used was most frequently two to three days. by selecting such a strain he and his colleagues may have eliminated the virus's natural temperature sensitivity during the early stages of infection (temperature sensitivity that is predicted by m4) -a flaw in the design of his experiments with potentially far-reaching implications.note, however, that the negative results of the host-chilling experiments using pedigree strains nevertheless weigh against m3 -because the lack of temperature sensitivity of the virus (or possibly other characters of a virus that had undergone prolonged serial passage) should not influence host susceptibility.leaving aside these early experiments, what is the evidence for or against the idea (m4) that temperature fluctuations can activate respiratory viruses and give rise to vari seasonality? epidemiological evidence shows that (a) surges in varis often follow a few days after temperature dips (even minor dips) [2, 3, 5, 14, 21, 22] ; (b) in all climates, it is temperature drops that are generally associated with vari epidemics rather than sustained low absolute temperature [3, 5, 21, 22] ; (c) the attack rate and the rate of transmission within families are often low, especially for influenza [5, [43] [44] [45] ; (d) vari epidemics often appear simultaneously throughout wide geographical areas, with no evidence of waves of transmission that move between neighboring (fig. 1 ) or widely separated (fig. 2) localities [5] [6] [7] ; and (e) influenza epidemics often occur in midwinter but cease while many susceptible individuals remain in the population [7] . all of these observations are compatible with m4, as discussed above. moreover, observations of the timing and location of vari epidemics suggest that respiratory viruses can become dormant, a suggestion that is confirmed by the occasional presence of varis in polar communities after many weeks or months of complete isolation [24, 25, 39] . biochemical tests of asymptomatic individuals who shed influenza a and b without seroconversion [35] [36] [37] [38] are compatible with dormancy, and pcr tests showed directly that individuals harboring a variety of viral pathogens subsequently developed the corresponding varis [18, 34] . if we accept this evidence of viral dormancy and reactivation, then the idea (m4) that chilling increases the activity of respiratory viruses that were present before the epidemic began can provide the rapid response, sensitivity to temperature dips, and occasional lack of transmission that we need to explain the epidemiological events (a-e) above. it is unclear how these events can be explained by the alternative mechanisms m1 -m3.we also need to explain the clear trend in the laboratory for persistent infections of cells to yield ts strains of a variety of viruses in the absence of obvious selective pressures [58, [69] [70] [71] [72] , and also the converse observation, that temperature sensitivity is lost when viruses are grown in cell cultures at low temperature in conditions that allow rapid replication [59, 74] (fig. 6) . moreover, biochemical studies show that many steps in the replication of laboratory strains of influenza and other viruses have residual natural temperature sensitivity [60] [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] [66] [67] [68] 83] , in spite of many cycles of replication of most laboratory viruses at 37°c. we can explain these data by suggesting a link between loss of temperature sensitivity and the acquisition of increased virulence in respiratory viruses, which seems to be a legacy of their evolutionary history. lwoff (1959) , and richman and murphy (1979) suggested that the temperature sensitivity of respiratory viruses allows them to target the respiratory tract, and to avoid the lungs [57, 58] . this idea, and the related idea that less ts strains tend to be more viru-lent, seems to be widely accepted by microbiologists. however, the corollary, that ambient temperature dips can activate viruses that were previously inactive, is less popular. it is, however compatible with the well-known ''trade-off" model of virulence. this model suggests that the benefits of virulence (in particular the increased rate of virus production and shedding) are balanced against the reduction of the time during which shedding takes place (and also changes to the behavior of hosts that reduce transmission) if virulence is too great. the implication is that mechanisms are required to moderate virulence, and temperature sensitive mechanisms can clearly achieve this in the case of respiratory viruses. an analogy in the form of a joke may be helpful here. two scientists are out hiking, when they meet an angry-looking bear. ''it's no use," says one scientist to the other, ''you can never outrun a bear". ''i don't need to outrun the bear," replies his companion, ''i only need to outrun you". it is often assumed that an ''evolutionary arms race" exists between viruses and the host immune system, with each making a series of small improvements to gain an advantage over the other [88] . this assumption may be incorrect -it may be that most viruses could easily overcome the defenses of hosts that lack specific immunity, but that selective pressures nevertheless reduce the virulence of well-adapted viruses, as predicted by the trade-off model. some of the evidence for this comes from viruses that have recently jumped from one host species to another, such as myxomatosis in european rabbits, and, in humans, hiv, sars, middle eastern respiratory syndrome, avian influenza and ebola. these viruses are unusually virulent, in spite of -or because of -having had little time to adapt to their hosts. the main arms race may not be between viruses and hosts, but between competing hosts, where each needs to reduce its susceptibility to outcompete other members of the same species.of course, respiratory viruses comprise many unrelated families, and there may be important differences in the mechanisms that give rise to their seasonality. multiple mechanisms could contribute to seasonality, and the mix could vary between viruses. nevertheless it seems likely that that the common seasonality of these diverse viruses is not coincidental, that common mechanisms give rise to this near-universal trend, and that some variant of m4 is the most important in many or most cases.it is unlikely that either evidence gleaned from studies that were designed to investigate other aspects of viral biochemistry or epidemiological observations can determine the causes of vari seasonality with certainty. instead it will be necessary to investigate temperature sensitivity directly in vivo and in vitro, working with viruses that are as close as possible to wild viruses. as a start, wild and laboratory viral samples should be ''deep sequenced" (i.e. the relative proportions of different sequences in a sample should be established at multiple genetic sites) to determine the mix of ts and non-ts sequences in wild samples, and to establish the impact on temperature sensitivity of propagating wild viruses in the laboratory. this analysis needs to include consideration of rna secondary structure. the information gained can be applied at many levels, from observations and experiments with living organisms to experiments with cell cultures and in solution. it may be possible to image the distribution of virions in the respiratory tracts of animals, and to see e.g. differences in animals that were housed at high and low temperatures prior to the investigation. virions might be released from tissues or cells by raising the temperature, or captured by lowering the temperature. (note that the genetic information remains attached to the chemical probe, in a manner analogous to the phage display technique.) the entry of virions into cells can be investigated by measuring the escape rate of preadsorbed virus from neutralization by antibody in temperature shift experiments [60] . in tissue cultures, transcription and the production of genetic material can be followed during temperature shifts (for example the production of mrna, crna and vrna can each be studied in influenza). similarly, the production of viral proteins can be followed during temperature-shift experiments. experiments in solution can also yield valuable information. for example, the thermal stability of mutants of influenza hemagglutinin and neuraminidase can be investigated in solution by thermal shift assays, and similar experiments can be undertaken with other respiratory viruses. the thermal stability of secondary structures of wild-type and laboratory viral rna and rna/protein complexes can be measured in solution. bioinformatics can be applied to the problem. for example the sequences of hemagglutinin, neuraminidase and other viral proteins from wild and laboratory strains, and from the viruses obtained from different animal hosts and laboratory procedures can be analyzed. this analysis can consider the impact of mutations on the structures of viral proteins and complexes that have been determined by x-ray crystallography and other techniques. for example the effect of changing a particular residue can be anticipated or investigated experimentally. secondary structure prediction techniques can be applied to viral rna, dna and protein/nucleic acid complexes. yet another approach is to investigate and model viral epidemiology with these ideas in mind. finally, experiments can be performed at the whole organism level. for example, chilblains and chapped lips can be examined for the presence of respiratory and other viruses. other, very simple, experiments can be performed with human volunteers. for example, groups of volunteers can be subjected to chilling in the autumn or midwinter (which are the seasons when individuals are particularly susceptible to varis) and compared to control groups who are kept warm. the number of varis suffered by both groups can then be compared. this approach would make use of dormant viruses that the participants were already carrying by chance.author's information i am one of the two founders and directors of douglas instruments ltd, a small uk company that manufactures automatic systems for protein crystallization. i worked with professor david blow in the 1990s, and have published 15 papers about protein crystallization that have together been cited over 750 times. a few years ago i began to think about respiratory viruses when a friend bet me that i couldn't find biochemical evidence that chilling could trigger varis. i started to write a short note, but everything fell into place so neatly that it rapidly grew into the current document.this paper is avowedly a report from the front line, rather than an abstract academic disquisition. it is, further, at best, a first draft of history. it reflects the experience of a practising barrister in england & wales grappling with the impact of covid-19 upon the mental capacity act 2005 ('mca 2005') across a range of fields in the weeks after the world appeared to change in mid-march 2020. 1 in the course of a few short weeks, many of the established legal frameworks relating to decision-making in england & wales in respect of those with impaired decision-making capacity were ripped up, or apparently rendered all but unusable. although the mca 2005 itself was not amended, the impact of other legislation (especially the coronavirus act 2020) meant that duties towards those with impaired decision-making capacity were radically changed. questions of isolation and social distancing raised stark questions about protectionand the ends of protectionwith particular difficulties in the context of those who could not understand what they were being asked or required to do. the intense pressure upon hospitals, and, in particular intensive care units, meant that best interests decisionmaking as the choice between available options suddenly took on a new and very stark character, and advance care planning startedin some casesto appear to be a threat rather than an opportunity. and the court of protection itself, the statutory court charged with oversight of the mca 2005, had in a matter of weeks to transform itself into a virtual court, raising deep questions about the functions of justice and participation. this article discusses both england and wales. devolution means that there are similarities and differences between the two. 2 the mca 2005 applies in england & wales as the framework through which decisions are made (most often informally) about capacity and best interests, on the basis of a functional model of mental capacity. the mca 2005 also provides an administrative route for deprivation of liberty for purposes of enabling care and treatment of adults in hospitals and care homes, the so-called deprivation of liberty safeguards ('dols'). outside hospitals/care homes, or in relation to those aged under 18, court authorisation will be required. separately, and long-predating the mca 2005 does not provide any mechanism to compel the delivery of health or social care to an individual. the court of protection has a duty to act in the best interests of the person before it, as do others (outside the court room arena) making best interests decision on their behalf. but the court of protection:[…] only has power to take a decision that p himself could have taken? it has no greater power to oblige others to do what is best than p would have himself. this must mean that, just like p, the court can only choose between the 'available options.' […] 37. other service-providing powers and duties [outlined immediately below] also have their own principles and criteria, which do not depend upon what is best for the service user, although that will no doubt be a relevant consideration. decisions can, of course, be challenged on the usual judicial review principles. decisions on health or social care services may also engage the right to respect for private ( challenges by way of judicial review are to a different court, the administrative court, for which it is more difficult (as a generalisation) to get public funding to pay for legal assistance, 5 and are more limited in scope, focusing on the process of decision-making much more than the outcome of the decision.the national health service act 2006 sets out the powers and duties of the national health service to provide healthcare; the care act 2014 (in england) and the social services and well-being (wales) act 2014 sets out the powers and duties of local authorities to provide social care to individuals. 6 if an individual's needs are such as to amount to a 'continuing healthcare' need, then it is the responsibility of the nhs to meet them, and to do so for free. social care is means-tested, such that a charge can be made for the provision of such care by local authorities. in very broad terms, in relation to both healthcare (outside hospital) and social care, the relevant public body is under a duty to assess the needs of the person, determine whether they are eligible needs, and then meet them.finally, the public health (control of diseases) act 1984 contains an extensive range of powers (in part 2a) in relation to public health protection, including, most materially, the power to the secretary of state (in england) and the welsh ministers (in wales) to make 'health protection regulations' "for the purpose of preventing, protecting against, controlling or providing a public health response to the incidence or spread of infection or contamination in england and wales (whether from risks originating there or elsewhere)." 7 section 2: health and social care outside hospital if decisions are made under the mca 2005 between the options that are actually available to the person, then changes made in relation to the powers and duties upon the state to secure the needs of individuals with impaired decision-making capacity will have a dramaticknock-oneffect upon the scope of those options. this is precisely what the coronavirus act 2020 ('ca 2020') has done, and i go into the changes it has introduced in some detail for two reasons:(1) for the benefit of those within england & wales who are grappling with (for whatever reasons) the new landscape;(2) as a case study for those concerned more broadly with the un convention on the rights of persons with disabilities ('crpd'), to make the point that examining whether persons with disabilities are able to 'enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with others in all aspects of life' 8 in any jurisdiction requires examination not just of the laws that on their face govern legal capacity, but also the wider framework within which those laws are placed.the ca 2020 was introduced into parliament on 19 march 2020, and received royal assent under a week later, on 26 march 2020. its long title "an act to make provision in connection with coronavirus; and for connected purposes" does not adequately convey its scope. reflecting the impact of covid-19 across all aspects of society, the act includes provisions ranging from emergency registration of health professionals, to the power to require information relating to food supply, to powers relating to the temporary closure of educational institutions and childcare premises, to postponement of elections to the general synod of the church of england. for present purposes, i focus upon the duties upon public bodies to assess and meet the continuing healthcare and social care needs of individuals, the latter because of their profound, indirect, impact upon decision-making in relation to those within the scope of the mca 2005.framework for adult social care. 9 this document, in essence, transposed principles that had been developed in relation to triage for inpatient medical treatment in the context of pandemic flu 10 to the social care setting:recognising increasing pressures and expected demand, it might become necessary to make challenging decisions on how to redirect resources where they are most needed and to prioritise individual care needs. this framework intends to serve as a guide for these types of decisions and reinforce that consideration of any potential harm that might be suffered, and the needs of all individuals, are always central to decisionmaking.it was not just local authorities, but also the nhs, which would be stretched. i deal at section 6 below with decision-making in hospital. here, i focus on the position outside hospital where, as noted above, the nhs (throughin england -clinical commissioning groups) has both powers and duties to meet continuing healthcare needs. 11 the ca 2020, with immediate effect, suspended 12 the duty on the nhs in england to carry out assessments of whether a person is in need of continuing healthcare. crucially, such continuing healthcare needs are free to access, unlike social care provision for which charges can be made. the explanatory notes to the act rather coyly suggested this section "changes the procedure for discharge from an acute hospital setting for those with a social care need […] it allows nhs providers to delay undertaking the nhs continuing healthcare (nhs chc) assessment and pending that assessment, the patient will continue to receive nhs care." 13 the provisions of the ca 2020 in this respect were not, in fact, so limited. although s.14 ca 2020 does not stop clinical commissioning groups carrying out such assessments, the (temporary) repeal of the duty mean that, overnight, individuals with profound healthcare needs lose any entitlement to assessment of those needs as a precursor to the potential for those needs to be met, for free. those of such individuals with impaired decision-making capacity therefore losein many casesthe potential for options to be made available for them in terms of their residence and care arrangements.further, given the abolition of the duty to assess, recourse to judicial review to challenge a failure to carry out an assessment becomes a nigh-on impossible task (and the court of protection can offer no assistance 14 ) . given that there is a considerable overlap between individuals with impaired decisionmaking capacity and those with continuing healthcare needs, their options have been immediately and dramatically narrowed by this legislative change.the ca 2020 also introduced what the government (but not the act) described as 'easements' 15 25 these are, respectively, (1) the local authority is satisfied on the basis of the financial assessment it carried out that the adult's financial resources are at or below the financial limit; (2) the local authority is satisfied on the basis of the financial assessment it carried out that the adult's financial resources are above the financial limit, but the adult nonetheless asks the authority to meet the adult's needs; and (3) the adult lacks capacity to arrange for the provision of care and support, but there is no person authorised to do so under the mental capacity act 2005 or otherwise in a position to do so on the adult's behalf.satisfied it is not required to meet the adult's needs under section 18." the statutory guidance did not explain when and how such power was to be used. section 20 of the care act 2014 is also (when 'eased') watered down 26 so that that the duty to meet a carer's need for support is to be tied to the necessity to avoid a breach of the carer's rights under the echr. i return to deprivation of liberty safeguards at section 4 below.it will be clear that the watering down of duties under the care act 2014 to a 'bare bones' approach, so as to avoid a breach of the echr, 28 means that in many cases the options available for individuals with impaired decision-making capacity are dramatically reduced.that having been said, and as a possibleand very tentativesilver lining to the cloud, the sudden and very immediate focus upon the echr may mean a renewed focus by the english courts upon the positive aspects of rights under the echr, and what those aspects mean in the context of those who cannot make their own choices.the echr has been 'domesticated' through the human rights act 1998, such that individuals can rely upon the rights it contains before the courts, and public bodies are required to comply with it in the discharge of their functions, so, on one view, the changes introduced by the ca 2020 do nothing other than repeat a commitment which already exists. in the context of immigration control, the fiction (and it is frequently a fiction) is that the individual concerned could always return to the country from where they came from, so it is not surprising that the courts have interpreted the echr as providing a minimalist safety net designed to ensure that the uk does not breach its obligations to those individuals under the convention. no such fiction could now operate across the piece. it seems to me, therefore, that (as perhaps presciently aburas might be said to recognise 38 ), the context is very different because, in effect, the echr is being required to do the heavy-lifting across the piece.long experience before the courts means that i do not underestimate the difficulty in persuading either a local authority orin due coursea court that it should not follow the very high bar set by the cases discussed above, which include jurisprudence up to and including the supreme court.that having been said, it seems to me that there are good arguments that courts should be more willing to place weight upon article 8 echr alone as opposed to the general position that (absent where a family is involved 39 ) article 8 does not add to article 3 echr. article 8 is a qualified righti.e. interference with it can be justified under the circumstances provided for under article 8 (2) ewhc 2282 (admin), in which the situation was found to have breached article 8 echr even though it did not breach article 3 echr, because the entire family were in such dire straits as a result of the local authority's actions. 40 art. 8(2) applies. where the interference is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f bodies, and in due course, the courts to proceed by reference to article 8 echr, then there is undoubtedly an argument that it should be asked to do more work to address the middle ground where the person's circumstances are not so dire as to cross the very high threshold of article 3 echr, but positive steps are nonetheless required so as to secure their physical health 41 or, importantly, "psychological integrity." 42 i would also suggest the courts should be willing to have regard to the recent jurisprudence from strasbourg relating to article 5 whichoddlydoes not seem to have been considered domestically before the courts in england. 43 in other contexts, the courts have been willing to accept that the crpd can be of assistance in interpreting the application of the echr. 51 if the statute itself now directs the courts to consider the provisions of the echr (and, by extension, the crpd), then the approach in davey may no longer seem quite so tenable. put another way, if the statute itself asks the echr to do more work as the safety net for those with disabilities, it is legitimate to ask those applying the statute to look to the crpd to assist in ensuring that safety net has as few holes in as possible.whether advocates andin due coursethe courts will be willing to run with arguments such as those set out above is, at the time of writing, an open question. but if they do, they may, ironically, have further blurred the distinction between the civil and political rights traditionally seen as the core of the echr and socio-economic rights (i.e. rights which actually require states to spend money). j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f individual level, the rights to independent living and to health enshrined in the crpd. 52 such would be of inestimable benefit to those with impaired decision-making capacity.the lives of those with impaired decision-making capacity have also directly, and, as will be seen, disproportionately, been affected by the public health measures taken to respond to the covid-19 crisis.in the same week as the ca 2020 came into force, regulations made under the public health (control of disease) act 1984 radically changed the legal landscape in england & wales, effectively placing the population under severe restrictions (which the daily mail might even characterise as house arrest) for their good, and the good of society.the health protection (coronavirus, restrictions) (england) regulations 2020 53 are set to expire in 6 months' from the date of their coming into force on 26 march 2020, 54 although with reviews by the secretary of state every 21 days. 55 whilst the regulations are in force however, there are statutory restrictions on every person in england from leaving the place where they are living "without reasonable excuse." 56 the regulations provided for statutory steps which could be taken to enforce this, including the power for a relevant person 57 to direct the person to return the place to where they were living or remove them to the place where they are living (including by the use of reasonable force). the person would also be also committing a criminal offence (which can be discharged by way of the issue of a fixed penalty notice). 58 what constituted a "reasonable excuse" for these purposes is set out in regulation 6(2). this included taking exercise, as well as 'to avoid illness or injury or to escape a risk of harm.' 59there are some very interesting questions that arose as to whether the regulations were ultra vires the act under which they were made (the public health (control of disease) act 1984). i do not address them here, but david anderson qc wrote a stimulating blogpost on the question. 60 interesting questions also arise as to whether they gave rise to the deprivation of liberty of the entire population of england & wales for purposes of article 5(1) echr (and, if so, whether it is justified under article 5(1)(e) for purposes of the "prevention of the spreading of infectious diseases"). these are both interesting questions, my tentative thoughts being, respectively (1) probably not; 61 but (2) for present purposes, i focus on the fact the regulations did not make any provision in relation to those with impaired decision-making capacity. the question arises, therefore, as to how they should be applied to someone who lacks the capacity (applying the mca 2005, or any common law test that might be said to apply) to understand: (1) that they are required not to leave the place where they are living without a (statutory) reasonable excuse); or (2) the consequences of so doing without such a reasonable excuse? and should they be subject to criminal sanction if they do so?one would like to think that it would be very unlikely that any prosecution would be brought against a person who did notbecause they could notunderstand what it is that they should or should not have been doing. the guidance issued by the crown prosecution service 63 in relation to prosecution of offences under the regulations provided that:the guidance made no reference to the presence of impaired decision-making capacity as a factor. it is also, equally, troubling that it would even be possible for a criminal prosecution to be in contemplation in such circumstances.it may, perhaps, be that the answer is to be found in the wording of regulation 6(2), which is not exclusive in terms of reasonable excuses. rather, it provides that "a reasonable excuse includes." that a person lacks the capacity to understand what it is that the new regime requires would appear, on its face, to be a reasonable excuse. whether any of the near constant stream of guidance coming out (but not, so far, relating to the mca specifically) will address this issue is not known, but i would hope it would.i should note that, under regulation 8(4), it would undoubtedly be possible for a person to be returned to the place where they are living by the use of reasonable force whether or not they had the capacity to agree to the steps being taken. interestingly, and undoubtedly by a side-wind, this suddenly given a previously missing power 64 to police offices, and other authorised people to return individuals subject to dols authorisations in care homes 65 where they have 'wandered' (a term i put in parenthesis because in many cases, it is very far from purposeless wandering on the part of a person with j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f dementia). but this was undoubtedly not the purpose for which regulation 8(4) was enacted. it would also leave anyone who does take steps to return an individual to somewhere other than a care home in a difficult position. the regulations did not provide the power for the person returning the person to where they live to prevent them from leaving their home; any such power would have to (legally) be found in another source, and (practically) be exercised by someone. and what if the person lived in their own home, and did not appear to have anyone there to 'receive' them?finally, i note that those caring (formally or informally) for those with impaired decision-making capacity are left in a very invidious position. should they be seeking to prevent the individual from leaving home so as not to breach the regulations, or should they let them do so in the hopes that the individual does not then encounter an unsympathetic relevant individual. it is very likely that many carers will feel (rightly or wrongly) that they have to take steps to stop the person leaving. in many cases, this is likely then to mean that the individual then meets the 'acid test' of not being free to leave the place they live and also being subject to continuous supervision and control. 66 if they cannot consent to that confinement, then it is very likely that they are then to be seen as deprived of their liberty for purposes of article 5 echr. 67 i return to this issue below having looked at the further powers that the ca 2020 introduced in the public health sphere.section 51 and schedule 21 ca 2020 contain powers relating to potentially infectious persons. part 1 relates to england; part 2 to scotland and part 3 to wales. they are materially identical, and for present purposes i will only give references to the paragraph numbers in part 1 (for england).schedule 21 provides public health officers, constables and (in some circumstances) immigration officers with the means to enforce public health restrictions, including returning people to places that they have been required to stay. where necessary and proportionate, constables and immigration officers are able to direct individuals to attend, remove them to, or keep them at suitable locations for screening and assessment. where a person has been screened and assessed and either tested positive, or the screening is inconclusive, paragraph 14 of schedule 21 enables a public health officer to impose requirements including to remain at a specified place (which may be a place suitable for screening and assessment) for a specified period; and/or to remain at a specified place in isolation from others for a specified period. ('a requirement to remain'). the public health officer has when imposing a requirement or restriction to inform the person of the reason for doing so, and that it was an offence to fail to comply with the requirement or restriction. a person can only be required to remain at a place for a maximum of 28 days, 68 , although can be required to remain in isolation indefinitely (although with a review every 24 hours after 28 days). a failure to comply with the requirement to remain at a place or in isolation is a criminal offence. 69 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f removing someone to or keeping the person at a place under the powers identified here; 70 failure to comply with a reasonable instruction is a criminal offence. 71 a constable or immigration officer (but not a public health officer) can use reasonable force, if necessary, in the exercise of the powers outlined here. 72 the recourse against the exercise of the draconian (if justified) imposition of a requirement to remain is by way of appeal to the magistrates' court. 73none of the provisions outlined above make any reference to the position of persons with impaired decision-making capacity. the closest that they come are in paragraph 14, where a public health officer is required in deciding whether to impose a requirement to remain "must have regard to a person's wellbeing and personal circumstances." "personal circumstances" here couldand arguably shouldinclude whether they have capacity to understand what it is that they are being required to do, and the consequences if they do not.in the event that a requirement to remain was imposed, it was not obvious from the face of the ca 2020 how it is that a person with impaired decision-making capacity is to make any appeal to the magistrates' court. so as to comply with the provisions of articles 6 and 8 echr (read alone or in conjunction with article 14 echr), it is clear 74 that the appeal provisions in paragraph 17 will have to be interpreted (1) as placing the threshold for bringing an application extremely low (as per the approach before the mental health tribunal or the court of protection 75 ); and (2) where the person does not meet that threshold, enabling another person to act on their behalf to bring the application.it was entirely possible that there are those who do have impaired decision-making capacity and pose a public health risk because they are either potentially or actually infectious with covid-19.precisely what legal powers could be exercised to require them to remain either in a place or (within that place, within isolation) is a question that has exercised many commentators. 76 four key issues are:significant doubts remain as to the thickness of legal ice upon which professionals are standing. had the mental capacity (amendment) act 2019 been in force, professionals would have had the ability to rely upon a revised version of s.4b mca 2005 making clear the basis upon which they were able to deprive an individual in need of care and treatment in an emergency, and then pending completion of the relevant statutory processes. 83 however, the likelihood of implementation of that act, requiring a substantial amount of work on the part of local authorities and nhs bodies, which was already looking unlikely for 1 october 2020, receded rapidly into the distance.very shortly after 'lockdown' started, the court of protection had cause to consider how dols was working in the context of a care home whichas with many othershad barred visitors. it is also striking (but perhaps reflective of the haste with which the application was brought on and considered) that hayden j did not address the fact that the dols regime does not, itself, provide authority to restrict contact, 94 so it is not immediately obvious upon what legal basis contact could be restricted except by going to court.finally, it is also, perhaps, striking that no arguments were addressed to hayden j (or raised by hayden j of his own motion) as to the risk posed to individuals within the care home by covid-19. on one view it could have been argued (see further section 2) above that bp's article 2 rights in fact pointed not to the cessation of contact between him and his family, but for his rapid move to his daughter's house, and the provision of such support to her there as required to ensure he could be kept safe there. not only would the court of protection have to find ways in which to ensure that family members and/or informal carers did not feel excluded by the arrangements, the court would have to find ways in which to ensure that sometimes painful progress towards the greater participation of the subject of proceedings -'p'was not lost. 100 the guidance noted above from hayden j actively solicited "[i]maginative ideas […] to ensure that p participates in their proceedings where they are able to so do safely and proportionately." 101 but given that "[w]here judicial meetings with p are necessary for a determination of the issues then remote conferencing technology to facilitate that meeting is the only likely mechanism," 102 immediate hurdles towards an important way in which such participation could take place were clear. the energy and commitment of those concerned with the court to ensure that it could continue both to offer a service, and to serve p was clear, but the task at the time of writing appeared formidable.space precludes a detailed consideration of the issues that arise in the context of the effect of covid-19 upon the scarce critical care resource within england & wales, and also the scarce resource of ventilation. 103 however, they do need to be touched on briefly as radically changing the framework for medical decision-making. in a series of cases starting in 2013, 104 the court of protection had developed an increasingly sophisticated notion of best interests in this context in which even interventions with a very small chance of success could be said to be in the best interests of the patient if it was clear that this is what they wanted. 105 this did notquitecross the line into holding that approaching matters through the prism of best interests could require that clinicians provide treatment that they did not consider clinically appropriate, 106 but on occasion came very close. 107 the impact of covid-19, however, means that it appears clear that decision-making in the case of those with impaired decision-making (and whether or not they have covid-19) might have to be undertaken on the basis not of what was in their best interests, but on a utilitarian basis in order to save the maximum number of lives. what had been a perennial question for ethicists and the subject of planning that had never had to be moved into anything close to an operational phrase 108 has become an ever more pressing issue.however, national bodies (in particular national nhs bodies) have been notably slow to produce guidance addressing the issues, perhaps because of political (including health service political) concerns as to the public reactions that would be engendered by the recognition of the reality of the position. they are also perhaps aware of how guidance produced under speed in countries that had been affected ahead of england (most notably that produced by in the italian context by siaarti, which suggested that there might need to be a simple age cut-off for admission to icu 109 ) would look if transposed directly into the english context.further, an earlyand very high-level -attempt to provide guidance (the nice 'rapid response' guideline ng159 110 ) was the subject of threatened judicial review proceeding within hours because of the perception that its reliance upon a tool known as the critical frailty score would discriminate against individuals with learning disability or other 'stable' cognitive impairments. 111 it was perhaps not a coincidence that it took another 10 days before any other body (this time the british medical association) put its head above the parapet, 112 that time to press coverage including the headline "virus patients more likely to die may have ventilators taken away"). 113 guidance from the chief medical officers (who appeared frequently in the 17:00 press conferences that became such a feature of the crisis) was still not forthcoming at the time of writing.whilst there was limited 'off-the-shelf' material that could be drawn upon, much of that material did not, in fact, provide the sort of detailed operational detail as to either procedures or criteria that was really required. this meant, therefore, that clinicians have bene left at a vital period in the run up to the peak essentially trying to make it up as they went along, frequently seeking to do so whilst juggling heavy, and increasing, clinical loads at the same time. they have also been left unclearand in many cases in real moral distress in consequenceas to the point at which they were supposed to stop applying ordinary principles of medical decision-making and instead to start operating in a world governed by some form of utilitarianism. a further consequence of the slowness of national bodies to give direction was that nhs trusts have not been not given either the 'push' or the tools to start creating the governance structures which would be crucial to ensure that triage decisions take place within structures that could provide both oversight of the process and support to clinicians operating within it.this has had one particularly pernicious consequence in the case of those with disabilities, including those with impaired decision-making capacity. whether out of a misplaced excess of zeal in attempting to undertake advance care planning, a misunderstanding of the law, 114 or otherwise, it appeared that significant numbers of individuals were having decisions made as to resuscitation without any form of consultation; in other cases, it appeared that individuals were being pressured into signing their own dnacpr notices. 115 many such individuals were elderly, but did not have specific disabilities. in other cases, it appeared that judgments were being made that (e.g) cpr should not be attempted because they had, for instance, a learning disability. this prompted an urgent letter from the national director for mental health, nhs england and nhs improvement, the national clinical director -learning disability and autism nhs england and nhs improvement and the medical director for primary care, nhs england and nhs improvement to remind trusts and gps that:the health of some people who have a learning disability and / or a diagnosis of autism may be at risk from the presence of co-existing physical conditions and also from inequities in access to and delivery of appropriate and timely assessment and treatment for physical health conditions. end of the pandemic makes a more or less cheering read than it does at present will depend, in very significant part, upon the actions taken by those who care about capacity law over the coming months, when it will be tested as never before.networks in describing the entanglements of humans and nonhumans, i also want to highlight ruptures where things do not stick to themselves, and people refuse to socialize among themselves (latour 1993) . as i will show, the encounters of civet cats, grasshoppers, david beckham, and other human and nonhuman beings are always fraught, sometimes contentious, and, on occasion, even violent.furthermore, these translocal bodily encounters provide occasions for the production of contestatory knowledges and practices of nature, culture, tradition, modernity, and cosmopolitanism. differences, as anthropologists have argued, have not disappeared because of "globalization" (rofel in press; tsing 2004) . neither can differences be readily relegated to the realm of the receding past and out of our anticipations of futures. as michael fischer puts it, the current age is not one of the erasure of the past through the various postmodern tactics of late capitalism, and "legacies of the past continue to haunt, constrain, reroute, and interact with the present" (2003:7) . fischer and others have embraced the concept of the "emergent" to talk about the increasing complexity of interactions and differentiations in everyday life today. donna haraway, for example, argues that an analysis of emergent "naturecultures" would take into account "vulnerable, on-the-ground work that cobbles together nonharmonious agencies and ways of living that are accountable both to their disparate inherited histories and to their barely possible but absolutely necessary joint futures" (2003:7) . in this article, i take the emergent seriously: rather than focusing solely on the new, i foreground the contested ways in which dynamic imaginaries of pasts and futures interact to create various emergent socialities. neither necessarily utopic nor dystopic, these entangled, effervescent socialities not only deserve critical analytical attention but also are conditions with which many of us live.focus on such emergent socialities and the bodily encounters enabling them allows me to critically examine technologies of consumption and discourses of consumer choice as a means of intervening in discussions of neoliberalism. analyses of neoliberalism have counted the emergence of the consumer-subject-self-regulating, choice-savvy-pivotal to the workings of neoliberal governmentality (rose 1996 (rose , 1999 . nikolas rose, for example, argues that neoliberal discourses of consumption locate an individual "within a certain form of life" through the identification of consumables and those who consume them (1999:86) . whereas rose highlights the discursive and transformative nature of consumption in the production and transformation of the self, i want to complicate our understandings of consumption by foregrounding its viscerality. feminist anthropologists have long argued against the prevailing vision of corporeal bodies as prediscursive: instead, they see these bodies as intimate projects and processes of subject formation that produce multiple, fractured selves through politics of desires, emotions, and pleasures. at play in these projects and processes are contestatory practices of race, gender, class, and other imaginaries of difference (alexander and mohanty 1997; butler 1993; ebron 2002; kondo 1990 kondo , 1997 rofel 1999, in press; stoler 2002) . drawing on these insights, i here emphasize that the visceral is already discursive. in examining consumption-aseating and (conspicuous)-consumption-as-spending, i suggest that, through bodily encounters of various humans and nonhumans during and after sars, the uneasy conflation between these two types of consumption have refigured orientalist tropes, while at the same time positioning them vis-à-vis neoliberal discourses of lifestyle and consumer choice. 2 i am, therefore, not only interested in bodies at large but also, specifically, in both human and nonhuman bodies as "consumables" (rose 1999:87) . however, rather than assigning the consumables to "the world of goods" that shapes the consumer-subject within "the sphere of self" (rose 1999:85) , i want to understand consumption-in its visceral and discursive dimensions-as heterogeneous and unruly discourses and practices that foreground and challenge the pervasiveness and seamlessness of neoliberal discourses of subject formation. i suggest that, although seemingly discrepant, both the banning of wild animal markets and controversies surrounding real madrid's china tour-especially the frenzy from the chinese public, as well as chinese and european media, over the star player david beckham-are dense moments of translocal encoun-ters through which consumption, as a set of heterogeneous visceral and discursive practices, proliferates. furthermore, these bodily encounters and proliferating practices of consumption provide occasions for the (re)production of a set of contested hybrid identities and subjectivities. at stake in the production and representation of chinese bodies of both human and nonhuman sorts are not just imaginaries of china's past but also visions of cosmopolitan futuresfutures that depend not so much on the transition to a new stage of consumption, globalism, or neoliberal governmentality as on situated, contestatory projects and processes out of which unruly subjectivities and identities emerge. i hope to understand these unruly emergences by taking a close look at the proliferation of consumables and those who consume them-as well as their historical entanglements and displacements. i begin with stories of two banquets and the unruly human and nonhuman bodies they brought to the table.the first banquet story begins with real madrid's purchase of david beckham. in july 2003, real madrid, the new york yankees of the football world, purchased david beckham from the english club manchester united for 35 million euros (about $40 million). beckham, the captain of the english national team, is perhaps better known for his good looks, his marriage to victoria adams (a.k.a. posh spice of the british pop group spice girls), and for the reference to him in the film bend it like beckham (2002) , which enjoyed transatlantic popularity. the transaction was completed just weeks before real madrid's tour of east asia, where beckham's metrosexual and athletic image was immensely popular, especially among young women and men: even youth who do not follow football can recognize beckham's image instantly.real madrid's first stop in asia was kunming, a scenic city in southwestern china. the trip was the most ambitious marketing project ever undertaken by a football club anywhere in the world. the football club was expected to receive over $9.9 million in appearance fees alone for their 18-day tour of china, japan, hong kong, and thailand (vanden bussche 2003) .this trip generated much public frenzy and media attention in china also because it was the first visit to china by a major foreign sports team since the sars epidemic. during the sars epidemic, the international football governing body fifa had decided to move the 2004 women's world cup, scheduled for september 2003, from china to the united states. during real madrid's trip, a series of sars charity events were to be staged between trainings and exhibition matches in mainland china and hong kong.even before their arrival, reports of real madrid's trip began to flood newspapers, tv channels, and websites and forums in europe, asia, and even the united states, where football (or soccer as it is known here) is less popular. chinese websites, in particular, followed and publicized every move of the team. sina.com, one of the most popular websites among the 87 million chinese internet users, created an interactive webpage with updated news exclusively regarding real madrid's visit. the news included real madrid's training and match schedules, "cultural" activities such as banquets and sightseeing, as well as stories of chinese fans' enthusiasm for the team and, especially, beckham.after real madrid's landing in kunming, however, reports of "china salutes beckham" (vanden bussche 2003) quickly gave way to titles such as "real madrid face pr disaster in china" (agence france presse 2003) . while chinese media mumbled about the lukewarm manners of real madrid players, their european counterparts made outright accusations of real madrid's "disrespect" for their hosts' customs and culture. the first crime on the list was the team "[snubbing] the ancient chinese rite of passage for first-time guests, leaving a meticulously prepared banquet in their honour a mere 15 minutes after its start" (agence france presse 2003) . the media expressed "shock" over the fact that the team left the banquet early without eating anything and before the provincial governor, who was the host of the evening, could present them with a welcoming gift. whereas french and english presses elaborated on how real madrid made their hosts "lose face," chinese media focused on beckham, who was reported to have done nothing during the banquet except play with his cell phone.the fiasco took on an even more sensational aura after the british tabloid the sun published a news report entitled "becks snubs chinese grub." 3 it reported, [the] first course consisted of stinky tofu, described as "hell to smell but heaven to taste." it was followed by a succession of dishes, including crispy deep fried grasshopper, fried bamboo worms, which looked like maggots, and glazed bees. the main course of boiled chicken with mushrooms was served with noodles and a bowl of chicken fat. [sun 2003] these wildly exotic dishes, the sun concluded, were simply "indigestible" for beckham and his teammates (sun 2003) . emerging out of the encounters between real madrid and their chinese hosts-especially the media reports of these encounters-is the embodied imaginary of a traditional, exotic chinese culture out of sync with a cosmopolitan world represented by the globetrotting real madrid. the first point i want to make about this imaginary is that it is not the residue of a preglobalized world waiting to be wiped out by the rational and homogenizing forces of the global market; rather, it is precisely through encounters generated by transnational projects and processes of marketization and consumption, such as real madrid's far east tour, that such an imaginary is sharpened and given a visceral form.second, these encounters of human and nonhuman bodies and objects are as much about circulation and connection as about rupture. the sun's description of the grasshopper as a "local delicacy" indexes an exoticized bodily continuity between the wild animal and the chinese people who readily consume it. at the same time, this continuity, whether real or imagined, is the condition for the production of another kind of visceral discontinuity: that the grasshopper is simply "indigestible" for-and therefore incommensurable with-beckham's healthy, athletic, globetrotting body. this bodily incommensurability, once in place, sets beckham and his teammates apart not only from the grasshopper but also from their chinese hosts. indeed, the banquet fiasco, together with the media frenzies that ensued, crystallizes the kind of translocal visceral encounters in which boundaries of nature and culture, human and nonhuman, tradition and modernity, local and global are produced, contested, and reconfigured.what we have in hand here is a case in which things do not stick to themselves, and people refuse to socialize among themselves. in their places are "hybrids" that reshuffle and realign the boundaries and contents of nature and culture through unruly behaviors (see, e.g., haraway 1991 haraway , 1997 latour 1999; mitchell 2002; raffles 2002) . this is what latour (1993 latour ( , 1999 calls "the paradox of the modern": the proliferation of "hybrids" and the simultaneous rejection of the ontological presence of these hybrids by assigning them either to nature or culture, premodern or modern.yet the biggest irony of the real madrid banquet fiasco is that it took place after china banned the consumption of "wild animals" at the height of the sars epidemic. did the sun embellish or simply fabricate the exotic menu? or did the chinese hosts in kunming defy the chinese central government and stage this exotic banquet to impress their cosmopolitan guests? sina.com did not list the menu in their exhaustive coverage of the real madrid tour; they simply mentioned that the banquet included "local delicacies," a term that usually carries an exotic flavor. 4 whether the menu was real or fabricated, these stories themselves draw my attention: why did exotic animal food become a centerpiece in the media coverage of a sports team's commercial tour? what i am interested in is the heterogeneous, sometimes competing, ways in which particular hybrid bodies and subjectivities are produced through encounters generated by projects and processes of marketization and consumption. in popular and academic discourses, "consumption" has been a particularly relevant point of entry into descriptions and understandings of transformations in postsocialist china. in what follows, i offer a cautionary note on the entanglements of discourses of consumption in china with imaginaries of globality and emergent neoliberal subjectivities.celebratory popular and academic discourses have invoked images of lively markets and mass consumption as convenient tropes for china's transition from a production-based, planned economy toward economic and social progress. some are even hopeful that china's market economy, in producing enthusiastic consumer-subjects and cultivating horizontal relations of consumption, will create a more democratic everyday sociability (davis 2000) . even as these discussions can help bring neoliberal discourses into focus in understanding china's transformations, i suggest that they also run the risk of privileging consumption as an unmistakable sign of modernity and globality and that they perhaps too readily translate consumption into the (anticipated) production of neoliberal subjectivities and identities.in a recent article, wang hui (2004) argues that we cannot fully understand the historicity and contradictions of neoliberalism in china if we speak the untroubled language of "transition" or "development." he points out that such narratives of transition are in fact "ahistorical" precisely because they ignore the specific historical conditions for the emergence of "chinese neoliberalism" in the 1980s and 1990s: china does not fit the model of neoliberal transition through which consumption and market economy would be neatly lined up with private ownership, consumer choice, and, eventually and naturally, liberal democracy.sharing wang's concerns, i argue that, without problematizing the linkages between the market, consumption, and neoliberal subjectivity, we may inadvertently reproduce narratives of transition that relegate to the background other kinds of translocal networks and encounters by which meaningful bodily practices and subjectivities are produced, while at the same time leaving these networks and encounters relatively intact from critical analyses. it is necessary, i think, that we talk about transformationthrough-consumption without falling back on narratives of transition that oppose tradition to modernity, local to global, production to consumption.one useful strategy of intervention against narratives of transition has been bringing "production" back into the picture in understanding economic and social transformations as well as emergent subjectivities and identities in china. this strategy insists on understanding mass consumption and the emergence of neoliberal subjectivity in china as partially constituted, open-ended projects and processes that are necessarily entangled in relations of production and labor practices (anagnost 2004; pun 2003; yan 2003) .i also suggest that an important rupture of narratives of transition comes from within consumption as a set of heterogeneous discourses and practices that are at the same time visceral and discursive, persistent and anticipatory. fascinations with the consumption of "wild animals" became a focal point in european and chinese media coverage of real madrid's china trip precisely because these discourses of "wild" consumptions simultaneously refigured orientalist tropes of exotic epicurean traditions and neoliberal imaginations of the enthusiastic and savvy consumer-self. as a new middle class emerges in urban china, their choices of consumption-and desires for certain consumables-have also become subjects of international scrutiny as well as government regulation. to further discuss ambivalences toward and ruptures within consumption, i now turn to my second tale of a banquet in which "wild animals" again figured front and center-this time, however, through their conspicuous absence.my second banquet story is itself the product of interrupted circulations and unexpected encounters. i had planned for a field trip to shanghai in summer 2003 to conduct follow-up research on traditional chinese medicine. my aspirations for transnational traveling, however, were thwarted by the travel of something else: in spring 2003, the sars epidemic broke out in mainland china and hong kong and within a few months had spread to 30 countries; sars visited every continent except antarctica. i had no alternative but to postpone my trip until late august-after the who and the u.s. state department lifted their sanctions against traveling in china. 5 on my arrival in shanghai, i was overwhelmed by post-sars "feeding frenzy": as my friends put it, people felt as if they had just been released from prison and returned to consumption with a vengeance. tourism again became favorite weekend and holiday activities after the chinese government lifted the ban on interregional traveling, once-empty shopping malls were filled with bustling crowds scouring for things to buy, and restaurants were busy making up for the business lost during the sars outbreak.a few days after my arrival, i joined some friends from high school for a sumptuous dinner at a recently opened restaurant. it was located in the hongqiao area, which used to be a suburb but is now an affluent and bustling commercial area. the restaurant was on the third floor of a commercial high-rise: in the last few years, an increasing number of new, upscale restaurants have been set up within commercial complexes such as shopping malls, rather than standalone buildings. we took an elevator to reach the restaurant. the interior of the elevator was spotless. the carpet read "monday," indicating that it was changed daily. next to the buttons on the wall was a large sign that read "has been disinfected today"-a new practice in shanghai's public buildings beginning during the sars epidemic.at the entrance of the restaurant, we were greeted with a wall-to-wall fish tank containing a stunning school of red tropical fish, which were intended for viewing, rather than culinary pleasure. there were so many fish that they effectively formed a fluid red screen shielding the interior of the restaurant from the visitors. once the beautiful qipao-clad receptionist chaperoned us around the fish tank, i found myself in a spacious "exhibition hall." in the middle of the hall was a large table where vivid plastic samples and price tags of main dishes were displayed. a deli was set up on the left side of the hall, where various cold appetizers were showcased. the other two walls were lined with fish tanks that contained a wide variety of live fish, shellfish, crabs, and shrimps-most of which i had never seen before. unlike the fish tank at the entrance, these animals were destined to be eaten. taking notice of my awed expression, my friends told me that they selected this restaurant because of its dazzling array of live freshwater and marine animals.as we sat down to order, i noticed that there were no snake dishes on the menu. although not a big fan of eating snake, i was nevertheless puzzled by its absence because snakes-fried, braised, or stewed-were ubiquitous in shanghai's restaurants during my visit in 1999. 6 my friends told me that snakes were no longer sold in restaurants because they could not be "farmed"-that is, humans cannot regulate the reproductive activities of snakes while keeping them in captivity-and were, therefore, listed among the "wild animals" that the chinese central government banned during and after sars.snakes were not the only "wild animals" that disappeared from the dinner table because of sars. among competing explanations for the origin of sars, the hypothesis of zoonotic origin, meaning "animal-borne origin," was most strongly favored by research scientists in and outside of china and, furthermore, was the theory most widely spread through mass media, the internet, and rumors. in late april 2003, at the height of the sars outbreak and under mounting international criticism for its lack of action, the chinese forestry administration and the chinese industry and commerce administration announced the banning of hunting, selling, purchase, transportation, importexport, and marketing of all "wild animals" with the exception of necessities for scientific research (people's daily 2003) . the term wild animal, however, was both vague and all encompassing. without any clear definition of which animals were considered "wild" and why, the "farmed tiger frog"-another delicacy and one of the best sellers at live animal markets-was singled out as the only "wild animal" exempt from the ban (people's daily 2003) . moreover, although land animals-including most amphibians-were strictly banned, the status of freshwater and marine animals was less clear. restaurants in shanghai, for example, stopped serving drunken seafood-a culinary method in which small, live freshwater or marine animals such as shrimps and clams are dumped into a pot of rice liquor and then eaten almost immediately. whether an animal was "wild," it seems, also depended on whether it was raw or cooked for consumption.in may 2003, research scientists in hong kong and shenzhen, guangdong province, working on civet cats isolated viruses similar to the human sars virus and suggested that the civet cat was the likely animal host of the sars virus (guan et al. 2003) . it is noteworthy that although some of these civet cats may have been captured, most were commercially farmed. almost all were destined to be eaten, at restaurants, rather than home. however, the isolation of the civet cat as the animal host of the sars virus did not ease the ban on-or lessen people's fears of-other "wild animals." it was only in august 2003, well after the last sars patient was released from the hospital, that the ban was relaxed to exempt chinese deer, african ostrich, turkey, scorpion, and a total of 54 assorted land animals (chinese forestry administration 2003) . most of the animals on the list were commercially farmed. many were exotic or novel food items. the chinese forestry administration explained that the rationale for their exemption was that the farming technologies for these animals were "mature" enough so that they could be domesticated and bred "for commercial purposes" (2003, emphasis added)-even as the administration admitted that there was no guarantee of control of germs that could potentially jump species.the ambiguity of the term wild animal was also one of the topics at my dinner with high school friends. we argued over which animals were "wild" and therefore banned-and whether the banning of "wild animals," indeed, made much difference in dealing with sars. our discussion ended, not in a consensus but with the arrival of our food, along with white towels soaked in disinfectant to clean our hands (only at the end of the meal did i find out that we were to pay for these towels, even though they were mandatory at restaurants in shanghai). in spite of the absence of the snake, our dinner did not suffer from the lack of exotic food: in addition to novel varieties of shrimps and shellfishes, i had my first taste of sturgeon-commercially farmed and braised to perfection.in the subsequent weeks, the topic of "wild animals" kept crawling back in various forms into my interviews with medical professionals in shanghai, as well as my conversations with other friends: when we were eating at restaurants, debating the origin of sars, or talking about football. even though the "wild animal" was at the center of everyday conversations and government regulations of sars, the meaning of the "wild" was by no means reductively "natural," nor could it be structurally defined in opposition to "domestic" or "farmed." i do not imply here that anything goes as far as the meaning of "wild animal" is concerned. to the contrary, i suggest that, through the act of banning certain animal foods and markets during the sars outbreak, the "wild" was marked with a set of heterogeneous meanings specifically and intimately related to, if not produced by, human consumption-consumption in its visceral and discursive dimensions. the wildness of the civet cat came under scrutiny when research scientists, the chinese government, and international media identified the animal as the likely animal host of the sars virus and, at the same time, an item on the chinese dinner table.these human entanglements in the production of the "wild animal" suggest that what needs to be analyzed in understanding sars is more than the physical body of the civet cat or the generic sequence of the sars-like virus it carried. we also need to pay critical attention to the enmeshment of civet cats and other "wild" creatures deep within everyday life. in what follows, i argue that it was during a medical, social, and political crisis of potential global scale that the "wild" took on contingent and contested forms through a variety of actions that were at once biological, political, legal, historical, social, transnational, and visceral. elusive and heterogeneous, the "wild" emerged as a temporary point of convergence in discourses of sars and, as i will show, at the same time resisted any identification of it as the readily accessible point of origin of the sars epidemic. to make this point, i first turn to the competing origin stories of sars, with a focus on the perhaps most sensational actor in these stories: the civet cat.one day in april 2004, as i was in the process of writing this article, i was confronted with, on the one hand, reports of a new case of sars originating from a laboratory in beijing and, at the same time, a new article in far eastern economic review entitled "why sars didn't return" (pottinger 2004) . the argument of the article, in short, is that the virus disappeared because of the successful elimination of wild animal markets in south china, including the killing of thousands of civet cats. although, contrary to the claims of the article, the elimination of wild animal markets did not eradicate sars, the chinese government immediately responded to the new sars case by announcing the plan to slaughter 10,000 more civet cats (bradsher and altman 2004) . what, i wondered, makes the civet cat public enemy no. 1 in the battles against sars, in spite of obvious possibilities of alternative origins and routes of transmission?to begin, sars was indeed a very bad disease for biomedicine. between november 2002 and the end of the epidemic in june 2003, an estimated 8,422 people in over 30 countries were infected with various strands of the virus, and 916 died as a consequence (who 2003) . however, given that the 11 percent mortality rate of sars is slightly above that of the influenza, sars was nowhere near a plague and the panic over sars seemed to have bordered on paranoia. this panic was compounded by the fact that, even as more and more people fell sick and died, biomedical science was late in coming up with an authoritative explanation or effective treatment. scientists were not able to identify the virus as a novel coronavirus until april 2003, 7 five months after the appearance of first clinical cases (holmes 2003) . even now, there is no effective treatment, definitive prognosis, or reliable preventive measures against a potential future outbreak. in fact, scientific communities around the world responded in diverse ways to the question of what should be done when facing such a rapidly spreading epidemic that threatened to reach a global scale. whereas some labs immediately delved into the sequencing of the sars genome (peiris et al. 2003; webster 2004) , others rushed to develop a vaccine (marshall and enserink 2004) . in the second case, some scientists conceded that, first, it would be extremely difficult to develop an effective vaccine given the unusually high evolving rate of the coronavirus; second, even if scientists managed to produce a vaccine, it would take a second large-scale outbreak to test whether the vaccine actually works (marshall and enserink 2004) . in short, sars called into question the efficacy of biomedicine in containing infectious diseases and threw into sharp relief the uncertainties and frailties of the standardized tools and narratives that produce and authorize biomedical knowledge. 8 however, the "inadequacy" of biomedicine was not the only factor that fueled the anxiety and paranoia over sars. 9 it is noteworthy that speculations over the origin of sars did not simply originate from the lab or the chinese government but had entangled roots in repercussions of recent world events. the sudden explosion of media coverage of sars in and especially outside of china coincided not with the outbreak of the epidemic, but with the u.s.led invasion of iraq at the end of march 2003. although some earlier speculations in and outside of china suspected the natural and nonhuman origin of sars, others spoke of biological weapons: was sars a mysterious biological weapon? (news24.com 2003) . rumors of sars being a "foreign" biological weapon spread through chinese websites, and some claimed that the novel and highly unusual virus was designed to target chinese genes (tong 2003) . debates about the origin of sars continue until today-for example, whether the virus jumped from animals to humans or the other way around-long after the story of the civet cat as the animal culprit prevailed in research communities and mass media.even as competing origin stories abounded, medical, sanitary, and everyday practice in china targeted multiple routes of transmission, especially respiratory transmission. the possibility of respiratory transmission of sars was emphasized by several different sources. in may 2003, the who released a conference report claiming that the major mode of transmission of sars was respiratory, although the potential for infection by ingestion must also be considered. medical professionals on the ground also noted that infection rates were much higher at high-tech locations such as hospitals with centralized ventilation (lee et al. 2003; masur et al. 2003) . in china and hong kong, many of those who came down with sars were doctors and nurses who worked at high-tech hospitals such as the prince of wales hospital in hong kong and the people's hospital in beijing, both of which remained quarantined for months during and even after the outbreak. some doctors and nurses who risked their lives fighting sars declined to be interviewed on television; others agreed to be interviewed, on the condition that the interview would not be conducted at their home and that their faces would be obscured so that friends and neighbors would not recognize and avoid them.in shanghai, there were only eight confirmed cases of sars. however, "fever clinics" for anyone who had a temperature higher than 37.5 • celsius (99.5 • fahrenheit), and quarantine wards for potential sars patients were set up in all major hospitals. a doctor who worked at one of these wards told me that, on entering the ward, he did not know whether he would get out again. he explained, i volunteered for the squad [to combat sars] in april, and stayed in the ward without going home for more than four weeks. the top floor of our hospital was quarantined for potential sars patients. there were 15 beds in there. we had no idea how many beds we would eventually need. at one end of the ward were the patients' beds, at the other the beds for doctors. there were three beds in between that were kept vacant. when i checked on my patients, i wore two protection suits, three pairs of disposable surgical shoes, three masks, and a pair of goggles. even so, i knew that i was still exposed to air when i used the stethoscope. i tried to use it as infrequently as possible. otherwise i just had to take the risk. luckily none of the patients in the ward had sars, although some turned out to have measles.it was such a relief to be home eventually. while i was inside (the hospital), i heard stories about taxi drivers refusing to take people coming out of the hospital. one of our nurses had to call us from her cell phone so that we could tell the driver that she did not have sars. so it was just as well that i did not leave the hospital for four weeks. [conversation with author, september 4, 2003] although medical and everyday practices-such as wearing masks and frequent disinfection of surface areas with disinfectants, including vinegar-worked against multiple and especially respiratory routes of transmission, it was the civet cat that became the most infamous creature in the origin stories of sars. in what follows, i focus on the one origin story that became ubiquitous and dominant in discourses of sars-that of the civet cat and china's wet markets. 10 why, among all the competing origin stories and suspected routes of transmission, did the civet cat draw the most intense scrutiny from researchers and media in and especially outside of china? why does the civet cat, along with other "wild animals," continue to be the target of aggressive government regulation and media controversies even after sars? why, while images of masked faces on magazine covers became symptomatic of the spread of sars, 11 did scientific and popular discourses zero in on practices of china's wild animal markets in their narratives of origin?underlying the fear of the civet cat was the assumptionpopularized by research scientists and mass media in and outside of china-that it was only when humans came into physical contact with the wild animal that the virus jumped species and started a deadly epidemic. the story of the "zoonotic origin" of sars was not only boosted by the identification of the sars virus as a coronavirus similar to flu viruses but also by the speculation that the initial site of the outbreak was hong kong or the guangdong province of southern china, both famous for their bold appetites for exotic animal foods. moreover, the first identified sars patient was reportedly an animal handler who worked in the wild animal food markets in guangdong province . the argument about the link between human appetites and the nonhuman origin of the virus was further consolidated by reports of the discovery of large quantities of sars antibodies among animal dealers in guangdong . in may, research scientists in guangdong and hong kong identified the civet cat, a delicacy in southern china, as the original animal host of the sars virus (guan et al. 2003) . in the meantime, research scientists pleaded for the immediate closing of wet markets in china and other asian countries as a measure to stop sars in its track and prevent future outbreaks (guan et al. 2003) . these pleas were quickly and widely publicized in scientific and medical journals as well as through mass media in and especially outside of china. as discussed earlier, the chinese government responded by banning the consumption of almost all wild land animals.at play in the frenzies surrounding the "zoonotic origin" is the translocal scientific and media representation that the chinese, in indulging their appetites for exotic "wild animals," transgressed proper barriers between human and animal, the domestic and the wild, and culture and nature. in other words, the story of "zoonotic origin" did not blame nature itself for the sars outbreak; what went wrong was the chinese people's uncanny affinity with the nonhuman and the wild. this affinity was enabled not only by the highly mutable virus that was crafty enough to move between chinese bodies of both human and nonhuman sorts but also by the visceral act of consumption.in fact, in both media and scientific origin stories of sars, the civet cat and the wet market in which it was sold were often conflated. european, north american, and many chinese newspapers and websites were replete with narratives linking the "age-old tradition" of eating wild animals with sars. these sensational reports portrayed the strange entanglements of human and animal bodies, and the deadly filthiness of such entanglements (lovgren 2003; rosenthal 2003; sperry 2003; webster 2004; yardley 2004; york 2003) . the following is a vivid description of wild animal markets in guangdong by reuters:two little boys giggle as they play hide and seek among hundreds of filthy cages packed tight with civet cats, dogs, porcupines and squirrels. . . . amid the stench of death and decay, traders of exotic animals-a culinary delight for many southern chinese-haggle over prices with customers, occasionally turning their attention to their children, pinching their cheeks or tousling their hair. narrow passageways are strewn with animal dung, urine, entrails and grimy fodder. "what's there to be afraid of?" asked mrs. huang, carrying her three-month-old daughter on her back. "we have been working and living here for years and we have had no problems." a few steps away, men with iron pipes clubbed a dog unconscious and slit its throat. others squatted around another dead dog, plucking it clean of hair with their bare fingers. virologists believe that such markets in china and farms where people live in very close proximity to animals are fertile breeding grounds for disease and viruses. [ reuters 2003] this excerpt is littered with interspecies bodily entanglements: "cages tightly packed" with various animals, human adults pinching the cheeks of their children and tousling their hair as they haggle over the prices of animals, narrow alleys strewn with animal parts, and a dead dog and humans who touch it with their "bare fingers." these voyeuristic images of the "local culinary tradition" were then contrasted with and condemned by the sanitized, authoritative voice of an abstract "virologist": unnatural interspecies bodily encounters breed disease and viruses. and the unnatural affinity with animals through eating, the stories go, lies in a chinese way of life "that has existed for as long as anyone can remember" (lynch 2003). as a logical consequence of this kind of reasoning, many scientists cautiously recommended the eradication of wet markets, while at the same time identifying chinese people's culinary taste as a public health hazard and a deeply rooted cultural tradition that needed to be "respected" (bradsher and altman 2004; nature 2004; watts 2004:134; webster 2004) .these accusatory ambivalences and voyeuristic curiosities toward visceral entanglements of chinese bodies of both human and nonhuman sorts should come as no surprise to my readers: similar discourses plague wet markets and restaurants in chinatowns in the united states. in his article "fish stories: environmentalist disgust and the viscerality of race," timothy choy (1997) examines environmentalist discourses surrounding "fresh kills" in the wet markets of san francisco's chinatown and what he calls the "racial signification" of the accusation, "you eat fish!" he argues that the identification of the chineseness of certain food practices begs a critical analysis of race that takes into account the visceral qualities of racial discourse. i find choy's observations useful for thinking through similar accusations: you eat dogs! you eat civet cats! you eat grasshoppers! the proliferation of these "you-eat-(animals)"s in everyday discourse of chineseness (and even asianness) underscores the viscerality of racialized orientalist tropes that produce various exotic others through their excessive pleasures and enjoyments. in the case of scientific and popular discourses of sars, we see the recurrence of a familiar narrative strategy that visceralizes the traditional and the uncanny as the origin of a culturally specific disease that-if not contained-threatens to destroy the global. the civet cat, in particular, became a protagonist in the origin stories of sars because it conjured up familiar orientalist representations in which the wildness and exoticness of chinese bodies-of both human and nonhuman sorts-emerged out of visceral acts of consuming. although these tropes are nothing new, i am intrigued, first, by their obsession with the viscerality of consumption, and the effectiveness of the visceral in producing racialized bodies, identities, and subjectivities. moreover, i suggest that, while mass media and scientific representations constructed a visceralized ancient epicurean tradition of china as the "real origin" of the sars outbreak, they also did so by locating narratives of excess squarely within the sphere of the market and mass consumption, which is not an emblem of "ancient chinese culture" but a product of recent economic, social, and political transformations in china.as has been pointed out by judith farquhar, the largescale marketization and consumption of food in china today has as much to do with the general "deficiency" of the mao era, as with the "excess" of a post-mao china in which desires for consumption are discursively cultivated and embodied (farquhar 2002) . farquhar argues that the practice of excess in postsocialist china is a response to the general state of deficiency-if not hunger itself-of the mao era. she further points out that such excess is often localized: compared to the pervasive state of deficiency that characterized the chinese state and society in general during the mao era, the excess in consumption has so far been restricted to urban areas and the emerging middle class. it is no surprise, perhaps, that the sars outbreak was at its worst in the prosperous guangdong province and the capital city beijing. i am interested, then, in how persistent strategies of othering are refigured for discourses and practices of middle-class lifestyle and consumer choice. i suggest that, in contrast to orientalist representations that conjure up the familiar image of one uniformly exotic china, a closer look at the heterogeneous discourses and practices of consumption suggests a more elusive and fragmented picture of "china" and "the chinese." rather than being emblematic of an anonymous "chinese culture," visceral practices of consumption in china today are intimately entangled in the emergence of an urban middle class. the rest of this article, then, is a preliminary examination of the ways in which competing visions, understandings, and practices of cosmopolitan bodies and subjectivities are produced in the wake of the sars epidemic. instead of discussing marketization and consumption strictly in terms of china's participation in the global domination of neoliberalism, i now want to focus on how competing visions and practices of the cosmopolitan are produced through consumption: in particular, the production of contested middle-class, cosmopolitan subjectivities mapped onto racialized, disciplined, healthy bodies.let me now return to real madrid and david beckham's tour of china. although the european media's interest in real madrid's china tour waned after the welcoming banquet fiasco, the chinese media and public, in contrast, continued to be fascinated by every move of the team, and beckham, in particular: is he getting along well with his new teammates? he lets his hair down today: is this a new fashion statement or is he in a bad mood? one report asserted that beckham has such an extraordinary body that even his sweat-drenched jersey smelled fragrant. all these observations were duly posted on sina.com and further proliferated through chat rooms and personal websites.in contrast to beckham, his teammate ronaldo, one of the most famous brazilian football players today, received comments on his body that were far less favorable. the chinese media joined european commentaries on ronaldo's weight problem, giving him the nickname feiluo (lit., fei means "obese" and luo is the first character in the chinese translation of ronaldo's name). the chinese reports during the real madrid tour, moreover, focused not only on ronaldo's weight but also, more importantly, on the presumed lack of control over his appetites. sina.com gave ronaldo an amount of attention second only to beckham: it suggested that ronaldo's "decadent" lifestyle during his summer vacation on the mediterranean island of sardinia made him "fat"; he was "always hungry and looking for good food"; and he had become so overweight that "he could barely run on the pitch" (sina.com 2003) .the contrast between the chinese media's treatment of beckham's and ronaldo's bodies is indicative of incongruous visions for cosmopolitan bodies and neoliberal subjectivities. whereas beckham's body was blond, disciplined, healthy, and sexy, ronaldo's racially ambiguous body was depicted to embody failures in disciplining an excessive appetite-which, as we recall, was blamed for the outbreak of sars. the chinese media, then, was already steeped in racialized orientalist and neoliberal discourses of the body: unlike their european counterparts, however, their anxieties over delayed modernity were palpable in the salient juxtapositions of beckham and ronaldo. ronaldo is, perhaps, as cosmopolitan as beckham. but, in choosing unwisely, he proved not to be a very good neoliberal consumer, which also made him not a very good neoliberal consumable.the ridicule of ronaldo further set up the disciplined beckham as the neoliberal poster boy and a very good consumable at the same time. the desire for beckham's body reached its climax not during real madrid's china trip but after. after real madrid's departure from beijing, which was the last stop of their china tour, a number of memorabilia were publicly auctioned. the most curious items were things used by david beckham at the hotel: slippers, pajamas, and bed sheets-unwashed. the slippers and pajamas were auctioned at 2,800 yuan (about $350) apiece, reportedly purchased by a chinese father for his daughter (sina.com 2003) . the money, ironically, went to a charity fund for children orphaned by the sars epidemic (british broadcasting company 2003) .here, the fear of germs was apparently forgotten: beckham's body was not seen as a pollutant but something, when consumed, that could contribute to the fight against virulent germs. this moment of identification, mediated by the consumption of fragments and peripheries of beckham's body, crystallizes a particular anticipatory discourse of neoliberalism: one in which china and chinese desires are to be articulated and included, not exoticized and othered.in this last story of encounters of bodies as consumables, the distinction between the world of goods and the sphere of human identities were again called into question: this time the chinese human body was not aligned with the civet cat and the grasshopper but david beckham. emerging out of this realignment of human and nonhuman bodies is a different vision and articulation of the cosmopolitan world and china's place in it. persisting anxieties over a world of out-of-place, unruly bodies are subdued by the aspirations for membership in an emerging middle-class, cosmopolitan world of disciplined, healthy, sexy bodies, even as these anxieties make such aspirations all the more urgent.instead of subscribing to the view that pitches tradition and culture against neoliberal subjectivities and practices, i have endeavored to understand the heterogeneous discourses and practices of consumption in relation to persisting orientalist tropes as well as neoliberal imaginaries in post-sars china. rather than assuming or anticipating the flourish of a more or less uniform neoliberal subjectivity in post-sars china, i have focused on the divergent, compet-ing, and embodied visions and practices of identity production and subject formation. i have argued that the unruly human and nonhuman consumables and those who consume them challenge us to critically rethink the ways in which nature and culture, wild and domestic, traditional and modern, past and future are invoked and refigured in diverse and meaningful ways.by focusing on consumption-as-eating and consumption-as-spending, i have brought to the foreground the importance of the visceral in contemporary knowledge production. by arguing for the "visceral," i am not proposing a phenomenological approach to the body. nor am i interested in setting up eating or tasting as non-western ways of knowing and being. rather, what i want to highlight here is that the visceral is already discursive.as noted by gary shapiro (2003) , michel foucault's notion of "disciplinary power" is intimately connected to the technology of the vision, a notion that is itself visualized through foucault's discussion of jeremy bentham's design of the "panopticon," the idea of which hinges on "a fictional gaze, a simple architectural equivalent of the traditional eye of god" (2003:298) . foucault's analysis of disciplinary power, then, has its own genealogy of vision, which has been a privileged position of modern knowledge production. i here think of, for example, haraway's critique of "the god's eye view" that authorizes the universality of a masculine science (1991) . i also think of voices from within medical anthropology that tell us that vision is but one of the senses through which we have come to know the world. however, these other senses-taste, hearing, touching, and smelling-have often been relegated to archaic or non-western modes of knowledge production and subject formation.in his article on cassette sermons in contemporary egypt, charles hirschkind (2001) argues for an ethnography of the sensorial that considers listening as a disciplinary practice and its role in subject formation. likewise, miyako inoue (2003) has described the ways in which listening shapes japanese women's language and their emergence as modern, gendered subjects. i find these discussions tremendously helpful in broadening our understanding of knowledge production and subject formation in the contemporary world. in placing the visceral at the center of this piece, then, i have tried to draw attention to the ways in which the visceral is already discursively produced and cultivated. if the civet cat is not always good to eat, it is still good to think. 1. i here adopt the more widely used term football, rather than the u.s. term soccer.2. the oxford english dictionary has a long list of alternative definitions for consume, all of which involve connotations of degeneracy, wastefulness, or exhaustion-a far cry from rational consumption circulated through neoliberal discourses. relevant to my topics in this article are consume (2), "to spend (goods or money), esp. wastefully"; and consume (3b), "to make away with (food), devour, swallow, eat up, drink up." 3. "becks" is a nickname for beckham. 4. sina.com did include, however, images of heavily made-up young women clad in ethnic minority clothing welcoming the real madrid players, who looked bewildered or bored. 5. during my trip, i found that sars, still fresh in people's memories, was a recurring theme in my conversations with medical professionals as well as other friends and acquaintances who lived through the epidemic. even the most mundane daily activitiestaking the elevator, for example-somehow turned into a conversation about sars. in this article, i juxtapose personal stories with articles from science journals, popular magazines, newspapers, and websites to examine the lingering presence of sars, and how it speeded up consumption activities. the form of this article, then, also serves as a reflection on the media of circulations, encounters, and ruptures.6. the popularity of snakes at restaurants in shanghai was related to the rise of medicinal food and female beauty products in urban china. snake is considered a good source of yin energy (the cool, feminine, descending, and nurturing energy). it is commonly recommended for women as a medicinal food to nourish their yin energy and, thus, give them smoother and more beautiful skin. fried snakes are not recommended for beauty purposes because the frying process depletes yin energy. 7. a coronavirus is a type of virus that contains single-stranded rnas and is shaped like a crown when seen under a microscope. it is a main cause of respiratory infections among humans and animals. 8. as biomedical researchers struggled to identify the virus, practitioners of traditional chinese medicine used sars as one of the opportunities to advertise the clinical efficacy of traditional herbal medicine in contrast to biomedicine (zhan 2001) . for example, students at beijing university were given herbal packages that contained eight different herbs as a preventive measure. "the jade screen," a yuan dynasty prescription, was used to treat patients with sars symptoms before the virus was identified. proponents of traditional chinese medicine argued that, because traditional chinese medicine uses "syndrome differentiation" to treat patients, it does not rely on the identification of the pathogen as a prerequisite for reliable diagnosis and effective treatment.9. medical professionals in shanghai told me that they believed that the first cases of sars probably occurred as early as november 2002. however, the international media explosion over sars did not happen until the end of march 2003. there have been several explanations for this delay. one explanation-especially from north america and europe-is the cover-up by the chinese government. north american and european scientists and media criticized the chinese government for its "authoritarian" and "secretive" approach to the epidemic and urged for more "democratic" ways of handling the crisis. in china, however, some suggest that the public disclosure of sars and the subsequent intervention by the chinese government were not only because of "international pressure." some medical professionals pointed out to me that the clinical symptoms and autopsies of sars patients were easily confused with those of pneumonia; on the other hand, it was impossible to keep sars a "secret" because of the fast rate at which the disease spread-causing entire hospitals to be quarantined.10. wet market is a term that describes markets in which livestock and wild animals are sold alive, especially as food items. the word wet emphasizes the wet and slippery floors-and filthiness, by association-of these markets. interestingly, although wet market had been used to describe markets in chinatowns of the united states, its popularity in english usage soared during media coverage of the sars outbreak.11. for example, the april 26, 2003, issue of the economist adopted on its front cover an image of chairman mao wearing a mask. the may 5, 2003, issue of time presented on its cover a blond-haired, blue-eyed young woman wearing a mask to alert the readers to the "global threat" of sars. most images, however, depicted not individuals but masses of asian bodies wearing masks. this focus on the spread of sars through sneezing and other forms of contact, thus, also played on an old orientalist image of china-and east asia-as a densely crowded place where contamination is spread very easily.in wuhan, china, in december 2019, a series of pneumonia cases of unknown etiology appeared, soon after diagnosed as being caused by a novel coronavirus initially titled 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) and subsequently officially named covid-19 by the who on february 11, 2020 [1] .as of february 14, 2020, there are 49,053 laboratory-confirmed cases globally [2] , 15 of which are in the united states [3] . there is a small but growing body of literature regarding the imaging findings of covid-19, and the purpose of this case report is to describe the imaging and associated clinical features of an asymptomatic covid-19 patient outside wuhan, china, including an imaging finding previously not reported.a 61-year-old asymptomatic man was admitted to our hospital in lanzhou, china (1005 miles from wuhan) on january 25, 2020 for close contact with a novel coronavirus pneumonia (ncp) patient more than 10 days prior. the patient was a retired driver in good health, without diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease and had no history of smoking. the patient's temperature and physical examination were normal. laboratory analysis showed reduced levels of c-reactive protein (1.29 mg/l; normal range, 2-8 mg/l), but white blood cells and lymphocytes were within normal range. the patient's throat swab was positive for ncp nucleic acid.on the day of admission, high resolution ct (hrct) showed multiple ground glass opacities (ggos) in the right lung (fig. 1a, b) . two days later, ct images revealed an enlarged lesion with small areas of consolidation in the center (fig. 1c, d) . on the sixth day, ct examination showed that the quantity, range and density of lesions in the right lung had increased further (fig. 1e ). on ct on the 9th day of admission, the lesions progressed further and involved both lungs, with thickened interlobular septa around the lesion in the upper lobe of the right lung (fig. 1f , g); in addition, there were small bilateral pleural effusions (fig. 1h ).since admission, the patient has remained with only mild shortness of breath after activity on the 11th day of admission (february 4, 2020). he has not had fever, cough, myalgias, fatigue, sputum production, headache, hemoptysis or diarrhea. notably, he has also remained without complications previously reported in association with covid-19, including acute respiratory distress syndrome, rnaaemia, acute cardiac injury, secondary infection. during the hospitalization, the main treatment has been oral antiviral drugs (lopinavir and ritonavir tablets), interferon and methylprednisolone. on the 23th day of admission (february 16, 2020), ct showed that the patient's pleural effusions had resolved and bilateral pulmonary lesions improved ( fig. 2a, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinimag.2020.02.008 received 13 february 2020; received in revised form 17 february 2020; accepted 20 february 2020 b), however the patient remains hospitalized because his nucleic acid test is still positive.the purpose of this case report is to describe the imaging and associated clinical features of an asymptomatic covid-19 patient outside wuhan, china.the principle findings are that in this patient with laboratory-confirmed covid-19, ct findings preceded symptoms and included bilateral pleural effusions, previously not reported in association with covid-19.there is a small but growing body of literature regarding the imaging findings of covid-19 (11 articles in the english language literature in pub med on february 15, 2020 [4] ), and the patient in this case report demonstrates both similarities and differences compared with the literature. most noteworthy is that the covid-19 patient in this case is the first reported, to the best of our knowledge, with associated bilateral pleural effusions. on the other hand, consistent with 98% of patients in the initial landmark lancet article with a sample size of 41 [5] , the imaging findings of this patient with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 infection ultimately had bilateral pulmonary involvement. yet in contrast to patients in the lancet cohort for whom "later chest ct images showed bilateral ground-glass opacity, whereas the consolidation had been resolved" [5] , for the patient in this case report, earlier chest ct images showed ground glass opacities (ggos) and later chest ct images showed progressive bilateral consolidation.the covid-19 patient in this report was also similar to a study from european radiology with a sample size of 63 which demonstrated multilobar findings, ggos and progression in the majority of patients [6] . the covid-19 patient in this report showed similarity to a cohort of 21 patients reported in radiology as well, in which the lung abnormalities on chest ct in patients with covid-19 showed greatest severity approximately 10 days after initial onset of symptoms [7] ; in the patient in this case report, ct chest changes were greatest at day nine. in sum, emerging information seems to suggest that typical imaging findings of covid-19 include ggo and/or mixed ggo and mixed consolidation [8] . this case report contributes to the growing literature on covid-19 by reporting for the first time the associated finding of bilateral pleural effusions.limitations of this case report include the sample size (n = 1) and lack of some desired information, including sputum culture or analysis of pleural fluid. despite these limitations, the goal in writing this case report is hopefully the education of radiologists and other clinicians of the recognition of this new disease [9] which has been declared a global health emergency by the who.in conclusion, this patient with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 infection demonstrates that abnormal ct findings can preceed clinical symptoms and that these abnormal ct findings may include bilateral pleural effusions. future series and studies should seek to assess if this is the case on a larger scale, as well as the association between viral clearance of covid-19 on laboratory analysis and clearance on imaging. in patients whose exposure history and epidemiological history can be determined, the imaging manifestations, high resolution ct may author's notethe authors wish to thank elizabeth k. arleo md for her assistance in writing this article.clinical imaging extends its best wishes to the radiologists and other health care providers in china, as well as to the patients affected with covid-19our thoughts are with you during this unbelievably difficult time.the 2019 coronavirus disease (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has been spread globally since its first outbreak in wuhan, china in december 2019. 1−3 common symptoms of sars-cov-2 infected patients involve fever, cough, and fatigue with an estimated death rate of 3%−5%. 4 it has already caused more than 7 million confirmed cases and more than 400,000 deaths all over the world (at the time this work is written). in addition to health concerns, the disease also brought severe economic and social issues. 5 while the situation of wuhan has been stepped down, europe and the united states are experiencing a major epidemic. thus, it is crucial to understand the infection and spreading process and find measures to mitigate the epidemic situation.the sars-cov-2 is a member of the beta-coronavirus genus, 6 which also includes the acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and the middle-east respiratory syndrome virus (mers). the sars-cov-2 virus appears to be optimized for binding to the human receptor ace2, 7 and the binding patterns between ace2 and sars-cov-2 or sars-cov at the receptor binding domain (rbd) are thought to be almost identical. 8 more specifically, sars-cov-2 shares 76%−78% sequence identity with sars-cov for the whole protein and 73%−76% for the rbd. 9 the trimeric spike glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 is comprised of three s1/s2 units, and the rbd locates at s1. one variation, the s1/s2 cleavage site of sars-cov-2 is a unique "rrar" furin recognition site, 10 while in sars-cov it is a single arginine. 11 the three s1/s2 units undergo a hingelike conformational switch between "up" and "down" states. only at the "up" state, the rbd is exposed and is able to bind to the receptor, while at the "down" state the rbd is hidden and is inaccessible by the receptor. 12 for sars-cov, the spike trimer with two "down" and one "up" is the most populated state. 13 this could very likely be the case for sars-cov-2, but to our knowledge no experimental statistical measurement has been reported yet. a recent study pointed out the possibility of two spike proteins binding with the same ace2. 14 after binding to the receptor, the following cascade of events is triggered: the spike protein undergoes a large conformational change, the s1 with the receptor is shed, s2 is transformed to a more stable postfusion state, and finally the viral membrane is fused with the cell membrane. 15, 16 despite the similarities in structures and binding patterns between the two viruses, sars-cov-2 spreads faster than sars-cov and this might be due to the stronger binding of the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex. 12 the range of experimental binding affinities of the two ace2-virus is wide, with reports of 15 nm 12 and 150−185 nm 13 for the ace2-sars-cov-2 and the ace2-sars-cov complexes, respectively, and also reports of 4.7 nm and 31 nm, 8 and 1.2 nm and 5.0 nm 17 for both systems, respectively. in all cases, the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex shows a larger binding affinity than ace2-sars-cov. on the other hand, although the sequences and epitope have been studied extensively, it is still unclear what is the structural/energetic basis for the difference between the two complexes. moreover, the receptor binding is a crucial step for drug and antibody interference with the infection process. thus, this work will focus on understanding the detailed differences between the binding features of the two coronaviruses and the human receptor ace2.recent works yielded high-resolution structure of sars-cov-2 at its prefusion state, 14 as well as the complex of its rbd domain and ace2. 8 these emerging structures provide an opportunity to use computational modeling to investigate the underlying mechanism behind the differences in binding strengths of the two ace2-virus complexes. however, such a task is very challenging. for example, recent theoretical work 18 analyzed the number of contacts, interface area, and fluctuations and concluded that different viruses have different strategy for binding. however, this work could not obtain the correct order of binding affinity between the ace2-sars-cov-2 and ace2-sars-cov complexes.obviously, the main issue is the differences in interaction of free energies between the two types of viruses and the receptor, as this energy is essential for understanding the binding process. evaluating the binding energy of a very large protein complex is an enormous challenge for fully atomistic models and thus we chose here to use our coarse-grained (cg) model 19−21 to study the energetics of the complexes. our cg model has been consistently developed and systematically calibrated to account for proper evaluation of electrostatic free energies of proteins and membranes, including, of course, solvation and hydrophobic effects. the model was applied extensively to many systems, calculating protein-folding free energies and related properties. 22−24 here we use the model to evaluate the binding of the virus to ace2.our analysis of the binding patterns found that the substitutions of residues near the rbd of sars-cov in the conversion to sars-cov-2 is not the reason for the increase in binding energy. it is found that the major contribution actually comes from the body of the spike protein that is away from the rbd. it is also found that the antibody of sars-cov, that did not show cross-reactivity, might be partially due to the fact that the binding interface is partially covered, compare to the situation in the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex.in this work, we used modeler 25 to perform homology modeling in constructing the binding complexes of ace2-sars-cov-2 and m396-sars-cov-2. the sars-cov-2 structure was taken from the recent cryo-em study (pdb id: 6vsb) 12 with an incomplete receptor binding domain. for the binding domain, we used the crystal structure of sars-cov-2 rbd that is bound to ace2 (pdb id: 6m0j). 8 the binding between m396 and sars-cov-2 was modeled using the m396-sars-cov structure as a template (pdb id: 2dd8). 26 subsequently, we utilized our cg model to calculate the free energy of each structure and the relevant binding energies. our cg model is focused on the electrostatic free energy of the protein that involves the solvation energy and the interactions between charged and polar residues. the full cg treatment includes membrane terms (see si) which are not included in the present case, since the membrane is out of the system studied. the total cg energy is defined as follows 20 (see also si) the terms on the right are the side chain van der waals energy, main chain solvation energy, main chain hydrogen bond energy, side chain electrostatic energy, side chain polar energy, side chain hydrophobic energy, main chain/side chain electrostatic energy, and main chain/side chain van der waals energy, respectively. the scaling coefficients c 1 , c 2 , and c 3 are taking values of 0.10, 0.25, and 0.15 in this work.before the evaluation of the free energy, we used a monte carlo proton transfer (mcpt) method 20 to determine the charge configuration of all ionizable residues in the system. in the mcpt approach, the mc procedure controls proton transfer moves between ionizable residues or between one ionizable residue and the bulk. the acceptance probability of the move is determined by standard metropolis criteria (see si). by such calculations, we are able to get the cg free energy of each protein configuration and also the electrostatic contribution of each residue when they are either in the the journal of physical chemistry b pubs.acs.org/jpcb article ace2-virus complex or in the unbound state. note that the cg already represents the free energy of the system and not the potential energy. all calculations and simulations were carried out using the molaris-xg package. 27, 28 for more details, see si.we started by trying to evaluate the binding energy differences between the two complexes (ace2-sars-cov-2 and ace2-sars-cov) and to determine where the difference is coming from. this study utilized the recently published cryo-em structure of sars-cov-2 (pdb id: 6vsb) 12 and the crystal structure of its rbd and ace2 (pdb id: 6m0j) 8 and performed homology-modeling in order to obtain the structure of the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex. the structure of ace2-sars-cov has been taken from a previous work (pdb id: 6cs2). 13 after getting the structures, we performed energy minimization and molecular dynamics for structural relaxation. this procedure was followed by the mcpt algorithm 20 (that determines the optimal charge distribution of the ionizable residues) and obtained the cg energies of the ace2-sars-cov-2 and ace2-sars-cov complexes. with the same treatment, we obtained the cg energies of the ace2, sars-cov, and sars-cov-2 monomers at infinite distance separation. the ace2-virus binding free energy was then calculated by δg binding = g complex − g ace2 − g virus . even though the binding mode of the two ace2-virus complexes ( figure 1b ) were argued to be almost identical, 8 we still obtained binding energy of −70.7 kcal/mol for ace2-sars-cov-2 and −66.4 for ace2-sars-cov, respectively. as expected, the major difference come from electrostatic contributions. at this point, the binding energy difference could either be an effect of the nonconserved residues or the change in structures of the two complexes near or outside the rbds.to understand this issue in a more quantitative way, we evaluated the electrostatic contributions of each residue to the total binding free energy of the two complexes (see figure 2a) . it was found that some residues give positive contributions while others give negative contributions. this finding is consistent with the results that show some interactions at the binding interface strengthen while others weaken the binding. 14 to see whether the difference in binding comes from the rbd, we further classified the free energy contributions based on their distances from the binding site. thus, we plotted in figure 2b the contributions of the residues within given range to the total free energy (this was done according to the distances to the n501 residue of ace2-sars-cov-2 or to t487 of ace2-sars-cov). to our surprise, if we consider the journal of physical chemistry b pubs.acs.org/jpcb article the residues within 60 å of the binding site, it is found that the ace2-sars-cov complex has a stronger binding affinity (its curve is below that of the ace2-sars-cov-2 curve). apparently the residues between 60 and 120 å are the residues that switched the trend. this result indicates that the binding to the receptor in a remote position from the binding site possibly leads to a stronger binding in ace2-sars-cov-2 than in ace2-sars-cov. interestingly, the three s1/s2 cleavage sites also locate within the 60−120 å range. in view of the above conclusion, we tried to examine whether the finding of long-range interactions is coincidental. thus, we tested the influence of effective dielectric constant in the cg model (using a constant between 60 and 90) and also use a function of the form ε eff = 1 + ε′[1 − exp(−μr ij )], where we used ε′ = 80 and μ = 0.8. it was found that the trend stayed similar to the different dielectric constants. it is still possible that including the effect of the ionic strength would reduce the binding difference at the long distance, but the sign is very unlikely to change.it should be noted that the value of the overall calculated binding energy is most probably an overestimate. one missing effect is the entropy contribution of the separate parts of the complex (which is equal for the two systems). another missing effect is the above-mentioned effect of the ionic strength that would reduce the electrostatic interaction.to illustrate the contributions of each residue, we plot their contributions in figure 2c ,d. the figure assigns each residue one color by its free energy contribution. both complexes have residues with relatively large energy changes near the binding site (red and yellow colors) and according to figure 2b these contributions are more negative for ace2-sars-cov-2. however, when we move outside the rbd, more residues of this type appear in the thinner spike protein body of sars-cov2 compared to the fatter spike protein body of sars-cov. it suggests that for both ace2-virus complexes, some residues at the rbd region strengthen the binding while others weaken it (figure 2a) . however, the interactions change between 60 to 120 å at the binding site makes the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 stronger ( figure 2b) and may indicate an effective evolution of the spike protein body of the novel virus. this larger binding affinity might explain why sars-cov-2 spreads faster than sars-cov.because of the structural homology and similar binding patterns, several rbd-directed monoclonal antibodies (m396, s230, 80r) of sars-cov have been tested for sars-cov-2, but none of them could show cross-reactivity. 8, 12 another antibody (cr3022) that was obtained from a convalescent sars-cov patient could bind to sars-cov-2 but still could not neutralize the virus even at a concentration as high as 400 μg/ml, and its cross-reactivity was attributed to the high percentage of targeted epitope residues (86%). 29 in this work we tried to understand the absence of crossreactivity by studying the binding pattern between sars-cov-2 with one of the sars-cov antibody, m396. we used homology modeling to generate a structure of the m396-sars-cov-2 complex from sars-cov-2 (pdb id: 6vsb) 12 and m396-sars-cov (rbd) (pdb id: 2dd8) 26 structures. for the antibody-virus complexes, we used δg binding = g complex − g m396 − g virus . figure 3a shows the overlapped structures of the ace2-sars-cov-2 and m396-sars-cov-2 complexes that are aligned toward the virus body. visually the m396 antibody only covers part of the ace2-sars-cov-2 binding interface. as before, we analyzed the distance-dependent electrostatic energy contributions of the m396-virus complex. as seen from figure 3b , the binding of m396 and sars-cov-2 does not result in structural/energetic differences that can lead to an increase of interactions in the range between 60 and 120 å, as was observed in the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex. the energy contribution near the rbd (<60 å) is also weaker in comparison to the corresponding contribution in the ace2virus complex. overall, m396 shows an ineffective binding pattern that misses part of the epitopes of ace2 that could trigger the following structural changes, and this might also be the case for other antibodies that did not show cross-reactivity. to mimic the ace2-sars-cov-2 binding pattern, zhang et al. synthesized a 23-mer peptide fragment of the ace2 peptidase domain α1 helix. 30 however, the binding affinity was not strong. this might be an effect of the instability of a small helix fragment.structural analysis shows that there are 14 key residues that participate in the binding between ace2 and sars-cov. 17 among them, eight are conserved in sars-cov-2 and the other six are mutated. the six mutated residues are n439/ r426 (sars-cov-2/sars-cov), l455/y442, f486/l472, q493/n478, q498/y484, and n501/t487 ( figure 4a ). to understand how the substituted residues would affect binding energy, we performed mutation calculations for the two ace2virus complexes. the residues of ace2-sars-cov-2 were table 1 , all mutated ace2-sars-cov-2 constructs are less stable compared to the wildtype system, while the mutated ace2-sars-cov shows the opposite results. this is consistent with our previous distancedependent binding energy contributions near the rbd, where we find that the ace2 and sars-cov complex gives a more favorable binding pattern than in the ace2-sars-cov-2 complex ( figure 2b ). the mutation calculation suggests that the effective binding of the novel virus might happen at the remote part. the current work explored the structural/energetic basis of the difference in binding energy between the sars-cov-2/ ace2 and the sars-cov/ace2 complexes. it was found that the binding of sars-cov-2 is more favorable, not because its rbd has been optimized, but because the sars-cov-2 glycoprotein trimer body has been evolved to bind stronger at distanced sites (in fact, if we just consider the rbd then sars-cov is more favorable). it is not very clear if this stronger binding is converted to conformational changes, cleavage, and subsequent fusion events. however, if this is the case we have an interesting explanation of the reason why the novel coronavirus spreads faster and easier. the results also suggest to use the novel virus as a template during drug/antibody design with the whole spike protein as a binding template instead of a fraction of the rbd that might neglect the essential changes in the virus body and size effect.the supporting information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jpcb.0c04317.constructing the assemblies; energetics of the cg protein model; figure the protein complex construction was done by utilizing all available experimental structures, where all the structure used in this work are the combination of elements from cryo-em or x-ray diffraction (xrd) structures. for receptor ace2, the structure comes from cryo-em ace2-sars-cov-2 complex (pdb id: 6vsb) 1 . for the protein body of the novel virus sars-cov-2, we utilized two structures, where one is the virus body from pdb 6vsb, however, this structure misses a loop near the binding domain. another available structure is that of the xrd complex of ace2 and the receptor binding domain of the sars-cov-2. in this structure the loop near the rbd is complete (pdb id 6m0j) 2 . we combined the protein body of pdb 6vsb and the loops near rbd from 6m0j to obtain a complete sars-cov-2 protein body. the entire ace2-sars-cov complex structure was taken from the cryo-em structure (pdb id: 6cs2) 3 . for the sars-cov antibody m396 complex , we used the xrd structure (pdb id: 2dd8) 4 . the binding patterns of ace2-sars-cov-2 and ace2-sars-cov to m396-sars-cov are directly obtained from the above mentioned pdb structures. the binding pattern between m396 and sars-cov-2 was obtained by mimicking the binding pattern between m396 and sars-cov. the above homology-modelling is done by modeller 5 .after obtaining the structures, we trim them into coarse-grained (cg) representation, and perform steepest decent energy minimization and md relaxation to eliminate unreasonable closed interactions, until the potential energy is converged. next, we use a monte carlo proton transfer (mcpt) procedure to obtain the cg free energies (see below). all simulations and calculations were done by the molaris-xg package software 6 . the binding energy was calculated by the following equations:for the ace2/virus complexes:for the m396/virus complexes:the development of realistic cg models in the field has been slow, partly due to the difficulties of obtaining unique points for calibration. we have used a relatively extensive benchmark of folding experiments and membrane insertion experiments. the cg model that has been continuously developed and refined in our group is based on solvation model of ionizable residues, which emphasis the key-role of electrostatic effects of the protein 7 .in our cg model, the entire side chain is represented by a cb (fig s1) . the total cg free energy is given by:the total cg folding free energy is taken relative to the free energy of the unfolded system in water at zero allied potential. the two terms represent the main chain and side chain contributions, while the third term accounts for the total protein and side chain flexibility in estimating the overall conformational entropy.the main chain energy is given by the contributions of backbone solvation and hydrogen bonds:where c2 and c3 are the scaling coefficients (0.25 and 0.15, respectively).the side chain term is given by:where the first three terms are electrostatic, polar, and hydrophobic components, respectively.the last term is the van der waals component for side chain interactions and c1 is a scaling coefficient (0.10). the focus is placed on the electrostatic term, which is computed as a sum of change in free energy associated with charge-charge interactions between ionizable side chains ∆∆ → , and the change in solvation free energy of those residues in their specific environment ,∆∆ → , inside the protein and in water. finally, if electrodes and electrolytes are presented, then another term is added to the total energy:the last term is the cg representation of the effect of the external potential.for more details see ref. 7a and 7b.before the cg energy evaluation, we use a monte carlo proton transfer (mcpt) algorithm to obtain the charge configuration of the system 7a . in the mcpt approach, the mc controls proton transfer between ionizable residues or between one ionizable residue and the bulk. the acceptance possibility of the move is determined by standard metropolis criteria.the actual mcpt can be used for time dependent study of proton transport processes as described in ref 7b. however, here we use this approach just to obtained equilibrated ionization states. preparedness for the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) and its spread in india calls for setting up of adequately equipped and dedicated health facilities to manage sick patients while protecting healthcare workers and the environment. in the wake of other emerging dangerous pathogens in recent times, such as ebola, nipah and zika, it is important that such facilities are kept ready during the inter-epidemic period for training of health professionals and for managing cases of multi-drug resistant and difficult-to-treat pathogens. while endemic potential of such critically ill patients is not yet known, the health system should have surge capacity for such critical care units and preferably each tertiary government hospital should have at least one such facility. this article describes elements of design of such unit (e.g., space, infection control, waste disposal, safety of healthcare workers, partners to be involved in design and plan) which can be adapted to the context of either a new construction or makeshift construction on top of an existing structure. in view of a potential epidemic of covid-19, specific requirements to handle it are also given.guidance for building a dedicated health facility to contain the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak.preparedness for the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) and its spread in india calls for setting up of adequately equipped and dedicated health facilities to manage sick patients while protecting healthcare workers and the environment. in the wake of other emerging dangerous pathogens in recent times, such as ebola, nipah and zika, it is important that such facilities are kept ready during the inter-epidemic period for training of health professionals and for managing cases of multi-drug resistant and difficult-to-treat pathogens. while endemic potential of such critically ill patients is not yet known, the health system should have surge capacity for such critical care units and preferably each tertiary government hospital should have at least one such facility. this article describes elements of design of such unit (e.g., space, infection control, waste disposal, safety of healthcare workers, partners to be involved in design and plan) which can be adapted to the context of either a new construction or makeshift construction on top of an existing structure. in view of a potential epidemic of covid-19, specific requirements to handle it are also given.guidance for building a dedicated health facility to contain the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus outbreakincreasing clusters of people affected with novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov-2)-infected pneumonia began to be reported from wuhan, a metropolitan in for 'pneumonia of unknown aetiology', which was initiated in [2003] [2004] , in the aftermath of the sars outbreak 6 . the first four cases of covid-19 were identified through this routine surveillance programme deployed through the local healthcare facilities and were epidemiologically linked to the huanan (southern china) seafood wholesale market 7 . since then, there has been a steady increase in the burden of covid-19, with 60,347 confirmed cases and 1,369 deaths reported globally, as of 13 th february 2020. with cases emerging from as many as 29 countries, and travel-related importations also being reported, the global health security implications of covid-19 have come to the fore 4,8,9 . in response, susceptible countries have mounted public health measures to mitigate the threat of proliferation of covid-19. in india, airport entry screening has been initiated, existing visas from china have been cancelled, and travellers returning from covid-19-affected areas have been quarantined. given the implications of importation of cases and the impact thereof on the local epidemiology of covid-19 in secondary foci, it is essential to break ground on preparing health facilities to combat a local cluster of covid-19 cases.a well-equipped dedicated hospital facility (dhf) to deal with these cases with adequate protections for healthcare workers and other patients is the key to the standard of care. critical care and humane approach to acutely ill patients are essential ingredients of an epidemic control. while the course of the cov in india is uncertain, setting up of such units is important for future epidemics due to dangerous pathogens and antimicrobial resistant organisms including drugresistant tuberculosis during the inter epidemic period. such wards can be used for training of physicians during inter epidemic period.here, we focus on establishing a biosecurity ward de novo or in a makeshift manner in a tertiary healthcare facility to manage patients or suspected cases in an effort to combat the spread of covid-19.a scientific and evidence-based design shall be the key to initiate the process. the designing of dhf should have inputs from the infectious disease department, critical care, engineering and nursing department, departments of microbiology and virology, hospital administration and waste disposal facilities, referral ambulance services, social workers or counsellors for patients' families and situation room with digital connection with national programme. given the multi-disciplinary clinical needs and the specialized requirements for maintenance of the infrastructure related to dhf, it is vital that all the participating disciplines be brought together under a unified umbrella to identify the existing capacity and infrastructure, and needs, to make a streamlined plan for establishing the unit.the dhf must be a self-contained establishment that can meet most of its daily needs with only essential but limited contact with the outside world. basic requirements need to be accounted for continuous safe water supply; appropriate cleaning practices; adequate floor space for beds; appropriate handwashing facilities; adequate ventilation for isolation rooms and procedure rooms; adequate isolation facilities for airborne, droplet, contact isolation and protective environment; regulated and rational traffic flow to minimize exposure of high-risk patients and facilitate patient and clinical material transport; precautions to control rodents, pests and other vectors and appropriate waste management facilities/practices must be ensured. the unit can be a standalone facility or can be housed in a tertiary healthcare facility with the equipment and capacity to care for critically ill patients such as those with septic shock requiring vasopressors, bedside surgical procedures, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) requiring mechanical ventilation, acute kidney injury requiring dialysis and multi-organ failure requiring high degree of quality and multi-disciplinary care with organ support.an isolation room should be identified within the emergency room. this room will be used to isolate patients who raise any suspicion of covid-19 infection based on a set of validated, screening questions 10 . this approach may be adapted for other outbreak-prone infectious diseases as well.for mapping the patient transfer, the path of transport and specific elevators should be identified. the number of rooms with biocontainment facilities should be mobilized based on the magnitude of the emerging situation. in an epidemic situation, it is ideal to have separate rooms for suspected and confirmed cases 11, 12 .within the dhf, two units should be built. the first one will be an isolation space for laboratory confirmed cases. multiple patients can be kept in the same room. barrier nursing practices and protective isolation facility will be presented to prevent nosocomial infections.the second unit will be made for suspected cases which will include family and hospital contacts who are suspected to have potential contact with confirmed cases but await laboratory confirmation. this room will be built to include only one suspect per room. figure 1 is a conceptual drawing of this unit. figure 2 is a conceptual drawing of multi-bedded isolation room for suspects.one full-time physician, one paediatrician and one resident should be identified for the management of the unit. systems should be developed to ensure that an identified clinical rapid response team (rrt) is always available on call. intensive care unit (icu) nursing staff should be identified specifically for this dhf, and the ratio of nursing staff in this unit should be similar to icus 13 . paramedical and housekeeping staff should also be identified. precautions should be taken to minimize healthcare worker (hcw) exposure.staff attached to this facility should undergo focused training in infection prevention and control. mock drills should also be conducted to assure preparedness of the unit and as part of ongoing quality improvement measures.training will have to be carried out for all the healthcare providers who will participate in the care of the patients including doctors, nurses, paramedical staff, patient transporters, phlebotomists, laboratory technicians and housekeeping staff. this will require both technical training for the physicians and nurses and infection prevention and control training for all the cadres.screening systems will have to be identified in the triage area to isolate patients who present with: (i) fever and cough with a history of travel to covid-19 affected countries; (ii) hcws with fever and cough caring for patients with pneumonia whose cause of pneumonia is unknown; (iii) patients with fever and cough with contact history with someone with known sars-cov-2 infection; and (iv) patients with fever or cough with a history of visit to a healthcare facility with a case of covid-19 infection.once a patient has been isolated, rrt should be activated. simultaneously, it should be reported to the nodal officers in the ministry of health and family welfare, state department of health, for notifying the who in accordance with international health regulations (2005) 14 . specimens for transport must be placed in leak-proof specimen bags, which have a separate sealable pocket for the specimen (i.e., a plastic biohazard triple-layered specimen bag). the hospital which is receiving the patient should be informed ahead of time to initiate the necessary precautions. all specimens are to be delivered by hand if possible. any shipment of specimens should be in accordance with the prevailing international air transport association 15 and un/who norms 16 .food should be served on disposable crockery and should be consumed with disposable cutlery. non-disposable crockery and cutlery should be washed using hot water (70°c) and detergent, rinsed and dried. where possible, eating utensils should be cleaned in a dishwasher using a hot water cycle (reaching at least 70°c). a record of all patients or staff entering the room should be maintained.standard hygiene: standard precautions must be followed by all hcws, for all patients and at all times 17 . this comprises broadly of hand hygiene practices, proper donning, doffing and disposal of the personal protective equipment (ppe) and maintaining respiratory hygiene and cough etiquettes 18 .hand hygiene is recommended with alcohol-based handrubs (abhr) or soap and water. printed posters of both the methods should be pasted near all hand hygiene units. adequate supply of abhr (60-80% ethanol is recommended) and antiseptic soap solution (chlorhexidine gluconate 2% and alcohol combination) has been seen to be synergistic 19 .all hcws involved should have the knowledge of the correct donning and doffing steps, along with appropriate disposal of ppe and be trained in this procedure. non-powdered latex-free gloves should be used by all hcws. eye protection and face shield should be used 20 . respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette must be followed.gowns should be long-sleeved and made of non-absorbable (fluid-resistant) materials. the same gown should not be worn for all patients. in case gowns are not available, waterproof aprons should be used.the who recommends the use of medical masks (surgical or procedure masks which may be flat or pleated and are affixed with head straps) and particulate respirators (niosh-certified n95, eu standard ffp2 or equivalent) for contact and airborne precautions as well as aerosol-generating procedures (agps), respectively 18, 21 . the mask has to be worn before entering the patient's room and has to be removed once outside the room. if the patient is under droplet precautions and requires to be moved or transported, he/she should wear a mask. hand hygiene should be ensured after removing the masks. each room should have dedicated equipment such as sphygmomanometer, thermometer and stethoscopes.the movement of patients should be minimized within the hospital premises. if such transport is necessary, patients must don either medical masks or particulate respirators, whichever is available. the area to which they are being transported should be alerted about their arrival. a separate corridor should be preferred. in case the patients meet any surfaces, they must be disinfected. complete inactivation of the virus is seen with 70 per cent ethanol and povidone-iodine with an exposure time of one minute or 2.5 per cent glutaraldehyde with an exposure time of five minutes. the central drugs standard control organization registered disinfectant or 1:100 dilution of household bleach and water will suffice for disinfection of surface of non-critical patient care equipment. high-level disinfection and sterilization of semi-critical and critical devices, respectively, does not need to be altered for patients with known or suspected covid-19.when transmission-based precautions are being practiced, the ideal condition is to have single occupancy rooms for every patient. since that may not be feasible in every scenario, the practice of cohort isolation can be followed with a spatial separation of ≥3 feet (or 1 m). there are certain environmental cleaning procedures one needs to keep in mind. dusting should be avoided; floors should not be carpeted, and rooms should not have upholstery. for environmental cleaning of areas needing airborne precautions, high touch surfaces should be cleaned every day, and as needed, while low touch surfaces can be cleaned on a scheduled basis. primary focus should remain in adherence to required ppe and additional entry/exit procedures. for undertaking droplet and/or contact precautions, cleaning may be done twice a day, or as needed, for high touch surfaces, with a focus on all surfaces within the patient zone, non-critical patient care equipment, and any surface visibly soiled with blood or body fluids 22 .dead bodies are categorized into three categories based on the level of ppe being observed. all tubings attached to the bodies, such as nasogastric tubes, foley's catheter, and any others, are to be removed, keeping biosafety in place. all orifices are to be cleaned and disinfected and plugged to prevent any fluid leakage. all wounds must be redressed after disinfection with impermeable dressings.all ppe must be removed immediately, and hand hygiene must be performed immediately. once the body reaches the mortuary, the following precautions must be taken: (i) all bodies must be categorized and identified correctly; (ii) bodies found to be soiled with blood/body fluids should be placed in disposable plastic bags; (iii) dead bodies must be kept in cold temperatures of −4°c; and (iv) all staff posted in the mortuary should follow strict ppe guidelines.funeral workers must also observe strict adherence to ppe and follow strict environmental cleaning precautions.the overall risk of infection in a room can be mitigated by ventilation through two principles: dilution and removal. clean air, when added to a room, dilutes the airborne contaminants present in the room, thus reducing the chances of inhalation of infectious droplets. for outbreak-prone and epidemic-prone infectious diseases such as covid-19, the who recommends the institution of contact and droplet precautions 18 . the centers for disease control and prevention and who guidelines provide the following recommendations for preventing airborne infections 18,23 : (i) to help prevent airborne infections, adequate ventilation in healthcare facilities in all patient-care areas is necessary; (ii) for natural ventilation, the following minimum hourly averaged ventilation rates should be provided: (a)160 l/s/patient (hourly average ventilation rate) for airborne precaution rooms (with a minimum of 80 l/sec/patient for new health care facilities and major renovations); and (b) 2.5 l/sec/m 3 for corridors and other transient spaces without a fixed number of patients; however, when patient care is undertaken in corridors during emergency or other situations, the same ventilation rate requirements for airborne precaution rooms or general wards will apply.the design should consider fluctuations in ventilation rate.for aerosol generating procedures (agps) (supplementary table i (available from http://www.ijmr. org.in/articles/2020/151/2/images/indianjmedres_ 2020_151_2_177_280781_sm3.pdf)), adequate airflow is at least 160 l/sec/patient or in negative pressure rooms at least 12 air changes per hour (ach) and controlled direction of air flow when using mechanical ventilation.negative pressure rooms: negative pressure rooms include mechanical ventilation systems which maintain the pressure of the room at a slightly lower level than the pressure of the entry area so that it allows air to flow into the isolation room but not escape from the room, as air naturally flows from areas with higher pressure to areas with lower pressure, thereby preventing contaminated air from the isolation room to escape outwards.the negative pressure room should have a minimum of 12 ach in a high-risk area for airborne transmission, compared to six ach per hour in a low-risk area. negative pressure differential between airflow from adjacent spaces to the patient room should be >2. 5 pascal. an airflow differential >125 cfm (56 l/sec) should be maintained between exhaust and supply. sealing of the room (entry) should have provision of allowing approximately 0.5 square feet (0.046 m 2 ) leakage. clean air entering the room should flow first to the area of the room where staff or visitors are likely to be present and then flow across the bed area to the exhaust. direction of airflow and patient beds should not be in the same direction. the air from inside the room should be allowed to flow out via an exhaust fan or a high-efficiency particulate air (hepa) filter. there should be an anteroom outside of the negative pressure room. the pressure of which should be negative to the hallway and positive to the patient room so that unidirectional airflow is maintained 24 .hepa filter should be placed in each room, and if not available, adequate ventilation should be ensured. exhaust fans must be properly installed closely fitting to the window. hepa filter is useful in small volume settings such as bronchoscopy suites, laboratories or individual tb patient rooms. careful attention should be given to the equivalent ach the filter requires as most filters clean very little air per hour. maintenance of hepa filters with timely replacement of the membrane is necessary to ensure its functionality.the efficiency of filters and sustainability of negative pressure must be validated before dhf is open to patients. subsequently, validation must be undertaken regularly and at pre-decided intervals through a certified agency.while establishing an isolation room or a class n room (negative pressure room) in an existing facility, available infrastructure and financial implications for carrying out changes must be considered. it is rarely possible to create an ideal room. there is an extensive list of requirements given in 'guidelines for the classification and design of isolation rooms in healthcare facilities' which are the basic requirements to be met before any conversion 25 .some of the salient requirements are the presence of a clinical handwash basin with non-touch, fixed tap, wall mounted soap dispensers, handrub dispensers, disposable towel holders, glove dispensers, clean waste bins in accordance to 'the bio-medical waste management (amendment) rules, 2018' 26 and provision of two-way intercommunication system between the patient's room and the nurses' station. this document also gives insight into what considerations an institute needs to consider before converting a room into a class n room. the recirculating air system needs to be disconnected. it would be a preferred option to adjust the building ventilation system to create a permanent negative pressure room or to add a hepa filtration unit as a supplement or install it permanently in the hospital ventilation system. one should be able to seal the room adequately; dampers should be adjusted.since clinical manifestations of sars-cov-2 infection range from septic shock, pneumonia, ards, acute kidney injury to multi-organ dysfunction, the unit should be equipped like an icu. a detailed list of disease commodity package for novel cov has been published by the who 27 developing the infrastructure and mobilizing the human resources needed to counter a rapidly emerging outbreak of a highly contagious or lethal disease needs responsive systems, mounting multi-disciplinary response, one critical part of which is enabling key healthcare facilities in providing high-quality clinical care. this not only helps in limiting the loss of lives from the onslaught of the contagions, but also interrupts the transmission by excluding the infective patients from the general population. as such, biocontainment provides value for money in the longer term, even if it is a resource-intensive affair in the short term. these actions will substantially contribute to global health security.none.in early 2004, epidemic mortalities among cultured sea cucumber juveniles from a peristome edema disease with no identified agent were reported from shangdong province, china; they were followed by reports of sea cucumber adults with peristome edema disease and mortality of 10%. in early 2005, the disease broke out again, and the epidemic-stricken area spread to liaoning province, china. the mortalities of sea cucumber adults and juveniles were as high as 40% (chang y.q., 20 march 2005, key lab reports) . a number of laboratories in china have undertaken the identification of the causative agent, and tried to prevent its spread or outbreak in 2006.the diseased sea cucumbers first show edema in their peristomes. the tentacles cannot retract completely, and adhesion capacities for holding of tube feet on vertical surfaces weaken. consequently most of them drop to the bottom of ponds. compared to the normal ones, the grazing rate and activity of the diseased sea cucumbers decreased obviously, and 80% of individuals eviscerate. about 2-3 days later, small white lesions usually appear in some of the diseased sea cucumbers and gradually expand, with increased mucus secretion over large areas of the body wall. about 5-6 days later, the diseased sea cucumber will die, and mortality may be more than 90% (wang et al., 2005) . according to the typical symptom and state, the disease was designated acute peristome edema disease (aped), by the study groups.after exclusion of environmental factors such as heavy metals, dissolved oxygen, salinity, ph, nh 3 -n content and so on (data not shown), biologic pathogens, including rickettsia, chlamydia, bacteria, virus, and other parasites were suspected.transmission electron microscopic examination showed virus-like particles in intestine epithelium of diseased sea cucumbers. in this paper, we present formal evidence for the existence of viral particles in aped affected sea cucumbers, in the first report of sea cucumbers infected by viruses. the virus assembly, the relevant pathology, and ultra-structure changes are analyzed, which offer valuable reference to subsequent work on the aped etiology and epidemiology.five sea cucumber adults, averaged 420 g and five juvenile averaged 55 g, with typical aped symptoms, were taken stochastically, in march 2005, during the outbreak of sea cucumber aped. tentacle (buccal podia), peristome, papillate podia, respiratory tress, hemal channel wall, and intestinal wall were selected for study.the sea cucumbers were anesthetized by first being placed on moist cold filter papers in petri dishes for 10 min, and then into cold mineral water (fresh water, 4°c) for 5 min. this ensured that the sea cucumbers were extended with muscles relaxed, allowing easy dissection. this was carried out on the dorsal side. the selected tissues were detached and arranged in two groups.one group of tissue samples was prepared for ultra-thin sections and immersed in primary fixative (3% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 m phosphate buffer) (sorour and larink, 2001) . after fixation for 3-4 h at 4°c, the specimens were washed in the same buffer for 2.5 h at 4°c. postfixation in 1% osmium tetroxide in the phosphate buffer was carried out for 2 h at 4°c, followed by dehydration in a graded series of ethanol. the specimens were embedded in araldite mixture, and polymerized at 60°c. specimen blocks were sectioned with a reichert ultra-tome, 50 nm in thickness, and viewed with a jeol jem 1200ex electron microscope operating at 60 kv, after counterstaining with uranyl acetate and lead citrate (becker et al., 2003) .the other group of samples was prepared for histopathology analyses that were performed on frozen sections immediately following microtomy. they were sectioned at 5 lm and stained with mayer's haematoxyin and eosin (h&e), followed by observation and photography.histological examination of diseased sea cucumbers indicated that the intestine tissue was the primary target tissue. the lesions were characterized by tissue necrosis or histolysis accompanied with numbers of empty areas in tissues. intestinal villi, with blurred limits, appeared shrunken, shortened, or even disappeared. the number of epithelium cells and the thickness of the epithelium layer both decreased, accompanied with nuclei arranged irregularly (fig. 1a) . in the damaged epithelium, typically spherical viral inclusion bodies, 0.6-1.0 lm in diameter, were observed in cytoplasm, and were stained purple (fig. 1b) . no bacteria or other suspect pathogens (rickettsia, chlamydia, bacteria, protozoa, metazoa) were found. in the control samples, the limits of intestinal villis are clear, with thicker epithelium layers and the nuclei arranged regularly. no viral inclusion bodies were observed.the ultra-thin sections of tentacle (buccal podia), peristome, papillate podia, respiratory tress, hemal channel wall, and intestinal wall were observed by transmission electron microscopy (tem). no rickettsia, chlamydia, bacteria, or other parasitic organisms were found; while only a kind of viral particles was prevalent in intestine epithelium cells.the cell junctions in intestine epithelium are not tight, and large spaces exist between cytopathic cells. in the cytopathic cells, virus assembly was obviously going on, and numbers of vesicles, averaged 3-4 per cell, full of virus particles, were observed (fig. 2a) . the nuclei of infected cells were of amorphous and hyper-stained, with no nucleoli observed. the endoplasmic reticulum attached to the karyotheca obviously swelled and formed a separation cisternae between the nucleus and the cytoplasm (fig. 2b) . except for abnormally high mitochondrial densities, the cytoplasm of infected cells was nearly free of cellular structures, and composed of large areas of granular material and empty vesicles. the empty vesicles in cells differed: some were empty with clear membranes, some were empty but without clear edges (fig. 2c) , and some contained few virions along the encircling membranes.many intact virus particles were found both inside and outside the cytopathic cells. most of them were enveloped, with diameters between 80 and 100 nm. lengths of the protrusions in envelope went between 10 and 20 nm (fig. 2d , inset). nucleocapsids were always round in shape, with diameters between 45 and 70 nm. similar to what has been reported previously for coronaviruses, in cytopathic cells of aped, virus particles always aggregated, and formed a virus vesicle with an encircling membrane. within such vesicles, diameters of virus particles were about 50 nm. staining of the virus differed: some were electron lucent in the center, as if hollow; some were electron-dense with petallike pattern (fig. 2d) .in normal intestine epithelium cells of healthy sea cucumbers, the nuclear envelope as usual (ferreira and manker, 1965) is formed by two membranes with pores, and the nucleoprotein consists of granular and filamentous components randomly distributed. in each nucleus one or two nucleoli are regularly seen. in the cytoplasm, the golgi complex is generally apparent in a peri-nuclear position. mitochondria, ribosomes, rough membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum, and occasionally small lipid inclusions are diffusedly scattered through the cytoplasm.the morphologic features of the virus particles in sea cucumber were similar to those of the family coronaviridae.large, ill-defined areas of cytoplasm, containing ribosome-like structures and devoid of other organelles, were noted in some virus-infected cells (fig. 3a) . on the other hand, in some virus-containing vesicles, dense, granular material was seen interspersed between the virions. cytoplasmic inclusions of electron-dense viral nucleocapsids were mostly found in association with virus-containing vesicles, or empty vesicles (fig. 3b) .tubular structures averaging 25 nm in diameter were seen within some virus-containing vesicles. some ends of the tubular structures swell and are similar to the spherical virions (fig. 3c) . tubular structures within nonvirus-containing vesicles, whose size and morphology are similar to those in virus-containing vesicles, are also found (fig. 3d) . outside the virus-containing vesicles, but always adjacent to the vesicles, there occurred another kind of tubular structures, averaging 15 nm in diameter. some of these linear structures were arrayed at low density (fig. 4a) and some of them were dense compactly, and orderly (fig. 4b) . intestinal villi arranged irregularly and the epithelium layer obviously damaged or even disappeared (arrowhead) accompanied with empty areas for histolysis (arrow). bar, 50 lm. (b) viral inclusion bodies were observed in epithelium layer. the size of these obviously spherical inclusion bodies ranges between 0.6 and 1 lm, stained purple (arrow). bar, 3 lm. orderly tubular structures can also be found around the vesicles. bar, 50 nm. inset: a typical virus particle, with an envelope and regular petal-like surface projections (arrow) surrounding the periphery of the particle. bar, 100 nm. additional cytoplasmic structures associated with virus infections were double-membrane vesicles, which have been similarly noted in coronavirus-infected cells (dubois et al., 1982; gosert et al., 2002) . in contrast, double-membrane vesicles in cytopthic cells of sea cucumber with aped, typically were composed of accumulations of multiple single-membrane vesicles enclosed within an outer membrane (fig. 5a) , and virus particles were sometimes located between the two membranes. on the other hand, vesicles with tight double-membranes were also found in cytopathic cells of sea cucumber with aped, and their formation seems probably associated with the varicose rough endoplasmic reticula (fig. 5b) .some vesicles with dark, blurry margins around clear membrane were also found in the cytopathic cells (fig. 5c) . the virions always occurred in the dark blurry margins near membranes, if the vesicles were not full of virions. virions acquired an envelope by budding into the cisternae, and formed mostly spherical, sometimes pleomorphic, particles (fig. 5d) , suggesting that these vesicles may be the site of viral assembly.frozen section technology is widely applied in clinical diagnostics of humans, and can display the histological changes accurately and rapidly. in our study, viral inclusion bodies in affected cells and tissues is one of obvious characters compared with the normal ones and they can be found easily in the diseased samples by frozen section and h&e stain. therefore the frozen section technology was used for the fast detection of these viral infections in our epidemiology and diagnostic study. as to the apply of tem to discover agents, with sars, as with previous investigations of outbreaks involving such viruses as ebola, hendra, nipah, and more recently, monkey pox, tem played an essential role (goldsmith et al., 2004) . the epidemic viral diseases of aquatic organisms, especially those whose cells cannot be cultured yet, can be studied uniquely with this powerful tool.detailed studies described here on the morphogenesis of a sea cucumbers virus by thin-section tem found many characteristics previously described for cornaviruses (becker et al., 1967; oshiro et al., 1971; siddell et al., 1983; zhang et al., 2003) . virions accumulated in dilated cytoplasmic vesicles that appeared to migrate to the cell surface where the virus particles were released. virus particles formed upon membranes of an apparent ''budding compartment,'' a term used to describe the continuous membrane system from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to the golgi complex (dubois et al., 1982; tooze et al., 1984) . additional cytoplasmic structures associated with coronavirus infections included nucleocapsid inclusions and double-membrane vesicles, which have been proposed as the replication complex for coronaviruses and arteriviruses (gosert et al., 2002; pedersen et al., 1999) .as has been reported for coronavirus, additional cytoplasmic features were associated with virus-infected sea cucumbers cells. tubular structures were occasionally seen within virus-containing vesicles. some ends of the tubular structures swell and are similar to the spherical virions; but the actual relation between the spherical virions and the tubular structures are not certain (goldsmith et al., 2004) . the tubular structures outside vesicles are not the same as the tubulorecticular structures, which were reported for coronavirus (ferreira and manker, 1965; goldsmith et al., 2004) . their high linearity suggest that they maybe microtubules (wu and yuan, 2003) and function as a transport or organizer for the migration of all kinds of vesicles for the virus assembly, including viruscontaining vesicles, empty vesicles, and nucleocapsid inclusions.though all findings proved that the intestine epithelium cells were infected by these virus particles, that such viruses had not been detected, in normal controls, it still cannot be concluded that these viruses are the agent of sea cucumbers aped, without infection experiments. as has been reported, the cells of invertebrates cannot be cultured, and the viruses of invertebrates cannot be replicated in vitro (deuff and renault, 1999) . only minimal intestine tissue can be obtained as material when the disease occurs, because of the sea cucumbers' peculiar evisceration. therefore it is difficult to purify viruses from infected tissues. we have tried to purify the viral particles by sucrose gradient centrifugation of homogenates from intestine tissues. unfortunately, to date, we have not obtained the viruses pure enough for infection experiments, nor for sequencing the viral genome. currently primary culture of intestine epithelium are being tried to obtain enough viruses for future research.another question is the origin of these viruses in sea cucumbers, which have never been reported as hosts for any viral infection or out break of epidemic disease. from the severe traumas among virus-infected cells, it can be concluded that these sea cucumbers are not the natural hosts, but suffer as victims infected from other hosts. even worse is that these viruses were also observed in the diseased larvae of sea cucumbers (1 mm), which were just 30 days old. in june of 2006, epidemic disease broke out during the seed cultivation in north china and caused 80% mortality. similar viruses were observed replicated at high numbers in cytopathic cells, and causing severe pathological changes. that observation suggests that the viruses may now be transmitted vertically from the parents, even though the first infection and origin have not been confirmed yet. now it seems less important for us to find the origin of these viruses, but to select uninfected parent sea cucumbers for brood stock cultivation.the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndromeassociated coronavirus (sars-cov) highlights the importance of virus surveillance in wild animals (drosten et al., 2003; ksiazek et al., 2003; peiris et al., 2003; susanna et al., 2005) . now a corona-like virus is reported in diseased sea cucumbers reared in north china, during epidemic mortalities. would these viruses infect other cultured creatures in same ponds? will it be safe for us to eat and touch these aquatics? a series of questions emerge, but one re-assuring option can be concluded! to date, all the staff involved with this study remains healthy.the nasal/throat swabs were collected from sars patients in guangzhou; vero e6 cells were conserved in the center for disease control of guangdong province.cell culture the nasal/throat swabs were treated with 1000 u/ml penicillin and 1000 mg/l streptomycin at 4 overnight. after centrifugation at 3000 r/min for 30 min, the supernatant was used to inoculate the monolayer cells at 37 for 1 h. remove the solution, and then add 2% bovine serum (gibco/brl) into the mem culture medium (gibco/brl). keep them in co2 incubator in 33, and inspect the cells everyday.electron microscopy (1) negative stainingthe culture medium of cytopathic cells was centrifugated at 10 000 r/min for 5 min. about 5 µl supernatant was dripped on a copper grid with formvar membrane. negatively stain the sample with 3% pta. remove the drop after a few seconds, put the copper grid in a sealed iron box, and then heat it up to 90 for 1 hour. (2) ultrathin sectioningthe cytopathic cells were collected by centrifugation at 4000 r/min for 5 min, and fixed with 3.0% glutaraldehyde and 1% oso4. dehydrate the samples with ethanol and then embed them in spurr resin (sigma co.). after ultrathin sectioning, the samples were observed under transmission electron microscope. healthy vero e6 cells were also treated with as controls.immunofluorescence and pcr assay (1) immunofluorescence put the cytopathic cells onto a glass slide and then fixed them with acetone at 20 for 30 min. dilute the serum samples from sars patients with pbs to 1 40, put them in 56 for 30 min, and then drip them onto the glass slide. incubate the samples in 37 for 1 h, and then wash them with pbs for three times. the goat anti human igg-fitc was added into the samples and incubated at 37 for 30 min. (2) pcr assayextract the viral rna according to the viral rna kit made by qiagen company, and then use two pairs of coronavirus-specific primers (roche co.) to carry out rt-pcr and nest-pcr. pcr products are observed through 1.5% agarose gel electrophoresis. the primers of rt-pcr and nest pcr are listed below respectively: bniouts/bnoutas: sense, atgaat tac caa gtc aat ggt tac antisense, cat aac cag tcg gta cag cta c bniins/bnias: sense, gaa gct att cgt cac gtt cg antisense, ctg tag aaa atc cta gct gga g 2 resultsin the supernatant of cytopathic vero e6 cells, virus particles can be seen through transmission electron microscope (tem). the diameter of the virus is between 60 nm to 120 nm. the virus particles can be of round or oval shape. there are many 10 20 nm cilia-like protrusions outside the envelope. the protrusions are arranged in order and there are wide gaps between them (fig.1 ). this appearance is extremely resembled to coronavirus.the ultrathin sections of vero e6 cells are observed through tem. the cytopathic cells have many empty vesicles. mitochondria are fewer than normal cells, and the outer membrane and crista of mitochondria are disrupted. endoplasmic reticula decrease and always swell. other organelles are hard to be seen. there are fingerprint-like fibres in empty vesicles and cytoplasm. the chromatins in nucleus shrink and congregate along the edge, and sometimes some tiny granules appear in the nucleus. however, in normal cells, the empty vesicles are fewer, mitochondria are intact, and no pathological change or virions are found.many virus particles are found both inside and outside the cytopathic cells. the virions located outside the cells always line up along the cell membranes, most of them have envelope, and their diameter is between 60 nm to 100 nm, whereas the length of the protrusions in envelope is between 10 nm to 20 nm. these characteristics are consistent with those of the negatively stained viruses. nucleocapsids are overcolored, always round in shape, and the diameter is between 45 nm to 70 nm (fig.2) .virions outside the cell, and the arrow points to a typical virion with envelope (bar=100 nm)virus particles always congregate, and form a virus vesica with an encircling membrane. in the vesica, virus particles do not have envelope and the diameter of them is about 50 nm. staining of the virus differs: some are light-colored in the center as if they are hollow; some are overcolored with petal-like pattern (fig.3) . some vesica membranes are clear, and the viruses inside are also clear and always light-colored (fig.4) ; whereas, some vesica membranes are blurry, and the virus inside are misty and overcolored. there are some empty vesicles near these vesicae. most of the virions inside these empty vesicles have envelope, and their appearance is consistent with that of the virus outside the cells (fig.5,6 ). these empty vesicles are similar to the "smooth vesicles" reported [8] . therefore, we suppose the vesicae are related to the virus morphogenesis, and name them as "virus morphogenesis matrix vesicae (vmmv)".virions in the vmmvs, and the arrow points to a virus particle with petal-like pattern bar=100 nm virus particles were also found in cytopathic nucleus, these viruses are overcolored, and there are light-colored distinct gaps between them and the chromatins (fig.7) . furthermore, one special phenomenon is that the nucleic membranes swell to form bubbles, some bubbles are very long and most of the bubbles contain sars-associated virus. these bubbles differ in size, and they contain several to tens of virus particles, most of these virions are light-colored (fig.8) .no other suspect pathogen particles are found except for the virus mentioned above in cytopathic vero e6 cells. however, there are no such virions or other suspect pathogen particles in normal vero e6 cells.the results of indirect immunofluorescence assay indicate that convalescent-phase serum collected from 10 sars patients respond with the infected cells positively. but the results of 20 healthy individuals' serum are all negative.the 1.5% agarose gel electrophoresis of rt-pcr product shows that one 110 bp fragment can be seen with eb staining, which is consistent with the 110 bp target of bniins/bniinas.(1) all the cytopathic cells contain the same kind of virions, and no other pathogens are found in these cells. furthermore, normal cells do not contain this kind of virus particles. therefore, these virus particles may probably be the sars pathogen, and their appearance is similar to the coronavirus reported in the literature [9, 10] .(2) the primers of rt-pcr and nest-pcr are designed according to the replicase 1b conservative sequence of coronavirus, and the target fragment is 110bp. a specific 110bp fragment is obtained as the product of rt-pcr and nest-pcr, which means the virus is coronavirus. according to the genome sequencing and sequence analysis (published in another article), this virus is a new coronavirus.(3) using the virus in cytopathic cells as antigen, with serology method, we test the igg antibody specimen from sars patients' convalescent-phase serum and healthy individuals' serum. the positive percentage of patients' serum antibody against this virus is 100%, whereas no health individual's serum contains this antibody. this result is similar to those of other laboratories in the world. combined with the results of overseas labs[3, 6, [11] [12] [13] [14] , the isolated coronavirus is probably the main pathogen of sars.(4) however, it is still being argued that the new sars-associated virus is the only pathogen of sars [15, 16] .in our study, we also found other virus-like particles and pathogens in pathologically changed tissues of sars patients and other cultured cells, such as hep-2, mdck (data not shown). other pathogens are not found in vero e6 cells maybe because the cell strain is only sensitive to sars-associated coronavirus, not sensitive to any other pathogen.(5) on the basis of the whole research, we suppose the virus morphogenesis process as below: at first the premature virus particles appear in the vmmvs, and these particles are relatively small, light-colored in the centre and hollow. as the virus grow in the vmmvs, nucleic acid and protein assemble gradually; therefore, the virus become bigger and overcolored. after maturation, the viruses obtain envelope and locate in the smooth vesicles. at last, virus particles release from the cells. we are studying which functional proteins play an important role in virus morphogenesis. this study is of great importance in drug design against sars-associated virus.(6) it has not been reported previously that sars-associated virus or any rna virus appear in swelled nucleic membrane bubble or nucleus. it is thought that coronavirus nucleic acid duplicate in cytoplasm, and the whole assembly process also takes place in cytoplasm [8, 17] . consequently, coronavirus particles should not appear in nucleus. however, virus particles are found in some nuclei and nucleic membrane bubbles in our research. one possible explanation is that the sars-associated virus is a new coronavirus, and its duplication, assembly site and morphogenesis have changed.the coronavirus disease (covid-19) is widespread around the world. in clusters of the virus, there is likely to be a continuous generation of outbreaks, which may lead to larger-scale outbreaks [1]. in japan, between 10% and 20% of all patients who are infected produce secondary infections [2]. countermeasures aimed at preventing the spread of infection have centered on accurate detection and appropriate response to these clusters [3,4]. accordingly, an effective and straightforward system for observing health status outside traditional health care settings would be useful as a counter-cluster measure for preventing the spread of covid-19.in japan, covid-19 is a designated infectious disease as defined by the relevant infectious disease control laws [3]. if a patient is suspected to have a covid-19 infection based on clinical characteristics and diagnosis is confirmed by a polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test, the confirmed patient is hospitalized and isolated. an active epidemiological investigation is then conducted by public health centers, which are public institutions established by local governments based on the japanese community health act [5]. at public health centers, retrospective contact tracing [6-8] of confirmed patients and prospective symptom tracking [9,10] of their “close contacts,” people with whom they have been in recent contact, are conducted. first, to identify the source of infection and make lists of close contacts for the 14 days before the onset of symptoms, a retrospective behavioral investigation is conducted based on whether the confirmed patient had participated in events characterized by the “three cs” (closed spaces with poor ventilation, crowded places with many people nearby, or close-contact settings such as close-range conversations) [11,12], as well as their travel history. second, to prevent secondary infections, close contacts are monitored for fever, dyspnea, coughing, and other symptoms for 14 days from the most recent date of exposure to a confirmed patient. to relieve pressure on the medical system, further measures have been implemented to care for mild or asymptomatic patients at home or in isolated accommodations [13-15].health observations conducted outside of traditional hospital settings can be difficult. in one example, patients on a large cruise ship were confirmed to have covid-19 [16-19]. after quarantine, the remainder of the passengers with negative pcr tests disembarked [20,21]. the ministry of health, labor and welfare (mhlw) issued a report on health follow-up, and the public health centers in the nearby residential area conducted a health observation [22]. such an investigation is time-consuming because it is based on telephone interviews or similar formats [23]. in another example, a hospital doctor was confirmed to be infected, and 13 other individuals were confirmed to have been infected by that doctor within 10 days, mainly from close contact [24,25]. such heavy investigation of close contacts prompted concerns that if the infection spread further, the public health center would be overloaded [23].in japan, which has become a super-aged society, it is critical to fill the gap between average life expectancy and healthy life expectancy [26]. personal health records (phrs) are expected to extend healthy life expectancy [27]. based on their personal judgement, individuals record their medical, nursing, caregiving, and health-care–related data (ie, person-generated data [28]). until now, this process has been considered suitable for daily management of an individual’s physical condition [29-32]. the phr allows the user to check their own health status (eg, to be aware of their physical activity by measuring the daily number of steps or to prevent overeating by monitoring their daily weight measurements). importantly for disease control, the phr can be used to detect early signs of infection through regular measurements of body temperature. management of an individual’s physical condition and self-care can theoretically be made easier by recording these data.the kyoto university data health study group, under the supervision of the kyoto university health service, conducts research on shared lifelong phr data based on annual health checkups for students and has created standardized models to promote the use of phrs [33]. there are no major differences between the observation items collected by daily health observation for phrs and the disease-specific observation items for covid-19. we hypothesized that by expanding the phr to collect observation items specific to covid-19, it would be possible to efficiently observe the health of individuals outside of hospital settings, including the close contacts of confirmed infected people, as well as patients who are mildly symptomatic or asymptomatic at home or in isolated accommodations.“k-note” (kenko-nikki; “health diary”) is a phr-related app developed by healthtech laboratory, inc, a kyoto university–originated venture company in the kyoto university incubation program [34]. the kyoto university data health study group members and other volunteers, including researchers at wakayama medical university, gathered data and added health observation functions specific for covid-19 to the phr data.the objective of this study is to determine whether phrs could be used for efficient health observation of emerging infectious diseases among individuals outside a traditional hospital setting. in addition, we sought to demonstrate the practical use of a smartphone and tablet app that supports phr-based health observation by integrating monitoring functions specific to covid-19. we explored the development, use, and efficiency of this app relative to conventional methods in the setting of an actual active epidemiological investigation of covid-19.the phr smartphone and tablet app “k-note” was developed to manage various data based on an individual’s input as an alternative to conventional paper-based health checkup information. it is used to record day-to-day health information such as the number of steps taken, body weight, and blood pressure, as well as medical information such as medications and vaccination history. its principal purpose is to improve individual lifestyles and, ultimately, extend healthy life expectancy.since july 2019, k-note has been distributed free of charge to study participants as part of a proof-of-concept study of health promotion using phrs. we recently added a covid-19 health observation function to the phr app and made the software available to the public free of charge.initially, the integration of health observation data specific to covid-19 in the k-note app was intended to streamline health observation within schools and companies of groups suspected of being infected. however, following an incidence of covid-19 infection, at the request of wakayama city public health center, the app was applied in the context of an active epidemiological investigation [24]. to improve the efficiency of health observation work at the public health center, we referred to the survey items of the national institute of infectious diseases [35] and created a microsoft excel (microsoft corporation) macro for data visualization.in general, personal information protection and network security in japan is strict, and there are often severe restrictions on access to webpages and social networking services, as well as personal computer settings. because k-note is intended to be used for health observation related to covid-19, it was designed to be usable in various information and communication technology environments, including use by local governments. the basic concepts underlying development are as follows: only the app and the readily available excel software package are required, operation can start immediately, and due consideration is given to the protection of personal information. the benefits of the app include its availability as a free download (ie, app store, google play). data specific to covid-19 can be recorded and managed with other health observation data, and can be sent by email to the specified destination with one click. individuals can easily review their own health observation data, and the epidemiological officer can easily visualize the comma-separated values (csv) data they have received using the excel macro for data visualization. data are managed only within the smartphone or tablet and are not made available elsewhere unless the individual who has been in close contact with an infected individual and is to be observed (health observer) specifically authorizes data sharing. k-note uses the health observation form to show the state of the health observer as “not infected” (ordinary health follow-up, close contact, etc) or “diagnosed with infection” (mild or asymptomatic), and users can choose from these options. here, we show an example of ”not infected“ (ordinary health follow-up, a close contact of a known infected individual).at the public health center, a list of health observers is made; a reference number, used in management, is assigned at this time. a special email address is also created that is used when the health observer sends data to the public health center. every day by the designated time, the health observer uses the integrated email address to send their data related to covid-19, such as body temperature and symptoms, which were recorded by the app. when the information has been received by the epidemiological officer at the public health center, they can visualize the collected csv data using an excel macro, and this can be used to monitor the health condition of all health observers. if appropriate, statistical data can be sent to authorities such as the mhlw and quarantine stations (figure 1).health observation at the public health center using k-note is performed in three phases: preparation, health observation by k-note, and data visualization at the public health center.as part of an active epidemiological investigation, the condition of confirmed patients is investigated at the public health center, and a list of health observers, who are to be observed for 14 days, is made. the epidemiological officer at the public health center acquires a reference number for each health observer. the ”roster“ sheet of the excel macro for data visualization serves as the epidemiological officer management’s ledger of health observers.because unique email addresses are used to transmit data to the public health center, the epidemiological officer can monitor each health observer separately, which may facilitate the investigation. although this is the system we have used, it may be useful to create the email address differently according to the operations of the public health center (eg, by creating one for each epidemiological officer at the public health center or one for each group of close contacts; figure 2).the health observer records their daily health conditions such as body temperature and symptoms for 14 days from the start of the observation (figure 3).after data input, when the health observer presses the “send data page” button, the “send data page” appears. health observers may input up to three email addresses. when the health observer presses the “send by email” button, the observation data is automatically converted into csv format and attached to the email. by a designated time every day, the app is used to send the health observer’s recorded observation data to the specified email addresses (figures 4 and 5).the epidemiological officer downloads the csv data of all health observers received on that day and stores them in a single folder. by launching the excel macro for data aggregation and batch importing the csv data on the ”execution“ sheet, all health observation data received on that day will be displayed on the ”data list“ sheet, and the “roster” sheet is updated. in the ”roster“ sheet, health observers whose health observation data were received that day are displayed in white, those whose data was not received on the day are displayed in yellow, and those whose data has never been received are automatically displayed in red. with this function, the epidemiological officer can easily distinguish the reporting status of all health observers. it is possible to adapt this system according to the situation (eg, it may be sufficient to contact only the health observers who are displayed in yellow or red). on the ”data list“ sheet, all the data for all the health observers are displayed. excel functions can be used to rearrange the health observers and display only a particular day. regarding body temperature, yellow is automatically used to distinguish health observers whose reported body temperature was ≥37°c, and red is used to distinguish those with temperatures ≥37.5°c. coughs or other symptoms are automatically displayed in red. if the epidemiological officer checks the “data list” sheet and a health observer requires more detailed observation, they may click the link in the ”thermal type table“ column to display the ”fever chart“ sheet. here, body temperature is displayed graphically over time, and 37.5°c is indicated by a red line so that it is possible to see at a glance whether there are days when the temperature exceeded the standard value. symptoms are also listed over time and displayed in red (figure 6).we started developing the health observation app on february 22, 2020, and registered the initial version in the app store on february 27. on march 5, a patient with covid-19 at a workplace in wakayama city was confirmed, and the use of the initial version of the app was started at the wakayama city public health center on march 6. we immediately customized the health observation app according to the actual epidemiological investigation and released an updated version on march 15. health observation had been performed for 14 days starting from the day of contact (exposure) with the confirmed patient. in principle, the investigation would be tracked daily until all health observers were contacted. for those who were exposed before march 5 and were found to be infected by health observation, observation will be completed without waiting for the final day. during the active epidemiological investigation, the wakayama city public health center discovered 72 health observers who had close contact with a confirmed case. among them, 57 (79.2%) adopted the use of the health observation app and 14 used telephone investigations; the observation period of the remaining health observers ended on march 5 (table 1).during the app-based investigation, the 6 health observers who did not send an email on march 19, 2020, were contacted by phone by an epidemiological officer to inform them of the end of the observation; their health condition was checked at that time. in total 57 of 72 health observers (79.2%) chose the app. the spontaneous email transmission rate was 86.7% (n=632/729).before the app was introduced, all health observers were interviewed by telephone, a process that took four epidemiological officers more than 2 hours. this suggested that, should the virus spread further, it would be difficult to maintain investigations by telephone with limited staff over 14 days. additionally, the comprehensiveness of the investigation may be compromised because health observers might be absent or epidemiological officers might not be able to make a phone call because of other work. furthermore, the health observer also had to wait in a place where they could answer the telephone during the survey period, placing a heavy burden on both the health observer and the epidemiological officers. with the introduction of k-note, it became possible to automatically manage information collectively; the health observers sent their data at a designated time every day, and a single epidemiological officer could carry out health observations alone. in addition, the arrival status of observation data and the health condition of the health observer were readily visualized, which improved the efficiency and comprehensiveness of the investigation. to improve efficiency, the app was modified 6 times, and the excel macro 3 times, by mid-may.the use of apps started with local governments and gradually spread to schools and companies. initially, a tool for health observation was required as a covid-19 countermeasure, and many facilities decided to introduce our app because of the motivation to respond promptly rather than seeking efficiency and effectiveness. many users expressed their gratitude for an excel-based system that could be introduced immediately, even if it was a bit inconvenient, because they did not know the specific method for health observation and there was no alternative system. as social awareness of the need for health observation increased, the number of users from large universities and companies increased. since mid-may, the number of inquiries by health observers has increased due to the state of emergency being lifted in japan and the subsequent movement toward resuming social activities [37].from the viewpoint of effectiveness, the ability to record daily health condition was of great significance as a countermeasure against covid-19. because it was possible to look back when some problem occurred, the app could be used for health observation not only in active epidemiological investigation at public health centers but also for health observation before and after events such as educational practice, face-to-face lectures, and physical education classes.because of the rapid spread of covid-19, no one was demanding optimal efficiency. still, we must acknowledge that our method for exchange of csv data by email and manual data visualization by excel macro was not efficient. in addition, there were many inquiries from local governments and companies indicating that, for security reasons, it was not possible to use web forms for the online briefing sessions or to download files (including the excel) macro on the internet.in the flood of various information technologies, the following two points are presumed to have driven increased demand for our app.from the viewpoint of satisfaction, the administrator of a facility or organization was able to fulfill their social responsibility by introducing our app as the infection of covid-19 spread. health observers also had a sense of security that someone was observing their health condition. therefore, it could be presumed that satisfaction was high. recently, health observation became one of the requirements for resuming social activities in japan.we extended phrs and developed a phr-based health observation app for counter- cluster measures of covid-19. as a result of applying the new app in an active epidemiological investigation at a public health center, we believe that the efficiency and completeness of the investigation have been improved, preventing the spread of infection. the app is used nationwide in japan, mainly by companies, schools, hospitals, and local governments for health observation for the prevention of covid-19. except for active epidemiological investigations at public health centers, confirmed patients may not have been identified by self-reporting from schools or companies alone. however, the app has contributed to the early detection of covid-19 or voluntary self-quarantine at home by individuals with suspected symptoms, and the use of the app can facilitate reopening of school and corporate activities. our findings suggest that health monitoring of phrs is useful for carrying out efficient health observation of emerging infectious diseases for individuals outside of a traditional hospital setting.a factor contributing to the success of our app is that we assumed that it would be used for health observation of small groups; accordingly, we designed the system configuration so that it could be introduced immediately without a cloud system; the user only requires the app itself and excel. many local governments in japan have strict control of security and protection of personal information, and are often restricted from displaying external webpages and using social networking services from their office local area networks. a system for storing health observation data in the cloud and sharing data between the health observer and the public health center would require security-related deliberation and entail large-scale initiatives for entire cities or prefectures. on the other hand, our method can be implemented immediately and at low cost in a comparatively simple ict environment in which emails can be exchanged between the health observer and the public health center using just the app and excel. it is therefore possible for each public health center to make a decision about whether to introduce the system. additionally, because it was based on the covid-19 health observation items of the national institute of infectious diseases and reflected the opinions of preventive medicine specialists and epidemiological officers at public health centers, the app was practical.the basis of this study was the idea that phrs, which are used to promote health via daily observation, can be used as a counter-cluster measure against large-scale infectious diseases. in the case of highly infectious diseases, infection is often found in people in close contact with a known infected patient, but they often do not have symptoms at the start of the observation. for this reason, it is extremely difficult to undertake comprehensive health observations outside the hospital, including of asymptomatic individuals or those with mild symptoms, those under isolation, those who are suspected to be infected based on airport quarantine, and those within active epidemiologic investigations. it is obviously too late to start preparations after an infectious disease begins to spread, and ideally, a system would be established during normal times. however, it is socially difficult to invest in and maintain costly measures against large-scale infectious diseases that occur once every few years or even several decades. although there are observation items specific to infectious disease control, they are just an extension of daily health observation. we believe that the idea of converting daily health promotion activities by phr into countermeasures against large-scale infectious diseases in emergencies could enable a swift response to these illnesses.the popularization of phrs is key to making daily health observations the basis of counter-cluster measures against large-scale infections. it is important for promoting the significance of the habit of self-management of health data and as a tool for individuals to maintain their own health throughout society. as a countermeasure against covid-19, many people have undertaken health observation using our app in japan. we would like to further promote the habit of phr-mediated health observation as a social infrastructure even after the end of covid-19. to do that, more people must become aware of the benefits of maintaining phrs. taking advantage of the experience of developing a health observation app for covid-19, we would like to develop various additional apps of the same kind, not only as a measure against emerging infectious diseases but also for health management for public marathons, in club activities in educational institutions, and after large-scale disasters.for research, detailed quantitative and qualitative evaluation items should be determined, and data should be collected at the time that the research plan is created. however, due to the urgency of preventing the spread of covid-19, app development and an introduction to public health centers were given priority. in this case, we only performed qualitative evaluation of the burden reduction effect by interviewing epidemiological officers and help desk managers. another limitation is that some members of society do not have access to smartphones, tablets, or wi-fi connections. although the process is explained well here, some people may find the method difficult to use if they are not familiar with information and communications technology. we distribute to these health observers an excel survey sheet that can be read into the data visualization excel macro. in addition, a proxy input function may be necessary. the current excel macro for data visualization was developed for the health observation of individuals who have been in close contact with known infected patients at public health centers. we believe that this is suitable for surveys of up to 100 close contacts per confirmed patient. if the number of people exceeds 100, a more sophisticated data visualization system may be required. it would also be possible to develop a retrospective behavioral investigation support app for confirmed patients and close contacts using smartphones and phr behavioral history information, but such an app has not been developed due to concerns about protecting personal information [38,39]. currently, contact-tracing apps are being developed all over the world [6-8]. in japan, as a counter-cluster measure, retrospective behavioral investigation of confirmed patients, explorations of close contacts, and prospective symptom tracking of close contacts are executed as active epidemiological investigations, but the amount of work required is enormous. if contact-tracing and symptom-tracking apps [9,10,40] can be used in combination in an active epidemiological investigation, it may be possible to greatly reduce the workload.as a measure against future large-scale infectious diseases after the termination of covid-19, it would be useful to develop an infectious disease control support network based on phrs that could seamlessly respond to signs of infectious disease spread active case findings of behavioral investigation of confirmed patients and close contacts, health observation of out-of-hospital close contacts and mild or asymptomatic patients, and provide statistics to local governments and national headquarters.we developed a health observation app integrated with phrs as a covid-19 counter-cluster measure. the app greatly reduced the follow-up burden of individuals who had close contact with known cases of confirmed covid-19 infection. the relatively low-tech nature of the app and excel combination meant that it was easily accessible, especially in japan. the system uses emails rather than the cloud, an approach that is arguably more compatible with business and privacy practices specific to japan. health observation by phrs for the purpose of improving health management and extending healthy life expectancy by using individuals’ own health information is also effective as a countermeasure against large-scale infectious diseases. we believe that raising the awareness of each person about their own health and the value of using phrs for daily health management is a powerful weapon against the rapidly expanding spread of infectious diseases. we hope that our study will help prevent the spread of covid-19 infections and future large-scale infectious diseases around the world.the coronavirus (cov) family consists of viruses that infects a variety of animals including humans with various levels of respiratory and fecal-oral transmission levels depending on the behavior of the viruses' natural hosts and optimal viral fitness. a model to classify and predict the levels of respective respiratory and fecal-oral transmission potentials of the various viruses was built before the outbreak of mers-cov using ai and empirically-based molecular tools to predict the disorder level of proteins. using the percentages of intrinsic disorder (pid) of the nucleocapsid (n) and membrane (m) proteins of cov, the model easily clustered the viruses into three groups with the sars-cov (m pid = 8%, n pid = 50%) falling into category b, in which viruses have intermediate levels of both respiratory and fecal-oral transmission potentials. later, mers-cov (m pid = 9%, n pid = 44%) was found to be in category c, which consists of viruses with lower respiratory transmission potential but with higher fecal-oral transmission capabilities. based on the peculiarities of disorder distribution, the sars-cov-2 (m pid = 6%, n pid = 48%) has to be placed in category b. our data show however, that the sars-cov-2 is very strange with one of the hardest protective outer shell, (m pid = 6%) among coronaviruses. this means that it might be expected to be highly resilient in saliva or other body fluids and outside the body. an infected body is likelier to shed greater numbers of viral particles since the latter is more resistant to antimicrobial enzymes in body fluids. these particles are also likelier to remain active longer. these factors could account for the greater contagiousness of the sars-cov-2 and have implications for efforts to prevent its spread.shell disorder analysis predicts greater resilience of the sars-cov-2 (covid-19) outside the body and in body fluidssince its first appearance in wuhan, china, in december 2019, the sars-cov-2 virus responsible for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has progressively spread around the world. 1 and to date (april 15, 2020), according to the johns hopkins coronavirus resource center, the outbreak involved 185 countries worldwide, with 128 011 people dead. 2 health care workers were among the hardest hit by this infection. this was evident from reports, both from china and italy, which revealed infection rates between medical staff between 3.8% and 20%. 1 the tests currently used for the direct identification of sars-cov-2 are mainly aimed at detecting viral rna through nucleic acid amplification, generally using the polymerase chain reaction. the nasopharynx and/or oropharynx are the most tested sampling sites using swabs, with a slightly greater sensitivity shown by the nasopharyngeal swab. 3 this video shows the step-by-step procedure for properly dressing and undressing, demonstrates how to wear the personal protective equipment (ppe), and provides some technical notes on the execution of the nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab for covid-19. all of this serves to avoid the risk of contagion of the health worker. the video is based on our experience at the giovanni borea civic hospital in sanremo, where in the last month, strictly following the cdc and who this article supplements the operative techniques video presentation, which can be viewed electronically. guidelines, 4,5 the otolaryngology team has performed about 900 nasopharyngeal (95%) and oropharyngeal (5%) swabs. following these steps, none of the operators have been infected as of the present date.the dressing phase takes place in a changing room, close to the entrance of the covid area but separate from it. it requires the execution of the following steps: (a) remove all jewelry and personal items; (b) practice good hand hygiene with soap and water or alcohol solution; (c) put on a first pair of gloves; (d) put on the disposable full body scrubs; (e) put on the cap; (f) wear a filtering facepiece particles mask, ffp2 or ffp3 (possibly covered with a surgical mask); (g) wear protective goggles and/or a protective visor; (h) wear the shoe covers; finally, (i) put on the second pair of gloves (which must cover the wrist of the full body scrubs). figure 1 shows the health care professional at the end of the dressing phase.the patient wears a surgical mask. she is informed about the procedure that is about to be performed. the patient must be seated in a comfortable position with his head resting on the back of the chair. the patient's head must be placed on a horizontal plane parallel to the floor. the patient is asked to lower the mask by uncovering only her nose and keeping the mouth closed. after opening the swab in a sterile manner, the operator positions the patient laterally in order to avoid direct droplets from sneezing or coughing. the swab is inserted gently into the nostril. the insertion must be parallel to the floor of the nasal fossa. the swab is kept medial and facing the nasal septum (do not insert the swab upward, as in this case the swab stops at the level of the nasal turbinates and the viral rna sampling may not be significant). it is important to use the mark on the swab stick as a depth reference ( figure 2 ). however, when the operator feels an obstacle to further introduction, it means that the swab will have reached the posterior wall of the nasopharynx. with clockwise and counterclockwise movement, repeatedly rub the swab against the posterior wall of the nasopharynx (figure 3 ), for about 10 to 15 seconds. extract the swab from the nostril taking care not to contaminate it upon exit, introduce it into the test tube and break it at the mark on the stick. in case of difficulty in introducing the swab into a nasal fossa due to deviation of the nasal septum or hypertrophy of the inferior turbinates, proceed with the same technique in the contralateral nasal fossa. the endoscopic vision shown in the video has a didactic purpose only; the nasopharyngeal swab should not be performed with the aid of the endoscope. if it is impossible to perform the nasopharyngeal swab (for unfavorable anatomical nasal conditions or because it is not tolerated by the patient), the oropharyngeal swab can be performed as a second choice. the patient is asked to lower the mask by exposing the mouth and to fully open it. the swab is inserted into the oral cavity until it reaches the level of the oropharynx. the sampling is carried out on the uvula, the palatine tonsils and/or the posterior wall of the oropharynx. the contact with the tongue and other areas of the oral cavity should be carefully avoided.we recommend that the undressing phase take place in a dedicated changing room, located immediately upon leaving the covid area. it involves the following steps; (a) remove the second pair of gloves and replace it with a pair of clean gloves; (b) remove the disposable full body scrubs and dispose it in the appropriate container (the front and sleeves of the dress are contaminated, so open the zipper or untie the laces, move it away from the neck and shoulders, touching only inside the garment, turn the lab coat upside down, fold or roll it up and throw it away); (c) remove the first pair of gloves (the outside of the gloves is potentially contaminated; therefore, first remove one glove by grasping and pulling it from the outside, and then remove the other glove by inserting a finger into the cuff of the glove and thus remove it, taking care not to touch its external part); (d) remove the glasses and/or the protective visor (their front is potentially contaminated; therefore, to remove them, grasping the side sections, and place them in a bag for disinfection); (e) remove the mask, first the surgical mask, and then the ffp2 or ffp3, (the front of the mask is potentially contaminated, therefore after having loosened the rear laces, grasp the front of the mask, move it away from the face and remove it); (f) remove the cap and shoes covers, if not already removed upon removal of the full body scrubs; (g) remove the second pair of gloves; finally, (h) practice good hand hygiene with soap and water or alcohol solution. for technical reasons, the undressing phase in the video takes place in the same area where the dressing took place, but we remark the importance of undressing in a separate, dedicated area. figure 4 shows the path that the operator should follow to avoid contamination of the rooms, starting from the dressing phase until returning to the clean common area.this report details the indications that should be followed by the health care professional during the execution of the nasopharyngeal and/or oropharyngeal swab for covid 19. particular attention must be paid during the undressing phase, due to the high-risk of self-contamination if this phase is not correctly performed. we hope that this manuscript and related video can serve as a guide to safely perform high airway sampling for covid 19. to prevent transmission from an infectious patient to other patients, personnel, visitors and the environment and to protect patients with impaired immune defence against infection [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] .• all patients having contagious disease that can easily be transferred directly or indirectly via contact, blood and body fluids, air/droplets or via equipment, textiles and surfaces. • all patients with significant reduced infection defence or otherwise infection vulnerable and who should be protected against infection.hospital management should ensure necessary capacity and type of isolating units: contact-and air-droplet isolates and protective isolates. updated isolation routines, adequate protective equipment-including ppe-routines for disinfection of rooms and surfaces and disinfectants and hand hygiene facilities should be available. department management should implement isolation procedures, train the use of ppe, control the use of routines and provide sufficient stock and capacity of ppe and means for disinfection and hand hygiene.the staff should follow current guidelines for treatment of patients with infections and for patients that should be extra protected against infections.there are many guidelines that are discussing airborne infections and definitions and methods to stop the spread by air [1, 2, [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . air outside houses normally contain a variable load of bacteria, dust and particles, and the number of bacteria may be 40-100 cfu (colony-forming units) per m 3 (1000 l) air. inside rooms where healthy people are present, the number may increase to 300 cfu or more, dependent of number of people and area. in operation rooms, it is recommended not more than 100 cfu/m 3 air to reduce risk of postoperative wound infection.all humans are continuously releasing bacteria and skin cells to the air and environment while moving around and are continuously picking up new microbes from the environment and air. in hospitals, there are many patients with infections (20-30% of the patients-hospital associated or not) that may spread pathogenic microbes to the air in the patient room or other places [17] [18] [19] [20] . about 10-20% of infections in hospitals and other healthcare institutions are airborne [9, 11, 12] . the transmission may be either directly from a sick patient coughing or sneezing or indirectly via re-aerosols from bedding, cleaning and other activities in the room of a patient with infection [1, 2, [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] 21] .the design of isolates for airborne infections is very important to control the spread in the department [22] [23] [24] . however, without good knowledge, good routines and the use of personal protective equipment (ppe), no well-designed isolate can stop the spread [2, [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] . [3, 11, 12] [3, 11, 12] • airborne infection isolate with a defined negative air pressure (−16 to 25 pa).• alternative is contact isolate with sluice.• single room with separate bathroom-entrance from the patient's room-or, if not a bathroom, use of bedpan or urine bottle. this can only be used for a short term until the patient is transferred to an airborne infection isolate and depends on the type of infectious agent. • isolate for airborne infections should have a sluice (anteroom), patient room and bathroom with toilet/washstand/shower and a throughput decontaminator/ autoclave. • ventilation and pressure. controlled negative pressure ventilation (−16 to 25 pa) with the lowest negative pressure in the sluice (−10 to 16 pa), increasing to the patient room and further increasing to the highest negative pressure (−20 to 25 pa) in the bathroom/disinfection room where the room air is exhausted. it is recommended 6-12 air changes per hour. incoming fresh air comes from the ceiling or high up on the wall of the patient room. outgoing used air is extracted ca. 15 cm from the floor (diagonal) or via openings in the lower part of the door to the bathroom/disinfection room. outgoing, used air is extracted ca 15 cm from the floor (diagonal) or via openings in the lower part of the door to the bathroom/ disinfection room. from the bathroom/disinfection room, the used air goes via a full decontamination with uvc, through varying filter types, including hepafilters, before entering separate exhaust channels over the roof-far away from incoming air pipes. • interlock of doors so that only one open at a time. one of the doors in the sluice must always be closed. • the sluice must be large enough that a bed can stand there with both doors closed.it must be spacious enough for dressing and undressing of ppe without self-contamination or contamination of the equipment in the sluice. the room must have a sink for handwashing. throughput cupboards between bathroom and sluice can create ventilation problems and should be completely sealed, and the cabinet doors must be interlocked. throughput decontaminator or autoclave from the bath to the sluice is an advantage for the disinfection of infection-prone equipment. • the patient room must be large so that visitors do not come too close to the bed-about 2 m distance from the bed on the sides and, at the foot end, at least 20 m 2 . during intensive treatment (respirator, dialysis, monitoring, etc.) and presence of two intensive nurses, there is a need for at least 35 m 2 space per patient. the room should have a sink for handwashing and a robust inventory that withstand disinfection with chemicals. • decontamination room and bathroom have entrance directly from the patient room, with door that turns into the patient room. the room contains a toilet, shower, throughput decontaminator or autoclave and cabinets for necessary equipment to the patient. • direct access from outside. it is an advantage of direct access to the outside of the building via a separate sluice for direct patient in and out.well-equipped airborne infection isolates may be used for all types of isolation requirements concerning infectious diseases, including high-risk infections that require strict isolation.an alternative for a shorter period may be a contact isolate or a single-patient room with sluice (anteroom with handwash) and a separate bathroom with decontaminator.when used for patients with airborne infections, a poster with a pink colour (for instance) with information is set up on the entrance to inform the staff about the state of the isolate and the use of ppe. contact hospital infection personnel when needed.donning ppe before entering the patient room in this order [11, 12] :1. gown is used by everyone-disposable is preferred-with long sleeves and cuffs. the disposable gown is only used once. multi-use gown is not recommended, but if used, it should be hanged in the patient room (beside the door) with the outside out or-if there is sluice/anteroom-should be inside of the gown hung out. the multi-use gown is changed after each shift or more often when needed and should only be used for a single patient. waterproof, disposable gowns or disposable plastic aprons are also used if there is spillage/liquid. 2. cap/hood is used by everyone. it keeps the hair in place and covers the ears.surgical mask or respirator mask is fastened outside the cap (and then, it is better fastened). 3. surgical or respirator masks are used by all, fastened on the back of the head and the neck. it should be well fitted over the nose and mouth. 4. respirator mask with p3 quality protection is used for:• pulmonary tuberculosis, all forms and on suspicion.• varicella-zoster, morbilli (measles), pertussis in non-immune person.• serious, highly pathogenic, airborne infections-see strict isolation.• pandemic influenza.• responsible physician decides the use of face masks or respirators.• beard prevents sufficient effect of respirators and other face masks.• leak test should be done. 5. face shield/visor/protective eyewear-used in case of splashes, droplets and aerosols with infectious material.room-bound shoes may be heat disinfected in decontaminator after use-or use disposable shoe covers. 7. gloves-used by all; long cuff that covers the wrist. the use of double gloves may do the work in isolation easier.doffing in the sluice or at the exit door if the room has no sluice/anteroom: [11, 12] remove ppe in such a way that you do not contaminate yourself or the environment. doffing is done in a defined area in the sluice on the unclean side. in this order, take off the ppe that you have used:1. hand disinfection with gloves on. 2. room-bound shoes or shoe covers-if used. room-bound shoes are tilted off and put foot straight into your own shoes. nb! if shoe covers are used, remove them with gloves on. 3. hand disinfection with gloves on. 4. gloves: learn the method to take off without recontamination. one is turned inside out when taken off and used as a cloth to remove the second glove. [11, 12] all equipment must be disinfected after use. cover the x-ray cassette with a clean pillow case (or other clean cover) before it is taken into the patient. after x-ray, transfer the cassette to a new, clean pillow case (wipe off with alcohol before the transfer) in distance from the patient, in a cautious way. in the sluice, uncover the cassette carefully and disinfect it completely with 70% alcohol. then bring it out in a new pillow case. it is notified about the infection.journal trolleys or papers are not taken into isolates. paper from the isolate that is needed may be put in clean plastic folders before leaving the room for copy (in plastic folder) before the paper is discarded as infectious material. the copy may be submitted to the journal.medical examination/treatment in other departments/death of the patient provide good advance information on infection risk to relevant departments. mors is taken care of in the isolate. the requisition is marked in uppercase letters: air isolation.before transportation to other departments, the patient should be washed and put on new, clean cloth, in a clean bed and with face mask.x-ray examination: evaluate x-ray examination in the isolate-see above. if examination is done outside the isolation unit, a fully airborne regime is made for the patient.surgical treatment should occur at the end of the daily operation programme, preferably on an operating room particularly suitable for the purpose, with no positive air pressure (preferably negative pressure), without laf (laminar air filtration) system and with a subsequent decontamination of the room as airborne contamination.remember good information to all who are treating/taking care of the patienteven when this occurs in isolation unit-such as physiotherapy, sampling, cleaning and so on.follow guidelines for contact isolation. note the remiss with capitals for airborne infection isolation.transport of patients outside the isolate is avoided if possible [11, 12] :• only essential transport is permitted and performed by experienced personnel. the ward's personnel must always accompany the patient. staff transporting and receiving the patient must receive information about airborne infection regime, in advance, and information concerning adequate precautions during transport, including clothing and the use of cap, surgical mask/respirator, gown and gloves. • the patient should have clean clothes and clean bed and should wear a surgical/ respirator mask when outside the isolation ward. avoid transport through other wards. transport a dead patient in clean bed and clean cover or in body bag. • when the patient is going home by ambulance before he is free from infection, the ambulance personnel must be informed so that adequate measures are implemented. the ambulance should not have unnecessary equipment. bed/stretcher and the cabin should be disinfected after use in ambulances. • hand hygiene before and after the transport.follow guidelines for contact isolation.• contact the ward office for information about actual protective measures and hand hygiene. • visitors are using the same guidelines for attire as the staff.• see also other information for visitors. [11, 12] use water, ordinary detergent and clean equipment. special cleaning and disinfection may be appropriate in certain cases-daily. if there are spills of blood or body fluids, the nursing staff should immediately remove the spills with gloved hands and afterwards disinfect the area with chloramine 5% or household bleach, or peracetic acid, before cleaning.after use, disinfect mops, cloths and buckets in decontaminator. consider disposable equipment such as mops and cloths.do not handle the used mops/equipment without gloves/infection gown/masks! termination of isolation: [11, 12] • after completion of the isolation period, all disposable equipment (including unused) like creams, soaps, bandages, etc. which have remained in the room during isolation is treated as infectious waste. all textiles in the room are treated as infectious and sent for laundry. • beddings are carefully packaged (to avoid re-aerosols) and sent as infectious textiles. • bed equipment and mattresses which cannot be washed or disinfected in the room are packed, labelled, and sent to disinfection. • rooms, fixtures, bed, bathroom and all reusable equipment are disinfected with peracetic acid, chloramine 5% and household bleach or by other means. • all handles, buttons, switches, call cord, waterproof mattresses, bed, nightstand, toilet, computer, telephone, tv and other contaminated fixtures and equipment are disinfected. • floors, walls (1.80 m up), lighting fixtures in the ceiling and other equipment should be disinfected. it is important to have good cleaning on all surfaces to avoid deposits of dust-bearing microbes. • the responsible nurse, biochemist or radiographer must inform the cleaning staff about the disinfection area and the disinfectant to be used. after the disinfection, the room and all equipment are washed with soap and water. • the room is aired 1 h after cleaning. • hydrogen peroxide 5% dry gas may be appropriate in addition to regular disinfection, especially in rooms with a lot of medical equipment and if problems with regular disinfection. follow written procedures. three subsequent disinfection cycles must be performed under control of effect on spore test. it does not work against tubercle bacilli but is otherwise approved against bacteria, viruses and fungi.consider the main cleaning of isolates 2-4 times per year, depending on usage and accumulation of microbes and dust. check the filter effect, air ducts and negative pressure. contact infection control personnel to be sure that the disinfection is done in a proper manner.nb! good hand hygiene is important! it prevents the spread of infection! isolation regimens should not be a hindrance for-but included in-diagnostics and treatment.see chap. 21.. the icf has established a unified and standardized terminology system to classify the functioning and disability. it is the fundamental system of physical medicine and rehabilitation and is recommended in the fields of diagnosis and coding, evaluation, and interventions of functioning to maximize patients' functioning at three levels: (1) body function and structure; (2) activity and participation; and (3) environmental factors and personal factors. the ichi provides a set of general classifications to report and analyze the evaluation and health interventions. it is applicable to all health system levels and uses the same structure and terminology as the icf to describe health interventions. the icd is used for disease diagnosis and coding; the icf is used for description, evaluation, and coding of functioning; and the ichi is used for intervention and coding of functioning. the ichi is consistent with the icd-11 and icf in ontological structure and terminology. 14, 15 [consensus 1] this consensus adopts the framework and approach of who-fics to build a rehabilitation protocol of covid-19 disease diagnosis, description and evaluation, coding and intervention of functioning (see table 1 ).[consensus 2] the who recommends three standardized functional assessment tools based on the icf in icd-11, namely the who disability assessment schedule 2.0 (whodas 2.0), the brief model disability survey, and the generic functioning domains (vb40). the functional evaluation based on the icf, such as icf-core set, can be used for patients' overall functional assessment, rehabilitation-needs assessment, and rehabilitation-outcome assessment. this consensus recommends the use of these three standardized assessment tools in rehabilitation evaluation. the qualifiers of icf can be used to standardize the results of functional assessment in the field of rehabilitation to achieve comparable international functional data.according to the icf, this consensus also recommends all evaluations mapped to icf structure involve in four aspects: body function and structure, activity and participation, environmental factors and personal factors. [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] according to the framework and scope of rehabilitation developed by the international society of physical and rehabilitation medicine (isprm white paper), icf and ichi β-2, we develop a personalized intervention plan based on specific unmet needs of patients with covid-19. 21 delivery system based on icf and who guideline: rehabilitation in health system. 6, [28] [29] [30] [31] in light of the who rehabilitation guideine: rehabilitation in health system, rehabilitation for covid-19 survivors should be provided at tertiary-, secondary-, and primary-care levels and integrated into the continuum of prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, and health promotion.[consensus 4] according to the recommendations from who guidelines rehabilitation in health system, considering the functioning caused by covid-19, including mental health issues and environmental support factors, we should implement the people-oriented rehabilitation throughout lifespan and concerns social determinants, adopt multidisciplinary and cross-domain approaches, and with approaches of universal design to bulid barriers-free environments and to establish a comprehensive rehabilitation service system.the new coronavirus is a coronavirus of β genus, with a capsule, round or oval particles, often pleomorphic, with a diameter of 60-140 nm. [32] [33] [34] 40 the virus is sensitive to uv; and heat of 56°c for 30 minutes, ether, 75% ethanol, chlorine containing disinfectant, peracetic acid, and chloroform can effectively inactivate the virus.chlorhexidine cannot effectively inactivate the virus.the novel coronavirus is the main source of infection.asymptomatic infections can also be a source of infection. the main route of transmission is through respiratory droplets and close contact. it is possible to propagate through aerosols when exposed to high-concentration aerosols for a long time in a relatively closed ta b l e 1 protocol of rehabilitation for covid-19 cases using the who-fics the results of a lung biopsy and autopsy in a covid-19 patient showed that the patient had pleural effusion, pleural thickening, and extensive and severe adhesion with the lung. the lung tissue showed dark red and gray white patchy changes in toughness, while a large amount of gray white viscous fluid overflowed in the lung tissue, and fiber cords were seen. white foam mucus was seen in the endotracheal tube, and mucus adhered in the lumen of the right pulmonary branch.the main manifestations of patients are fever, dry cough, and fa- it is necessary to establish a multi-disciplinary rehabilitation team for patients with covid-19. according to the functioning characteristics and the rehabilitation stage of patients, individualized rehabilitation intervention strategies and approached are recommended. 5, 41 from the current situation of the cases, most patients have a good prognosis, and a few patients are in a critical condition. the prognosis of the elderly and those with chronic basic diseases is poor. the symptoms of children are relatively mild.mild: the clinical symptoms are mild, and no pneumonia is found in radiology.moderate: fever, respiratory tract and other symptoms are present, and pneumonia is found in radiology.severity: those complying with any of the following should be (4) radiology shows that the lesions progress more than 50% in a coding protocol of covid-19 with icd-10 had been issued by national health and health commission and national health insurance bureau.the "u07.100" code is used for novel coronavirus as a statistical code for all confirmed covid-19 cases. it is not used as a main diagnostic code for the front page of the medical record.the "u07.100x001: novel coronavirus pneumonia" code is only applicable to the "confirmed inpatients with new coronavirus pneumonia" and must be used as the main diagnostic encode.the code is defined as follows: (1) [consensus 5] covid-19 cases have secondary functioning and disability. using the rapid extended icf core set, we can describe, evaluate, and code the functioning of cases with covid-19. this rapid icf core set developed from icf core set for copd. see table 2 for description and coding demonstration case.[consensus 6] according to the disease classification, functional status, and rehabilitation needs of patients with covid-19, the following rehabilitation assessment and evaluation are recommended.as novel coronavirus is highly infectious and highly pathogenic, the icf core set is a widely used standardized tool. there is no icf core set for covid-19. we recommend a rapid and extended icf core set from icf core set for copd for evaluation and description of functioning and disability for covid-19 cases (table 2 ).according to the covid-19-cases-related body functions and structures and the assessments and evaluation tools commonly used in the fields rehabilitation, we recommend the following assessments and evaluations. transferring oneself (d420) moving from one surface to another, such as sliding along a bench or moving from a bed to a chair, without changing body positioncaring for body parts (d520) looking after those parts of the body, such as skin, face, teeth, scalp, nails and genitals, that require more than washing and drying services, systems and policies for preventing and treating health problems, providing medical rehabilitation and promoting a healthy lifestyle(1) evaluation of dyspnea: modified borg scale for daily follow-up.(2) subjective fatigue assessment: rating of perceived exertion.(3) limb pain assessment: visual analog scale and oral rating scales.(4) evaluation of anxiety and depression: zung's anxiety/depression scales, self-rating depression scale and self-rating anxiety scale for regular follow-up evaluation.(1) vital signs evaluation: record the body temperature, respiration, pulse, blood pressure, blood oxygen saturation, urine volume, and other indicators regularly every day, and make relevant records before and after the intervention treatment.(2) imaging evaluation: chest x-ray; if necessary, ct and color doppler echocardiography may be used to evaluate the morphology of heart and lung and provide an objective basis for making a treatment plan.(3) assessment of bone, joint and muscle: bed rest or disease con- we recommend the whodas 2.0, activities of daily living (adl) assessments, and the 36-item short form health survey (sf-36) to evaluate patients' activities of daily life and participation.the whodas 2.0 is a standardized activity and participation assessment tool recommended by the who.according to the severity of the patient's condition, adls should be evaluated regularly for mild, medium, severe, and discharged patients, including basic adl evaluation and instrumental adl evaluation for cases who return to the community after discharge.the improved barthel index or other instrumental adl scales are recommended. for severe cases, we recommend observational evaluation.as there are no assessment scales specific to covid-19, we recommend using the medical outcomes study sf-36 or the copd assessment test in order to shorten the time of evaluation.considering that covid-19 cases may have different health conditions and will be at different rehabilitation stages, we recommend not only collecting data of vital signs, laboratory tests, and other information on disease, but also evaluating pulmonary function, subjective fatigue, dyspnea, pain, joint and muscle function, activity level, and quality of life tailored to patients' health conditions. those assessments should be carried out pre-and post-rehabilitation. only comprehensive and systematic rehabilitation data will provide evidence for the effect of rehabilitation in the intervention of infectious diseases, such as covid-19.[consensus 7] we developed a protocol of rehabilitation intervention based on the icf tailored to covid-19 diagnosis, functional status, and unmet needs of rehabilitation.within the framework of the who-fics, rehabilitation service de- the main clinical manifestations of covid-19 are respiratory dysfunction, with pulmonary consolidation and airway secretion obstruction. 43 according to the patient's condition, the therapist can use bodyposition drainage, vibration and clapping, active cycle of breathing techniques, and other techniques or equipment to clear the airway, and should pay attention to the local humidification of the whole body and airway to reduce the viscosity of the sputum. for mild, medium, and heavy patients, and patients after discharge, reducing the time spent in bed is helpful to reduce the risk of various bed complications, promote the improvement of cardiopulmonary function, and shorten recovery time.the threshold loading inspiratory muscle training device is the most commonly used method of respiratory resistance training at present.generally, the initial load is 30% of the personal maximum inspiratory respiratory control can significantly improve the experience of breathing, reduce respiratory-related oxygen consumption, and relieve the tension of patients. generally, deep and slow breathing is used to increase the compliance of the respiratory system, reduce the work of breathing, and relieve the dyspnea of patients.diaphragmatic breathing or abdominal breathing also have similar effects. if possible, physical therapy can be used for training, such as an electrical stimulation diaphragmatic trainer, electronic biofeedback, and so forth. in aerobic training, it is best to monitor blood pressure, heart rate, and blood oxygen saturation.(1) intensity: patients in the acute stage mainly take low-intensity exercise without fatigue on the second day. in general, patients in better condition can try medium-intensity exercise. after discharge, patients can carry out medium-and high-intensity exercise training according to further evaluation results to obtain more benefits.(2) frequency: according to the patient's tolerance, they should carry out active and passive training once or twice a day. if the patient's condition is serious and the tolerance is poor, they should shorten the training duration and increase the frequency accordingly to ensure the training quantity. long-term bed rest can lead to joint stiffness, contracture, and other changes. patients should be guided to actively carry out active and passive motions of the spine and limb joints to maintain their normal range of motion, which can be arranged 1-2 times per day and can be completed by joint and position. severe patients may not be able to complete the active whole joint motion effectively. at this time, they may need other people or special equipment to carry out the passive motion of joints, including the limbs, head, neck, and waist, to reduce the risk of deep vein thrombosis.(1) ultrashort wave therapy: ultrashort wave therapy can promote the exudation and absorption of the lung and improve ventilation function. it can be used for patients with lung exudation and the specific prescription is mainly short-term with micro or without heat; however, fever is a contraindication. small ultrashort waves can be used for bedside treatment to reduce the impact of high-frequency electromagnetic fields on monitoring equipment, but the ultrashort wave machine, its electrodes, and wires should be disinfected and protected according to the protection level.(2) ultraviolet therapy: whole-body ultraviolet irradiation can increase immunity function, which may be applicable to mild and medium patients, but severe and critical patients may have immune disorders, so it is not recommended.(3) low-frequency neuromuscular electrical stimulation therapy:neuromuscular electrical stimulation can improve the respiratory muscle and peripheral muscle function, so it can be used in bed patients for respiratory muscles or limb muscles, to delay muscle disuse atrophy, and to increase neuromuscular function. for some covid-19 cases, there may be some negative stress responses, mainly emotional disorders, such as panic, anxiety, and somatization symptoms, which affect the mood, state, sleep and overall mental health level. 49, 50 these psychological and behavioral disorders will affect the treatment effect of patients.for hospitalized patients with emotional disorders, such as anxiety or depression, we recommend: the implementation of psychological intervention as early as possible (including cognitive therapy and behavior therapy); the elimination of stressors; the improvement of patients' anxiety or depression; establishing a positive and optimistic mood; and seeking support from families, medical staff, andpsychologists. in addition to psychological and behavioral interventions, drug therapy and biofeedback therapy can also be used in the treatment of severe anxiety or depression.for covid-19 patients who receive rehabilitation in the community, we recommend: the establishment of a psychological support service system; the relief of panic about infectious diseases at the community level; the establishment of a psychological support and assistance system between community members, family members and patients; and the provision of special psychological services for those who suffer critical psychological events in the pandemic situation, such as the death of family members, to ensure that patients will not suffer from serious psychological obstacles that reduce their quality of life.in view of the psychological problems caused by covid-19, we recommend to provide mental health services for patients and their families, assist them to acquire and understand the correct information about the pandemic and the impact of covid-19, prevent them from panic and long-term stress state, and help them to establish a positive lifestyle and behaviors.participating in taijiquan, wuqinxi, baduanjin, and other physical activities is helpful to regulate breath, dredge meridians, and improve stability of the core muscle group and balance ability. these activities are especially suitable for elderly or weak patients with low physical abilities and can be carried out by mild, medium, and discharged patients, using group mutual aid mode or at home through video exercises.we recommend the following criteria for interruption of interven- to ensure that patients receive high-quality rehabilitation services from medical institutions, rehabilitation institutions, and community based service providers. we should build a patient-centered rehabilitation service system.it is necessary to establish a multidisciplinary rehabilitation team for patients with covid-19. according to the functioning characteristics and the rehabilitation stage of patients, individualized rehabilitation intervention strategies and approaches are recommended. 5, 41 we should establish a comprehensive rehabilitation service system in all professional fields, integrating all levels of health services, and providing comprehensive rehabilitation services for covid-19patients from clinical treatment to community rehabilitation services. in the community, we should especially emphasize the empowerment of patients, enhance their self-confidence, and improve their overall functions and their quality of life.for patients in different rehabilitation stages, we should analyze their unmet needs of rehabilitation, main functioning disability and rehabilitation resources from medical institutions, rehabilitation institutions and communities levels, and establish different rehabilitation solutions to improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of rehabilitation. 5we recommend: the establishment of a rehabilitation service platform; cooperation with experts in epidemiology and clinical medicine; and the integration of rehabilitation into the modern health-service system. for special patient groups, such as the elderly, people with disabilities, and children, we strongly recommend the consideration of their special needs and obstacles, as well as multiple functioning and its impact on covid-19 rehabilitation.in the community, we recommend the all members pay attrention to the negative influences and discrimination against covid-19cases. the proposed measures include the provision of correct information, the prevention of panic and bias, and the consideration of the psychological, social, and environmental factors in community rehabilitation services. 41thanks to members of the expert group for guidance and review of this paper.nothing to disclose.bin zeng https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2799-8686on the 31 december 2019, china reported the first cases of a pneumonia of unknown aetiology in wuhan, hubei province [1] , subsequently identified to be due to a novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) [2] . renamed as sars-cov-2 due to its potential to cause a severe acute respiratory syndrome [3] , the world health organization (who) declared this virus and the disease covid-this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved 19 , a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) [4] . the virus spread globally, manifesting a pandemic [5] , and outside china outbreaks in iran and italy further illustrated the potential for disease and associated mortality [6, 7] . though the uk diagnosed its index case at the end of january, the events that unfolded in lombardy three weeks later vividly demonstrated the susceptibility of a fully functioning modern health service to this unprecedented challenge [9, 10] .against this backdrop, in anticipation of an impending, sudden and unsustainable burden on the health service and wider civic society, the uk government stepped up its response [11] , culminating in the coronavirus act 2020 [12] , and other legislative measures including those mandating social distancing (commonly referred to as 'the lockdown'). these various legislative measures grant wide powers to the executive and enact deep changes in the ordinary functioning of systems across society, from health and social care to law and order and the food supply chain. in doing this, they introduce interferences with a wide range of human rights. the act alone comes to 359 pages.however, two critical points must be made. first, these measures do not purport to regulate every aspect of the crisis. rather, they make targeted amendments to, and supplement, existing law. second, they do not replace or remove certain fundamental standards relevant to intensive care, such as the human rights act (hra) 1998 or the mental capacity act (mca) 2005. frontline clinicians should thus not assume that they are acting in a legal vacuum where the new measures do not include specific provision for particular situations. rather, the pre-existing law, rights, standards, and guidance continue to apply. this existing framework will frequently adjust to take account of the present exceptional circumstances, but it is not simply extinguished -a point that was reiterated during the parliamentary debates during the expedited passage of the coronavirus act [13, 14] .this article aims to outline the broad framework within which we can consider the medico-legal and ethical aspects of some of the more readily identified issues experienced during the surge in demand for critical care. in particular it analyses legal aspects of patient care (standard of care; informed consent; restraint and isolation; family rights; personal protective equipment); and the legal and ethical aspects of rationing critical care. abstract legal analysis is an imprecise art given how much turns on the specific circumstances, and so specific or final answers cannot be given.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved negligence and the standard of care covid-19 has imposed on clinicians a need to move, in certain cases, from delivering the best care they can to a lower standard of acceptable, safe care. the question thus arises as to the legal position encountered by medical professionals who knowingly, though reluctantly, find themselves providing a lower standard of care than that which they would have only recently delivered.the english law of negligence typically defines the standard of care by reference to a 'reasonable person'. where a special skill is involved, the standard is that of the 'ordinary skilled (person) exercising and professing to have that special skill' [15] . this is assessed by reference to all of the circumstances in light of the facts known at the time. it follows that there is no absolute requirement to deliver the best possible care. the bolam test holds that a doctor will not have been negligent where they have acted in accordance with a practice accepted as proper by a responsible body of medical opinion, even where another body of opinion takes a contrary view.the test accepts and accounts for disagreements as well as variations in the exercise of clinical judgement. subsequent case-law has nuanced this, noting that any responsible body of opinion must be capable of withstanding logical analysis by the judge [16] ; that professional guidance is important evidence in considering the standard [17, 18] and that the standard is set by reference to the doctor's post, not the particular experience or 'rank' of the individual doctor [19, 20] .the law thus allows doctors discretion in the manner in which they provide care to patients, as well as allowing consideration of the breadth of factors which may influence their decision making. over the decades, there has arguably been a 'ratcheting up' of the standard required as medical advances and dissemination of knowledge have occurred. in the pandemic situation, by contrast, it would allow for the (i) degree of uncertainty and (ii) the particularly pressured circumstances under which doctors are operating to be taken into account. as one leading textbook suggests, '[o]ne can hardly expect the same meticulous attention in a hospital that is coping with a rail disaster or an epidemic as at normal times [19, 21] .' in short, the test would seem to protect doctors who provide a reasonable standard of care, consistent with a logical body of medical opinion and taking into account the new circumstances specific to covid-19, notwithstanding the fact that this may be of a lower standard than that previously provided. this is consistent with the approach that the general medical council (gmc) have outlined in respect of regulatory law [22] .however, clinicians should keep three points in mind. first, this leeway is not unlimited. in particular, clinicians who have been re-deployed to areas outside of their area of expertise will notthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved be granted more leeway; they will be held to the same standard of care as others in the same post. second, clinicians operating under such constraints, need to evidence not only the treatment undertaken but also the rationale underpinning their decision making. a doctor asserting that they satisfied the requirements of the bolam test may need to evidence the constraints placed upon their ability to deliver care by the circumstances at the time. this may require a more extensive explanation of how decisions have been arrived at and a more thorough recording of the circumstances in which such decisions are made than was required before covid-19. third, clinicians will need to ensure that their practice is acceptable to a reasonable body of medical opinion. ensuring awareness of clinical guidance is likely to be important, and doctors retain their general duty to keep up-to-date with developments in medical knowledge [23] .nevertheless, doctors are not required to read each and every publication, and practitioners may be excused ignorance of newly reported advances in practice [24] . similarly, a clinician will not be negligent solely through a failure to practise in accordance with what is now accepted wisdom abroad [25] . these points may be of some reassurance to doctors who find themselves dealing with a rapidly-evolving pandemic with great volumes of new research being published, much of it contradictory and of questionable quality.less flexibility can be expected of the law around informed consent. in the critical care setting, this is likely to be particularly important because a feature of covid-19 is that most patients arguably retain capacity until the point where they need sedation; contrast, in ordinary times, the evidence given in ferreira [26] .such patients must give informed consent to their treatment. clinicians must inform them of the treatment's material risks (those that a reasonable patient would regard as significant, or that the doctor should be reasonably aware that the particular patient would regard as significant) and of reasonable alternative treatments [27, 28] . this standard is stricter than the ordinary bolam/bolitho one. exceptions to this duty apply only where the doctor reasonably considers that disclosing a particular risk would be 'seriously detrimental' to the patient's health or in 'situations of necessity', such as urgent treatment where the patient 'is unconscious or otherwise unable to make a decision [29, 30] '. moreover, advance care planning should be discussed where feasible [27, 31, 32] . finally, though unlikely in the context of critical care, before carrying out further interventions it will be necessary to consider whether the patient can reasonably be awoken to consent [33] .this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved a significant challenge for clinicians is the uncertainty around this new pathogen, with limited evidence on which to base decisions. that makes it difficult to judge which risks are 'material' and how treatment might evolve. doctors are likely to best discharge their duty to patients by being honest about what is and is not known, within the limits of the available evidence. it will be for the patient and doctor to then decide upon whether to pursue particular treatment or opt for a different approach, accepting the limitations of the evidence. one particular point that arises is the likely need to inform sars-cov-2 negative patients of the risk of acquiring it through pursuing treatment, for example surgery [34] . doctors should ensure there is adequate written evidence as to the consent process.patients receiving critical care are typically unable to leave. they also frequently lack capacity.that inability can arise directly from their life-threatening condition, but it can also arise from treatment, sedation and/or restraints applied to them. managing these issues and ensuring protection of the patient's health, life, liberty and autonomy give rise to a host of complex legal issues at the intersection of criminal, civil, regulatory and human rights law. a large body of guidance addresses these issues [35, 36] . we will focus on three important aspects of human rights law.first, the sedation and restraint of a patient must remain tightly linked to the life-saving treatment, be kept to the minimum necessary and not materially differ between those with and without an underlying mental disorder in order not to amount to a deprivation of liberty (article 5 european convention on human rights (echr)) [37, 38] . this is the principle established in ferreira [39] .restraints that are stricter than necessary, or that continue beyond the life-threatening condition, are likely to amount to a deprivation of liberty, requiring authorisation by law (through the deprivation of liberty safeguards (dols) process or court order). prior consent to the restraints is highly unlikely to provide a sufficient legal basis [40] . conversely, insufficient or inappropriate restraint may lead to harm to or even death of the patient or others, potentially breaching articles 2 (right to life) or 3 (freedom from torture and inhuman and degrading treatment). second, difficult issues as to the patient's autonomy and consent arise under article 8 (right to private and family life), as addressed in the previous section. third, particular risks of discrimination, notably on grounds of race and disability, arise in the application of restraint (article 14 echr).against that background, two particular risks ensue in the covid-19 context. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved extreme possible 'quadruple capacity' situation [41] . that contrasts with ordinary guidance requiring one critical care nurse per bed [42] . in that context, the ordinary practice of monitoring sedation levels to ensure the patient does not awake may not suffice. in order to avoid this happening (and so protect the patient from foreseeable harm: articles 2 and 3 echr), care teams may increase sedation levels for all patients; use physical restraint (with 'bed buddies' restraining any patient who wakes whilst the lead nurse attends); or use mechanical restraint (mittens). moreover, the lower nurse-and doctor-to-patient ratios risk patients remaining sedated and restrained longer than strictly medically necessary.in the first instance, the relevant law is sensitive to context. it is likely to tolerate stricter or longer restraint than that which would be applied when resources were optimal. so long as such restraints remain 'the minimum required' in that context, they are unlikely to cross the line into a deprivation of liberty. this leeway will not, however, be unlimited, and inadequate, inappropriate or clearly excessive restraint will raise article 2, 3 or 5 issues (as appropriate). careful thought must be given to modifying restraints policies to ensure a fair balance, based on evidence, meeting the above standards and including regular review. notably, evidence from the us and continental europe suggest that physical and mechanical restraint are ineffective at preventing forcible extubation and increase the risk of inadequate supervision [43] .prior to deploying such restraints clinicians should carefully consider a number of issues (fig. 1) .second, critical care patients are subject to the same isolation and quarantine rules as others in hospital under the infection prevention and control guidance [44, 45] . this guidance, which envisages possible and confirmed cases of covid-19 being grouped together where single/isolation rooms are unavailable, raises a number of human rights issues (notably the risk that someone is infected as the result of this grouping, and the lawfulness of any deprivation of liberty to enforce the quarantine/isolation [46] , both of which are beyond the scope of this article).one critical point is however relevant: clinicians must be crystal clear as to what restrictions apply to a patient's movement and what their legal basis is. as outlined above, the sedation and restraints that are incidental to life-saving treatment fall outside article 5. once that treatment ends, any restrictions on a patient's movement must be justified on other grounds. that would apply, for instance, to continuing to isolate a patient post-ventilation under the infection prevention and control guidance [47] . any control or restraint of the patient may amount to a deprivation of liberty and thus require a legal basis (notably schedule 21 to the coronavirus act 2020).this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved most hospitals have severely restricted family visiting rights to inpatients, including those in icu [48] . public health england's infection control guidance recommends permitting access to 'essential visitors only, such as parents of paediatric patients', but goes on to recommend local risk management with the need for proportionality [44, 49] . the way hospitals implement this raises a number of issues.these hospitals' restrictions interfere with the family rights of both the patient and the relatives (article 8(1) echr) [30, 50] . moreover, visitors play a role in ensuring public scrutiny of standards of care; may act as an 'advocate and defender' of an incapacitated patient; and their face-to-face presence is likely to facilitate more rigorous consultation where best interest decisions fall to be made than consultation by telephone or electronic mail. their presence is likely to be particularly crucial in the case of children and vulnerable adults, above all when the visitor has the power to make decisions on their behalf (for example someone with parental responsibility or a lasting power of attorney).to be justified, this interference must pursue a legitimate aim; be prescribed by law; and be finally, still in respect of proportionality, 'blanket' bans are typically difficult to defend. that is particularly so here where, as outlined above, the degree of interference is much higher in some cases and the interests of vulnerable groups are in play, which in turn raises possible discrimination issues [52] . policies granting exceptions for children, persons with a learning disability, birth partners and persons receiving end-of-life care are significantly more likely to be justified than ones containing no such exceptions [53] . hospitals should consider alternative measures to mitigate the restrictions. regular contact to update family members on the patient's situation (unless inconsistent with patient confidentiality) is required where reasonablythis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved practicable, and is in any event important to facilitating any best interest decisions and some version of an 'advocate and defender' role. video-calls with the patient raise interesting issues. this is best analysed through a general data protection regulation lens [54] . it would constitute processing of sensitive personal data (relating to health) and so require legal bases under both articles 6 and 9 of the regulation. regulatory guidance should also be complied with [55] (fig. 2) .hospital trusts, as employers, are under a range of duties to ensure the health and safety of staff.this includes providing safe places and systems of work. here we focus on the duty to provide adequate personal protective equipment. under regulation 4(1) of the personal protective equipment at work regulations 1992 [58] , employers must ensure that 'suitable ppe is provided to employees who may be exposed to a risk to health or safety at work except where and to the extent that such risk has been adequately controlled by other means which are equally or more second, what this guidance does not provide is reassurance that if a bone fide decision was made not to carry out duties due to the inadequate provision of protective equipment, the clinician would be protected from regulatory and legal repercussions. the employment rights act 1996[62] offers some protection against dismissal on the sole or principal grounds of refusal to work in an area of work reasonably believed to be a serious and imminent risk to health. how this wouldthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved be viewed by professional regulators, however, is unclear. this difficulty is exacerbated by the fact that should clinicians continue working with inadequate protective equipment, this could consequently present a risk to patients [63] . ultimately, such a situation manifests a legal risk for trusts, both for breach of the 1992 and other health and safety regulations and potentially in negligence or article 2 echr claims by staff or patients. however, certain negligence claims may be indemnified by the government under section 11 of the coronavirus act.the possibility of having to ration acute life-saving care has perhaps been clinicians' greatest concern. the legal principles of rationing, particularly acute life-saving care are not straightforward, drawing upon a complex interaction of several legal regimens. this section will highlight four important areas.whilst there is no universally accepted definition to rationing, scheunemann and white state that a unifying feature of most definitions is that of 'denying a potentially beneficial treatment to a patient on the grounds of scarcity [64, 65] .' using this definition, triaging or prioritising access to potentially life-saving treatment, in the face of finite resources, is rationing.first, rationing is an everyday part of healthcare provision, including in critical care [66] . the nationally agreed transplant benefit score [67] is one example of a rationing tool. it aims to be transparent and use patient and clinical indices to maximise benefit; an urgent request for a lifesaving donor liver may not fit the system exactly, but still has its basis in clinical justification which acts symbiotically with resource considerations [68, 69] .in critical care, judgements as to whether a treatment is either clinically indicated in the best interests of the patient, or 'futile', take into account the quality of care that can reasonably be provided given the available resources. the courts have repeatedly upheld the lawfulness of resource considerations [70, 71] . in this sense, a degree of rationing has already occurred in this pandemic: reduced staff-to-patient ratios, use of sub-optimal equipment, postponement of nonurgent care, re-deployment of non-critical care staff [41] and apportionment of organ support all ration care. in the context of bestowing critical care during the covid-19 crisis, however, these measures remain within a 'margin of acceptability', the focus remaining on the clinical benefit or best interests of the individual patient within the new context [70] [71] [72] . the more difficult issue will come if, and when, resources are so scarce that critical care has to be refused to some patientsthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved against their best interests: when the line is crossed from 'triage by outcome' to 'triage by resource' (paragraph 2.1 [73] ). this is a difficult and at times fuzzy line, but it should be drawn clearly. dressing up a decision that is primarily based on resource limitations as a clinical or best interests decision risks illegitimacy in medicine and vulnerability to legal challenge [74] . judicial reviews of clinical commissioning groups' rationing decisions on public law grounds have rarely succeeded (see fig. 3 ). policy decisions sympathetic to the 'resources made available under current government policy' are a legitimate consideration [79] , though the courts' deference is not unlimited. policies must not be overly rigid in order to permit consideration of individual circumstances [80] . the need for robust evidence to support any criteria is heightened beyond the ordinary public law standards in certain cases by the human rights and equality implications of denial. basing decisions solely on age or disability (including many underlying conditions) would amount to unlawful direct discrimination [81] . including criteria that have a disproportionate impact on older persons or persons with a disability (for instance, using age, comorbidities or quality adjusted life years as indicators) amounts to prima facie indirect discrimination. this may be justified if the use is shown to be a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim (in this case, appropriately allocating scarce nhs resources), but adequate evidence of the appropriateness of these indicators will be necessary. as argued (by liddell et al.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved unpublished observation), '[s]mall differences between patients may not be meaningful, and allocation decisions based on very limited evidence and poor science could be challenged'.finally, in very exceptional circumstances a denial of critical care to particular individuals leading to death may violate the state's article 2 echr positive duties [82] .fourth, perhaps the greatest difficulties arise from the prospect of withdrawing ventilatory support from a patient who is still deriving benefit from that treatment, in favour of another who may have greater survival prospects. this situation raises extremely difficult issues, with three specialist lawyers recently arguing that 'removal of ventilation from a capacitous patient who does not consent, and withdrawal of ventilation from such a patient after he has lost capacity to communicate his decision, may be murder or manslaughter' [76] .we make two observations. first, in certain cases withdrawal will fit within the existing law. where a patient with capacity consents to withdrawal, where treatment is 'futile' (as in the case of a patient in permanent vegetative state) [83] , or where the treatment is no longer clinically indicated or in the best interests of the patient [83] , withdrawal will be lawful under ordinary principles. by contrast, withdrawing ventilation from a patient whose best interests require continued treatment, in order to allow a different patient with better prognosis to use the ventilator, does not fall within that ordinary framework. second, there is no clear authority on the position outside that framework. there is some limited support for the courts being flexible in an exceptional circumstance like this. as the specialist lawyers note, in re a (conjoined twins) the court approved the separation of conjoined twins in circumstances which would lead to the death of the weaker twin [84] . failure to pursue an elective separation was deemed likely to result in the death of both as they continued to grow. the court acknowledged that, where the need to act in the best interests of each child produced a conflict, it was appropriate to undertake a balancing exercise.given the absolute non-viability of the weaker twin, the exercise was in many ways simpler in respect of the conjoined twins than it would be for patients competing for ventilators. the principles of the case however may still be applicable: where one individual has much more to gain from a course of treatment than another; where performance or non-performance has consequences for both patients; and where the duty towards one patient is irreconcilable with the duty to another. this interpretation would almost certainly require prior sanction by the courts.second, the ordinary case-law requiring that life-prolonging treatment be given is underpinned by the duty to take 'reasonable steps' to protect life, rather than an absolute duty, and contains some suggestion that a different approach may apply where resources are inadequate [85] -although other case-law appears to contradicts this [86] .this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved our analysis illustrates the careful diligence clinicians must employ when making decisions relating to resource allocation vis-à-vis clinical judgement. a national emergency may recalibrate what is reasonable or even possible. clinicians must consider resources optimally and efficiently, and avoid recognising resource considerations inappropriately in delivering life-saving treatment.how thinly these resources are spread is a matter for policy makers, hospital trusts and the wider nhs.ethics and law do not neatly coincide. yet, as the preceding section on legal aspects of rationing affirms, the difficult issue concerns a context in which scarce resources mean that critical care could be refused to some patients against their best interests. as previously narrated, what is needed is 'clear guidance from an authoritative public policy and robust evidence supporting its criteria.' it also needs ethical justification.unfortunately, rather than a single authoritative policy originating from an appropriate body, a this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved circumstance to be equitable? or how exactly should one seek to do the least harm and most good? this problem is compounded by the pressure of exigency.third, since guidelines disagree as to which criteria should be adopted or in what order of importance, the requirement of authoritative ethical justification may not be met. the problem is that there can be reasonable disagreement as to which criterion should be decisive. it may be easy to set some aside: first come, first served; and the tossing of a coin or use of a lottery. 'first come, first served' whilst practical is not a defensible moral principle in as much as the hour of first presentation should not trump considerations such as clinical need.however, disagreement extends even to principles of prima face plausibility. the use of age as a criterion for prioritisation does, as previously suggested invite the charge of direct discrimination. even the use of age as a marker of what are seen as relevant differences, such as 'clinical frailty' and the likelihood of survival, or of the prospect of fewer years of life after treatment would be prima facie indirect discrimination. yet it is also hard to justify morally. age as such is a morally irrelevant difference; as a signifier or something that is relevant it is crude, unreliable and always defeasible.yet the use of age as such has intuitive attractiveness to many. one important reason is the 'fair innings' argument [89] . this holds that everyone should have an opportunity to lead a life of a certain duration. resources should then be distributed (and care given selectively) to ensure that those who have yet to live that length of life are prioritised over those who have already managed to do so. it has an intuitive appeal: why shouldn't those who have not had an opportunity to lead a life of decent duration be preferred to those who have already done so?nevertheless, what exactly counts as a 'fair innings'? and, even if we can agree, it is not clear why we should speak of fairness in this context [90] . luck and circumstances play a major role inthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved how long we live and it is not clear that we can speak of the length of a life as a good that can, and should be, distributed. the need for care, irrespective of age, might arise from bad luck. but it might also arise from choices for whose consequences an individual should rightly be held responsible.a last moral consideration is this. the application of any rationing guidance will cause moral injury in those compelled by circumstances to utilise what they believe bears serious moral costs.furthermore, rationing human resource, clinical expertise and the efforts of the multi-disciplinary team adds to this burden. recognition of these harms and support for those who suffer them is paramount. support for clinicians in their decision-making by ethics committees is desirable though it should be recognised that the provision of such services is variable.it is perhaps with a twisted sense of irony that the echr this year celebrates 70 years since its inception. the covid-19 global pandemic will challenge rights and legal considerations in numerous and as yet unrecognised ways. these implications will not be unique to healthcare, but will be felt throughout society. despite these challenges, such considerations are inherently malleable to context. clinicians employing a commitment to the usual medico-legal and ethical principles, even whilst the ability to meet these commitments is being tested more so than ever, will make a disproportionately positive contribution in safeguarding such principles. in this sense, it is not a twisted irony at all: now more than ever, we must look to the core values encoded in our rights and legal regimes in facing the new challenges raised by the pandemic. it remains to be seen exactly what final cost, not merely fiscal but also human, will be levied by this pandemic, especially upon those most vulnerable in society. undoubtedly, medical professionals, especially in critical care will play a disproportionate role in setting this potentially intangible price.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved whilst the authors have endeavoured to ensure the content herewith is correct, the information contained is intended for information only, are the views of the authors and is not intended to construe or replace formal legal advice.introduction covid-19 (or the coronavirus) is a global pandemic that has affected the everyday lives of hundreds of millions of people. at the time we write this, there have been over four million cases across over 200 countries worldwide (pettersson, manley, & hern, 2020) . moreover, pervasive stay-at-home orders and calls for social distancing, as well as the disruptions to every facet of our lives make it difficult to overstate the importance of covid-19. as the beginning of the outbreak has been traced to china (and wuhan in particular), both in the united states and elsewhere, people who are chinese or seen as east asian have become associated with this contagious disease. early reports in the united states were often accompanied by stock photos of asians in masks (burton, 2020; walker, 2020) . many of the first reports labeled the disease as the "wuhan virus," or "chinese virus," and the trump administration has also used these terms (levenson, 2020; maitra, 2020; marquardt & hansler, 2020; rogers, jakes, & swanson, 2020; schwartz, 2020) . news media coverage in the united states focused on the hygiene of the seafood market in wuhan and wild animal consumption as a possible cause of coronavirus (gomera, 2020; mackenzie & smith, 2020) . memes and jokes about bats and china flooded social media, including posts by our peers online. these reports provide the american public a straightforward narrative that focuses on china as the origin of covid-19.in this paper, we review current patterns of hate crimes, microaggressions, and other negative responses against asian individuals and businesses during the covid-19 pandemic. these hate crimes and bias incidents occur in the landscape of american racism in which asian americans are seen as the embodiment of china and potential carriers of covid-19, regardless of their ethnicity or generational status. we believe that asian americans not only are not "honorary whites," but their very status as americans is, at best, precarious, and at worst, in doubt during the covid-19 crisis.we suggest that what we witness today is an extension of the history of asians in the united states and that this experience may lead to the reemergence of a vibrant panethnic asian american identity.as of early may 2020, there have been over 1.8 million individuals who have tested positive for and over 105,000 deaths from covid-19 in the united states alone and the numbers are growing rapidly every day ("cases in the u.s.," 2020). although researchers have traced cases of the virus in the united states to travelers from europe (gonzalez-reiche et al., 2020) and to travelers within the united states (fauver et al., 2020) , some members of the general public regard asian americans with suspicion and as carriers of the disease. on april 28th, 2020, nbc news reported that 30% of americans have personally witnessed someone blaming asians for the coronavirus (ellerbeck, 2020) .the covid-19 pandemic has revealed the negative perceptions of asian americans that have long been prevalent in american society. many individuals in the united states see the virus as foreign and condemn phenotypically asian bodies as the spreaders of the virus (ellerbeck, 2020) . consistent with claire jean kim's theory on racial triangulation (kim, 1999) and the concept of asians as perpetual foreigners (ancheta, 2006; saito, 1997; tuan, 1998; e. d. wu, 2015) , we posit that during covid-19, the racial positionality of asian americans as foreign and other persists, and that this pernicious designation may be a threat to the safety and mental health of asian americans. they are not only at risk of exposure to covid-19, but they must contend with the additional risk of victimization, which may increase their anxiety.historically, from the late 19th through the mid twentieth century, popular culture and news media portrayed asians in america as the "yellow peril," which symbolized the western fear of uncivilized, nonwhite asian invasion and domination (okihiro, 2014; saito, 1997) . it is possible that the perceived threat of the yellow peril has reemerged in the time of covid-19.the spread of the coronavirus and the increased severity of the pandemic has caused fear and panic for most americans, as covid-19 has brought about physical restrictions and financial hardships. so far, forty-two states have issued stay-at-home orders, which has resulted in 95% of the american population facing restrictions that impact their daily lives (woodward, 2020) . novel efforts to end the pandemic across the states have led businesses to shut down. as a result, more than 30 million people in the united states have filed for unemployment since the onset of the coronavirus crisis (gura, 2020) . because this virus has been identified as foreign, for some individuals, their feelings have been expressed as xenophobia, prejudice, and violence against asian americans. these negative perceptions and actions have gained traction due to the unprecedented impact covid-19 has on people's lives, and institutions such as uc berkeley have even normalized these reactions (chiu, 2020) . however, racism and xenophobia are not a "natural" reaction to the threat of the virus; rather, we speculate that the historical legacies of whiteness and citizenship have produced these reactions, where many individuals may interpret asian americans as foreign and presenting a higher risk of transmission of the disease.already, the fbi has issued a warning that due to covid-19, there may be increased hate crimes against asian americans, because "a portion of the us public will associate covid-19 with china and asian american populations" (margolin, 2020) . news reports, police departments, and community organizations have been documenting these incidents. evidence suggests that the fbi's warning was warranted. based on reporting from stop aapi hate, in the one-month period from march 19th to april 23rd, there were nearly 1500 alleged instances of anti-asian bias (jeung & nham, 2020) . the reported incidents have been concentrated in new york and california, with 42% of the reports hailing from california and 17% of reports from new york, but asian americans in 45 states across the nation have reported incidents (jeung & nham, 2020) .there have been a large number of physical assaults against asian americans and ethnically asian individuals in the united states directly related to covid-19. while the majority of americans are sheltering-in-place and staying at home, 80% of the selfreported anti-asian incidents have taken place outside people's private residences, in grocery stores, local businesses, and public places (jeung & nham, 2020) . we suggest that these hate crimes and other incidents of bias have historical roots that have placed asians outside the boundaries of whiteness and american citizenship. in addition, we believe that the current covid-19 crisis draws attention to ongoing racial issues and provides a lens through which to challenge the notion of america as a post-racial society (bonilla-silva, 2006) .one of the incidents under investigation as a hate crime includes the attempted murder of a burmese-american family at a sam's club in midland, texas (yam, 2020a) . the suspect said that he stabbed the father, a four-year-old child, and a twoyear-old child because he "thought the family was chinese, and infecting people with coronavirus" (yam, 2020a) . police are investigating numerous other physical incidents including attacks with acid (moore & cassady, 2020) , an umbrella (madani, 2020) , and a log (kang, 2020) . there have been a number of physical altercations at bus stops (bensimon, 2020; madani, 2020) , subway stations (parnell, 2020) , convenience stores (oliveira, 2020) , and on the street (jeung & nham, 2020; sheldon, 2020) . asian americans are also reporting physical threats being made against them (driscoll, 2020; parascandola, 2020) . based on stop aapi hate statistics, 127 asian americans filed reports of physical assaults in four weeks (jeung & nham, 2020) , and it is likely that other asians have not reported their experiences out of fear or concern about the legal process.in addition to the physical attacks and threats against asian americans, individuals have also filed reports of vandalism and property damage targeted at asian businesses. one korean restaurant in new york city had the graffiti "stop eating dogs" written on its window (adams, 2020) . perpetrators have also made explicit references to covid-19 in their vandalism, where phrases such as "take the corona back you ch*nk" (goodell & mann, 2020) , and "watch out for corona" (wang, 2020) have been documented on asian-owned restaurants. some of these incidents were not reported to the police and therefore will not be investigated as hate crimes, as business owners reasoned that it would be difficult to track the vandals (adams, 2020; buscher, 2020) . these incidents of vandalism demonstrate the association some people make between asian american businesses and covid-19.beyond the narrow definition of the incidents that can be classified as punishable hate crimes, asian americans have also documented a large number of alleged bias and hate incidents. stop aapi hate reports indicate that 70% of coronavirus discrimination against asian americans has involved verbal harassment, with over 1000 incidents of verbal harassment reported in just four weeks (jeung & nham, 2020) . in addition, there have been over 90 reports of asian americans being coughed or spat on. one prevalent theme in the verbal incidents is the linking of asian bodies to covid-19, where the aggressors are purportedly calling asians "coronavirus," "chinese virus," or "diseased," and telling them that they should "be quarantined," or "go back to china" (adl 2020). in all of these incidents, the perpetrators consistently use anti-asian racial slurs (buscher, 2020; goodell & mann, 2020; sheldon, 2020) . this hateful language that targets all asians (and not just chinese americans) demonstrates the racialization of asian americans.the threat of a global pandemic to people's everyday lives is something that most americans have not experienced before. however, the act of interpreting the current national crisis as an external threat and ascribing this danger to chinese bodies and more broadly asian bodies should not surprise scholars of asian americans. in fact, this deeply-rooted cognitive association of asian americans to asia and to disease has a long history. hence, we examine the phenomenon of xenophobia against asian americans in the context of historical racial dynamics in the united states.race has been posited as a socio-historical concept, and while many race scholars in the united states have focused on the black/white binary, others have documented how asian americans have also been racialized over time (omi & winant, 2014) . these scholars have examined how the racialization of asian americans has developed in relation to african americans and white americans (bonilla-silva, 2004; kim, 1999) . one of the dominant stereotypes of asian americans is that they are perpetual foreigners, where individuals directly link phenotypical asian ethnic appearance with foreignness, regardless of asian immigrant or generational status (ancheta, 2006; tuan, 1998; f. h. wu, 2002) . this stereotype is longstanding in american history and has forcefully re-emerged during the covid-19 crisis. the perception of an asianlooking person as simultaneously chinese, asian, and foreign underscores how this racial categorization affects all asian americans. thus, we suggest that the concept of asian american panethnicity (okamoto & mora, 2014 ) may be particularly applicable during the covid-19 pandemic.the legacy of white supremacy equates white bodies with purity and innocence, while nonwhite bodies are designated as unclean, uncivilized, and dangerous. white supremacy and its tactic of othering asian bodies has been a consistent recurrence over earlier pandemics. dating back to the nineteenth century, the bubonic plague was framed as a "racial disease" which only asian bodies could be infected by whereas white bodies were seen as immune (randall, 2019) . in 1899, honolulu officials quarantined and burned chinatown as a precaution against the bubonic plague (mohr, 2004) . in 1900, san francisco authorities quarantined chinatown residents, and regulated food and people in and out of chinatown, believing that the unclean food and asian people were the cause of the epidemic (shah, 2001; trauner, 1978) . the history of the yellow peril has continued throughout the 20th and 21st centuries in the embodied perceptions of asian immigrants as the spreaders of disease (molina, 2006) .more recently, during the 2003 sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) epidemic, the discourse in the united states focused on chinatown as the epicenter of the disease (eichelberger, 2007) . studies suggest that 14 % of americans reported avoiding asian businesses and asian americans experienced increased threat and anxiety during sars (blendon, benson, desroches, raleigh, & taylor-clark, 2004) . we suspect the negative impact of covid-19 on asian americans has been far greater than the impact of sars. in new york city's chinatown, restaurants suffered immediately after the first reports of covid-19, as some restaurants and businesses experienced up to an 85% drop in profits for the two months prior to march 16th, 2020far before any stayat-home orders were given (roberts, 2020) . when moral panic arises, foreign bodies, typically the undesirable and "un-american" yellow bodies, may be seen as a threat that can harm pure white bodies.the cycle of elevated risk, followed by fearing and blaming what is foreign is not just limited to disease outbreaks, but also occurs during economic downturns. in 1982, vincent chin was beaten to death by two men who blamed him for the influx of japanese cars into the united states auto market. vincent chin was attacked with racial slurs and specifically targeted because of his race. although chin was chinese american, in the minds of these two men, he represented the downturn of the auto industry in detroit and the increased imports of japanese automobiles (choy & tajima-pena, 1987) .similarly, after the 9/11 attacks in the united states, retaliatory aggressions were not limited to attacks against arabs or muslims (perry, 2003) . violence and hatred against the perceived enemy resulted in incidents targeting sikhs, second and third generation indian americans, and even lebanese and greeks (perry, 2003) . more recently, the hate crime murder of srinivas kuchibhotla, an indian immigrant falsely assumed to be an iranian terrorist and told "get out of my country" before being shot to death, illustrates the association between racialized perceptions of threat and incidents of violence (fuchs 2018) . with the covid-19 pandemic, violent attacks and racial discrimination against asian americans have emerged as non-asian americans look for someone or something asian to blame for their anger and fear about illness, economic insecurity, and stay-at-home orders.the current perceptions of china and more broadly east asia as both economic and public health threats have made chinese and east asians in america fearful for their own safety. some asian americans have made efforts to hide their asian identity or assert their status as american in an attempt to prevent hate crime attacks (buscher, 2020; tang, 2020) . while this tactic may be effective on the individual level, it does not modify the positionality of asian bodies during covid-19. the attempt to distinguish asian americans from asians who are foreign nationals misses the fact that in the united states, being asians and being foreign are inextricably bound together.after world war ii, news media and local organizations encouraged chinese americans to distinguish themselves from the japanese, and similarly encouraged japanese americans to show their americanness and patriotism to gain acceptance by the white majority (e. d. wu, 2015) . muslim and sikh americans displayed american flags after 9/11 to show that they were not a threat to the united states, and more recently there has been a movement to celebrate sikh captain america (ishisaka, 2018) . former presidential candidate andrew yang suggested that asian americans fight against racism by wearing red white and blue and prominently displaying their americanness (yang, 2020) . in many of these situations, these strategies did not directly address the problems of racism and xenophobiathey simply shifted the blame towards another group.disease does not differentiate among people based on skin color or national origin, yet many asian americans have suffered from discrimination and hatred during the covid-19 pandemic. although the threat of the virus is real for all americans, asian americans bear the additional burden of feeling unsafe and vulnerable to attack by others. the link between covid-19 and hate crimes and bias incidents against asian americans is indicative of the widespread racial sentiments which continue to be prominent in american society. while some scholars have gone as far as to regard asian americans as "honorary whites" (tuan, 1998) , the current covid-19 crisis has made markedly clear this is an illusion, at best. there are a number of reasons why the racial dynamics of anti-asian crimes during covid-19 should be examined more closely.first, the majority of incidents and attacks have occurred in diverse metropolitan areas such as new york city, boston, and los angeles. these are spaces that most americans have traditionally regarded as more liberal and tolerant of difference than other parts of the united states. in new york city alone, from the start of the covid-19 outbreak through april 2020, the nypd's hate crime task force has investigated fourteen cases where all the victims were asian and targeted due to coronavirus discrimination (nypd, 2020) . the remarks of a kansas governor that said his town was safe "because it had only a few chinese residents" (lefler & heying 2020) offers one explanation for the high concentration of racial incidents in large cities with sizable asian populations, but we think that this is not sufficient in explaining the data so far. future research should track racial bias and hate crimes more systematically in order to further our understanding of how demography and urbanicity influence these incidents.second, these hate crimes have increased the anxiety of asian americans during already uncertain times, with many fearful for their physical safety when running everyday errands (tavernise & oppel jr., 2020). asian americans are now self-conscious about "coughing while asian" (aratani, 2020) , and concerned about being targeted for hate crimes (liu, 2020; wong, 2020) . there is evidence to suggest that asian americans under-report crimes (allport, 1993) , and some recent immigrants may lack an understanding of the legal system and process of reporting crimes, particularly in the case of hate crimes. therefore, scholars should take additional care to document and analyze these incidents and their effects on asian american communities across the united states.the possible upward trend of anti-asian bias incidents and hate crimes is indicative of the growth of white nationalism and xenophobia. the image of a disease carrier with respect to covid-19 is bound in asian bodies and includes assumptions about race, ethnicity, and citizenship. as vincent chin, srinivas kuchibhotla, the burmese-american family, and many others have shown us, the level of fungibility in terms of how asian ethnicities are perceived can be deadly. it does not matter if the person is from china, of chinese origin, or simply looks asianthe perpetrators of this violence see all of these bodies as foreign and threatening. while there have been numerous instances of anti-asian bias and crime, there have not been similarly patterned anti-european tourist incidents or an avoidance of italian restaurants, suggesting that covid-19 illuminates the particular racialization of disease that extends beyond this virus, and further back in american history.already there has been substantial news coverage of these anti-asian crimes, which suggests that people are paying attention to this issue, and police departments are actively investigating many of these incidents. activists and community organizations have started online campaigns such as #washthehate and #hateisavirus to combat anti-asian racism during this time. the bbc has documented 120 distinct news articles covering alleged incidents of discrimination since the onset of the covid-19 pandemic (cheung, feng, & deng, 2020) . in addition, the chinese for affirmative action and asian pacific policy and planning council have created a platform where individuals can record incidents of racism and coronavirus discrimination. the reporting of hate crimes during covid-19 is superior to the reports of these types of incidents during the sars outbreak (leung coleman, 2020; washer, 2004) . although the federal government response has been limited compared to the hate crime prevention initiatives after 9/11 and sars, in may 2020, the commission on civil rights agreed to take on the demands proposed by a group of democratic senators in a letter requesting a stronger response to the anti-asian hate crimes and discrimination during covid-19 (campbell & ellerbeck, 2020; yam, 2020b) .similar to the murder of vincent chin, which served to ignite an asian american activist movement, we hypothesize that the racial incidents against asian americans during the covid-19 pandemic may encourage the political mobilization of a panethnic asian american movement. at the same time, we believe that the incidents that are classified as "hate crimes" and "bias incidents" based on legal definitions do not fully capture the extent or pervasiveness of racist and xenophobic thoughts against asian americans. we encourage future scholars to more closely examine the culturally embedded racial logics that lead to these incidents, rather than focusing solely on the incidents themselves as the object of analysis. the hate crimes against asians in the time of covid-19 highlight the ways that asian americans continue to be viewed as foreign and suspect. this may be an additional burden on asian americans beyond the anxiety, economic instability, and the risk of illness all americans have experienced during covid-19.the article changes in police calls for service during the early months of the 2020 coronavirus pandemic attempts to identify how demand for police in ten large us cities -baltimore, md, cincinnati, oh, los angeles, ca, new orleans, la, phoenix, az, san diego, ca, san jose, ca, seattle, wa, sonoma county, ca and st petersburg, fl -changed during the early months of the covid-19 epidemic. this document provides further technical detail not included in the main article, and additional figures of 2020 calls for service in comparison to expected calls based on the frequency of calls in previous years. table 1 shows descriptive statistics for each of the models used in this study, together with the autoregressive (ar) and moving average (ma) periods and an estimate of model error. all of the models had zero seasonal ma periods, so these are not shown in the table. the chosen measure of forecast error is the mean absolute scaled error (mase) suggested by hyndman and koehler (2006) . the mase can be interpreted as the prediction error of the model relative to the prediction error of a 'naïve' model that simply forecasts that all future values of a time series will be same as the last observed value. if the mase of a model is less than 1, the model in question performs better (i.e. has a smaller error) than the equivalent naïve model.each model estimates the weekly frequency of a particular type of call for service in a particular city. each model contains the following variables:• zero or more moving-average (ma) terms, • zero or more auto-regressive (ar) terms, • zero or more seasonal auto-regressive (sar) terms, • a linear trend term, • 51 dummy term representing weeks of the year, • a dummy representing whether there is a us federal holiday in the week, • a dummy representing whether data for the relevant week was missing, and • for models of los angeles data, a dummy representing whether the week was before or after 1 january 2018, since certain types of pro-active call (e.g. traffic stops) were only included in the data after that date.the number of ma, ar and sar terms is chosen automatically using the algorithm outlined by hyndman and khandakar (2008) , in which multiple models with different values for the arima terms are estimated and the model which minimizes the akaike information criterion (aic) estimator of prediction error is chosen.the data in the following tables are also available in csv format at https://osf.io/cdfnw/ total calls since 2016 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −14% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +3% f sh q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −8% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −4% f s, h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −15% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −34% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −14% f s, h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +21% f sh q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −27% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −1% assault calls since 2016 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −11% burglary calls since 2016 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −15% disturbance calls since 2016 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −11% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +22% f sh q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +6% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q intruder alarm calls since 2016 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −35%f sh q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q medical emergency calls since 2016 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +6% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −11% f sh q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +7% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −58% mental health/concern for safety calls since 2016 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −6% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +39% f sh q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −5% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +1% f s, h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +38% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −37% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −5% f s, h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +8% f sh q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +0% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −4% actual call count is within 99% confidence interval of estimate actual call count is outside 99% confidence interval of estimate mental health/concern for safety calls in 2020 compared to forecasts f = first us case s = schools closed h = stay−at−home/shelter−in−place order suspicious person/vehicle calls since 2016 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −14% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −10% f s, h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −9% f s, h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −26% trespassing calls since 2016 q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −24% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +1% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +28% f s, h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +82% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q −2% f sh q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +45% f sh s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +23% f sh q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +9% f s h q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q +4% f s, h the coronavirus epidemic unfolding in the usa is likely to present several different challenges for law enforcement agencies. this article attempts to provide early evidence on how demand for police response to incidents has changed during the early months of the pandemic, using calls-for-service data from 10 large us cities.the appearance of the first us case of the covid-19 disease caused by the novel coronavirus designated as sars-cov-2 on 20 january 2020 led to changes in society across the usa that are unprecedented in recent decades. as well as leading to at least 80,554 deaths by 11 may (dong et al., 2020) , the virus resulted in school closures in every state and stay-at-home orders in many (mervosh et al., 2020) . both the virus and federal, state, and local responses to it may have had an effect on policing in several different ways. first, the virus may have directly influenced the ability of police agencies to continue to function. for example, on 3 april 2020, over 1,500 new york city police officers (about 4% of all officers) had been infected and one in six officers was sick or quarantined, including the chief of the counterterrorism bureau (southall, 2020) . in detroit, the chief of homicide investigation was one of several officers to die of covid-19 (eligon and macfarquhar, 2020) .secondly, law enforcement officers were asked to undertake new tasks as part of the government response to coronavirus. for example, since police typically lead the initial response to a sudden death at home, they became first responders to many covid-19 deaths in the community. officers were also required to enforce stay-at-home orders that covered at least 90% of americans by mid-april 2020 (reuters, 2020) . in new york city, for example, over 700 officers were diverted from other duties to respond to calls related to breaches of social distancing regulations (sandovai, 2020) . while enforcing stay-at-home orders may be more familiar for officers in parts of the country more prone to natural disasters, for many it will have been entirely new. internationally, there has been much debate about how police should balance enforcing public health regulations and protecting both civil rights and police-community relations (cave and dahir, 2020) . officers may have also had to contend (often with little notice) with changes to procedures, for example, to encourage social distancing between officers or between officers and the public.thirdly, the virus and governmental responses to it may lead to changes in factors that influence the frequency or severity of incidents to which police respond. for example, initial indications suggest an increase in gun purchases during the early weeks of the epidemic (schwartz, 2020) . a record number of americans also claimed unemployment benefits (rushe and holpuch, 2020) , with previous studies having linked joblessness to (for example) higher rates of suicide (milner et al., 2013) .it is the changes in demand for policing, as measured in the number of calls for service, which were the focus of the present study. there are at least three reasons why it is useful to make initial estimates of any changes now, even if (as with all scientific results) they are inevitably provisional. first, gathering initial evidence at this stage is likely to be helpful in shaping future research questions on covid-19 and policing, especially since the range of such questions is so large. secondly, academics are already fielding questions from the media and others as to how police demand is changing during the pandemic. most importantly, early evidence may be useful in helping practitioners to develop responses to later stages of the pandemic. this is especially important because it is likely that there will be multiple waves of infection during the pandemic (xu and li, 2020) and it is possible that future waves will hit hardest in different places to those most affected by (and able to learn most from) the first wave.answering calls for service from the public and other agencies is a core part of the mission of almost all law enforcement agencies. people call the police not only to deal with serious crimes or major threats to public safety but also for a wide range of 'order maintenance' tasks, from disputes between neighbours to minor traffic collisions (thacher, 2014) . servicing the demand produced by calls for service consumes a large proportion of available police resources (meehan, 1992) , with other activities such as crime prevention and proactive law enforcement often relegated to the time available between calls (shane, 2007) .since answering calls takes up so much police time, understanding calls for service is essential to understand policing. nevertheless, understanding trends and patterns in calls has received much less attention from scholars than understanding patterns in crime. research on calls has typically focused on designing efficient systems for call handling and response (brooks et al., 2011; green, 1984; larson and rich, 1987; mazerolle et al., 2002) or has used calls for service as a proxy for crime or disorder in research into other issues unrelated to calls themselves (cohn and rotton, 2003; decker et al., 2007; klinger and bridges, 1997; quinet and nunn, 1998) . most studies of calls for service have used small sample sizes, often involving the study of a few hundred calls (neusteter et al., 2019) .a small number of studies have identified temporal patterns in calls associated with patterns of routine activities (chen and kurland, 2018; chohlas-wood et al., 2015) . for example, cohn (1996) and lebeau and corcoran (1990) both found that the frequency of calls was associated with changes in weather. a small number of studies have tested for changes in call frequency associated with major disruptions to activities that were caused by natural disasters. lebeau (2002) found that the number of calls for service increased substantially during and for the week after hurricane hugo struck charlotte, nc, with ordermaintenance and service calls becoming a particular focus of police activity. buttell and carney (2009) found that in the year after hurricane katrina, total calls for service in new orleans increased but domestic-violence calls (the focus of that study) decreased.more recently, scholars have begun using models to forecast the future frequency of calls for service. holcomb and radke sharpe (2006) compared forecasting methods and found that an autoregressive integrated moving average (arima) model had the lowest error. jasso et al. (2007) detected major emergencies by comparing the actual number of 911 calls received per hour to the number of calls expected based on a statistical model. for an in-depth review of research into police calls for service, see neusteter et al. (2019) .research on how calls have changed during public health emergencies is extremely limited. luna et al. (2007) reported on case studies of police department plans for responding to an influenza pandemic, with some departments saying they planned to reduce response to some nonurgent calls if necessary. richards et al. (2006) likewise suggested that it may be necessary to not respond to some calls due to officers being unavailable due to illness, while brito et al. (2009, pp. vi-vii) suggested that 'calls for service will likely increase (dramatically at first)', possibly leading to the police being 'overwhelmed'. however, these studies were largely based on contingency planning, rather than analysis of calls during an actual public health emergency.a recent commentary by reicher and stott (2020) attempted to assess the risk of widespread disorder in response to the covid-19 pandemic but did not discuss the demand for policing. similarly, stott et al. (2020) discussed how police could maintain public legitimacy while enforcing coronavirus lockdown measures but did not mention police responses to calls. lum et al. (2020) conducted a survey of law enforcement agencies in canada and the usa during march 2020 and found that-contrary to the expectations of those studies based on contingency planning-57% of agencies reported that calls for service had declined. however, they noted (p. 1) that 'this adjustment in calls for service could reflect a reduction in certain types of calls and increases in others. much more research is needed to understand the impact of covid-19 on calls for service to the police.' the present study used calls-forservice data to identify how, across multiple cities and for many types of incidents, demand for policing changed during the early months of the covid-19 pandemic.seattle, wa; sonoma county, ca; and st. petersburg, fl. 1 these cities were chosen because they all release incident-level data (in some cases after a few days' delay) about each call received by the police control room. in many cases, the data had been released as part of the police data initiative (caplan et al., 2015) . open calls-forservice data have largely not been used in academic research (see lersch and christy (2020) for an exception), but open crime data from the same sources have been used (ashby, 2019) .data on all calls since 1 january 2016 were included in the analysis, or a total of 23.8 million calls across all 10 cities. calls were aggregated into weekly counts, both for total calls and for calls of 18 selected types, chosen because they are among the most frequent types of call received (table 1) . using weekly counts reduced noise in the data (compared to using daily counts) while allowing the analysis to retain sensitivity to short-term changes (compared to using monthly counts).the amount of police activity generated by an individual call for service will vary considerably. some calls will require no police response at all (perhaps because they will be passed to another agency), while others will represent the start of a major investigation lasting many months. quantifying the demand caused by each call is difficult and often requires access to multiple sources of data (e.g. covering investigator time, forensic resources, and court processing) that were not available for the present study. the frequency of calls in each category was therefore used as the variable of interest. this leaves for future research questions such as whether detection rates, time-todetection, or other measures of police productivity changed during the coronavirus pandemic.to identify changes in calls for service during the pandemic, data were split into two. data from 1 january 2016 to 19 january 2020 (the day before the first us covid-19 case) were used to establish the baseline frequency of calls that would be expected in the absence of the pandemic. these data were fed into a seasonal arima model for each type of call in each city-using only data from before 20 january 2020 to train the models ensured that the forecasts were not influenced by any changes in calls during the early weeks of the pandemic. each model included a variable for the long-term trend in calls, seasonal variables for each week of the year, a variable indicating whether a us federal holiday occurred during that week and a variable indicating whether the week corresponded to a small number of weeks for which data were missing (see table 1 in supplementary material). data for los angeles included certain types of pro-active call such as traffic stops only from 1 january 2018 onwards, so models of calls in los angeles also included a variable specifying whether a week was before or after that date.arima models require selection of the number of autoregressive and moving average terms to include. this study determined these parameters using the algorithm proposed by hyndman and khandakar (2008) and implemented in the fable package (o'hara-wild et al., 2020) in r version 3.6.1 (r core team, 2019). this algorithm runs multiple models with different parameters and selects the model that minimizes the akaike information criterion estimator of prediction error. due to the large number of models (177 in totalone for each category of call in each city), the chosen parameters for each model are shown in table 1 of supplementary material.the resulting arima models were used to forecast the weekly frequency of calls for service of each type in each city from 20 january 2020 onwards. these forecasts provided a synthetic comparison group of data representing the expected frequency of calls in the absence of any changes related to the coronavirus pandemic. this synthetic comparison was necessary because the global nature of the pandemic meant that comparison (139) 116 (23) 1,664 (158) 19 (6) 420 (37) 202 (42) 77 (19) 185 (23) 14 (4) 66 (10) burglary 391 (60) 805 (126) 61 (13) 595 (49) 220 (47) 91 (24) 170 (20) 19 (6) 72 (29) dead body 13 (4) 95 (13) 12 (4) 31 (7) 40 (10) 15 (5) 24 (5) 24 (6) disturbance 2,079 (332) 568 (106) 4,618 (567) 697 (72) 1,372 (134) 2,452 (472) 1,138 (255) 811 (126) 95 (23) 162 (26) domestic violence/family dispute 475 (54) 61 (11) 1,497 (107) 328 (35) 372 (34) 200 (21) 148 (16) driving while impaired 32 (8) 119 (14) 11 (5) 57 (8) 87 (20) 31 (10) 33 (7) drugs 960 (166) 133 (48) 226 (42) 66 (21) 53 (10) 60 (16) 73 (17) 87 (24) 136 (45) intruder alarm 701 (70) 279 (28) 1,162 (125) 675 (188) 870 (115) 656 (140) 521 (113) 266 (31) 89 (18) medical emergency 87 (22) 19 (7) 400 (46) 151 (35) 114 (25) 130 (35) 76 (26) 61 (16) mental health/concern for safety 346 (53) 235 (50) 433 (54) 118 (18) 1,361 (78) 704 (147) 424 (89) 217 (21) 57 (19) 105 (14) missing person 135 (19) 39 (9) 35 (8) 200 (28) 56 (13) 30 (8) robbery 113 (22) 25 (7) 263 (25) 25 (7) 63 (10) 46 (12) 26 (9) 35 (7) 14 (6) shooting/shots fired 41 (14) 10 (4) 129 (26) 62 (20) 70 (17) 42 (16) 28 (12) 10 (5) 24 (12) suspicious person/vehicle 258 (36) 180 (23) 298 (31) 1,296 (107) 623 (118) 731 (80) 219 (44) 158 (25) traffic collision 1,404 (161) 503 (59) 1,222 (91) 576 (65) 941 (105) 362 (69) 258 (54) 350 (44) 16 (4) 207 (21) traffic stop 1,368 (448) 457 (120) 927 (937) 957 (365) 505 (168) 462 (127) 228 (59) 393 (91) trespassing 67 (14) 859 (131) 1,154 (101) 107 (29) 105 (26) 230 (30) 14 (5) 74 (13) vehicle theft 193 (33) 74 (14) 102 (15) 186 (65) 282 (27) 221 (45) 328 (94) 105 (16) 228 (72) covid-19 and police calls for service article policing data from unaffected cities were not available. nevertheless, these forecasts rely on the assumption that call frequency will continue to follow the same trend and seasonal patterns as in the past.to determine whether the observed frequency of crime during the pandemic was different from what would have been expected otherwise, the observed frequency was compared with the confidence intervals around the estimates produced by the arima models. this allowed testing of whether the observed frequency is different from what would be expected, taking into account any long-term trend in calls, any seasonal patterns, and short-term noise in the data.the benefit of using arima models in this way, rather than, for example, as a part of an interrupted time series design, is that an interrupted time series would measure the average difference between the frequency of calls before a set point (e.g. the issuing of a stay-at-home order) and afterwards. this requires selection of a single change point in what was a fluid situation and potentially obscures short-term changes in the frequency of calls that may be of substantial practical relevance. for example, an interrupted time-series design using 8 weeks of post-lockdown data might fail to find any effect if calls substantially increased for 2 weeks but then returned to the normal level for the following 6 weeks, since the average number of calls would be close to normal. nevertheless, a 2-week spike in calls might be highly relevant to a police chief attempting to plan for future waves of the pandemic, and so it is important to choose a research design that allows identification of such patterns.the potential disbenefit of the current approach is that it requires a large number of comparisons between actual call frequency and the respective model confidence intervals, raising the probability of false positives. given the large number of weekly comparisons presented in the figures below, it is likely that actual counts in some weeks will be outside the confidence intervals by chance. to avoid falsely identifying an effect, actual counts will only be considered as being different from the forecast if the actual counts for two or more consecutive weeks are outside the 99% confidence interval, rather than a single week being outside the more conventional 95% interval.this study did not attempt to compare changes in call frequency in different cities to the number or rate of infections or deaths in each place. this was because reliable data on the number of either cases or fatalities were not available at the time of writing. published statistics on confirmed infections are likely to be influenced by variations in testing regimes in different states. as more data are released, it will be possible to better understand the total deaths resulting from the pandemic in each city, potentially by using data on excess mortality from all causes (weinberger et al., 2020) , but this is left for future research.the call-count data, individual model coefficients, and annotated r code for this analysis are available at https://osf.io/7v3nu/. figure 1 shows the weekly frequency of total calls for service from january 2020 onwards (represented as a solid black line), compared to the forecast produced by the relevant arima model (the dashed line) and associated 99% confidence interval (the grey band). the confidence intervals are much wider in some cities than in others, reflecting the greater week-to-week variability in calls seen in some cities. the percentage shown on each panel of the figure represents the difference between actual calls in the final week for which data were available and the forecast number of calls in that week. also shown are the date of the first covid-19 case in the usa and the dates on which the relevant city or state closed schools and issued a stay-at-home order. figure 1 shows that the actual frequency of total calls was significantly below what was forecast by the model for multiple consecutive weeks after coronavirus-related lockdowns began in 6 of the 10 cities for which data were available. in three of the four remaining cities, the frequency of calls was below that forecast by the model but remained within the 99% confidence interval. the pattern of calls in new orleans was unique: calls decreased from the beginning of march, increased substantially in the week after the city closed schools and issued a stay-at-home order on 16 march, then decreased sharply again and remained below the forecast.since this study was a natural experiment with a synthetic comparison group, it is not possible to exclude the possibility that these changes were caused by factors unrelated to either the pandemic or societal responses to it. however, the scale of the changes to everyday life resulting from the pandemic, and the near-simultaneous beginning of the decreases in calls across cities in five widely separated states, suggests that other explanations are unlikely. the overall decrease in calls was contrary to the expectations of the contingencyplanning studies discussed above, and from the experience of police during and after natural disasters such as hurricanes. police leaders planning responses to future pandemics (or waves of the covid-19 pandemic) should therefore not automatically assume that they will experience a substantial increase in calls and will need to plan for different scenarios.as well as total calls, models were estimated for 18 common call types: assault, burglary, dead body, disturbance, domestic violence/family dispute, driving while impaired, drugs, intruder alarm, medical emergency, mental health/concern for safety, missing person, robbery, shooting/shots fired, suspicious person/vehicle, traffic collision, traffic stop, trespassing, and vehicle theft. table 2 shows the number of cities in which calls of each type were either above or below the relevant 99% confidence interval for at least two consecutive weeks after lockdowns began. for reasons of space, the full results for each call type are presented in the supplementary material. the following discussion will discuss the different patterns found and use selected call types as examples; equivalent figures to fig. 2 for all call types are also included in the supplementary material.the individual call-type models included separate forecasts for assault, burglary, domestic violence (including family disputes), robbery, shootings (including reports of shots fired), and vehicle theft. not all of these calls will be the result of crimes having occurred, since callers can be mistaken in what they report, so it is important not to assume that crime-related calls for service are a reliable proxy for the frequency of crime (kane, 1998) . crime-related calls are discussed here mainly not as a proxy for crime but as a measure of the demand placed on police, who must still respond to apparently crime-related calls even if they later turn out to be unfounded or non-criminal.the picture for crime-related calls during the early weeks of lockdown was mixed. the frequency of assault calls was significantly below the forecast in three cities (baltimore, cincinnati, and seattle) while remaining within the expected range in other cities. conversely, the frequency of burglary calls was significantly above the forecast in three cities (new orleans, seattle, and st. petersburg). the frequency of calls to shootings or reports of gunfire remained within the forecast range except in baltimore, cincinnati, and phoenix. vehicle-theft calls remained within the range expected based on the forecast in every city, while robbery calls remained within the forecast in all but one (baltimore). for all these types, calls remained within the expected range in at least five cities. overall, it appears that police should expect crime-related calls (at least for those categories studied here) to continue at about the expected frequency during any future pandemic lockdowns. figure 2 shows the frequency of domestic violence/family dispute calls in each city. not all such disputes involve violence, but it was not possible to separate domestic violence from family disputes due to limitations in the call categories used by individual cities. these calls are of particular interest since policy makers and the media expressed concerns that requiring people to stay at home would expose repeat victims to greater risk (taub, 2020) . however, ashby (2020) found no evidence that serious assaults in residences had increased during the covid-19 lockdown in eight large us cities, while payne and morgan (2020) found that the number of breaches of domestic violence orders in queensland, australia had not changed during the pandemic. figure 2 shows that the number of calls to domestic incidents increased after lockdowns began in three cities (los angeles, new orleans, and phoenix) while decreasing in cincinnati and remaining within the expected range in baltimore, seattle, and st. petersburg. it is notable, also, that in two of the cities in which calls initially increased, they returned to within the expected range after a short period. further research will be required to identify the causes of these diverging trends across different cities, while being mindful that higher calls may indicate better recording (e.g. through covert reporting schemes) rather than necessarily showing a greater problem with domestic violence.order-maintenance calls calls to maintain public order typically make up a large proportion of police work. the most frequent of these calls are requests to respond to disturbance of various kinds. in the period of the covid-19 lockdown, calls to disturbances significantly increased in four cities (los angeles, new orleans, phoenix, and san diego), although in new orleans calls were outside the confidence interval for only the first 2 weeks of the lockdown and in san diego disturbance calls were already expected. the mechanisms underlying any relationship between drug calls and covid-19 are likely to be complex. for example, stay-at-home orders may move some drug users indoors (potentially decreasing calls) while making drug use stand out more on quieter streets (potentially increasing calls). the closure of high schools is also likely to have changed the activities of many young people, who are disproportionately likely to be involved in drug activity. calls to suspicious people or vehicles appeared to remain largely as in previous years, although they were briefly up in new orleans and down in seattle. similarly, calls to people trespassing remained within the forecast range except in san diego and seattle, where they increased. figure 3 shows that the frequency of intruder alarms dropped significantly below the forecast frequency in four cities, meaning that in the 4 weeks from 16 march, there were around 3,600 (30%) fewer alarm calls than would be expected based on the models: 860 (30%) in baltimore, 1,300 (27%) in los angeles, 1,200 (35%) in phoenix; and 270 (26%) in seattle. alarm calls in the other five cities were also below the forecast but remained within the confidence interval. with the exception of calls to alarms, it appears that police should expect the usual requirement to maintain public order to remain during any future wave of the pandemic, although there may be relatively minor fluctuations.although all cities have emergency medical and rescue services to respond to medical incidents, police often co-respond to such cases and these calls form a substantial proportion of police demand. for example, police in the cities in this study recorded an average of 5,400 calls to deaths, medical emergencies, mental health, and other concerns for safety (including 'person down' calls) each week in 2019, compared to around 3,700 weekly calls to assaults and 2,400 to burglaries.given the number of cases of covid-19, it might be expected that the number of medical calls would have increased substantially. this was also the reasoning behind the warnings of dramatic increases in calls for service predicted by the contingency-planning studies mentioned above. contrary to these expectations, in no city were calls either to medical emergencies or mental health/concerns for safety significantly above what was expected: medical-emergency calls significantly decreased in three cities (cincinnati, los angeles, and new orleans) and mental-health calls decreased in cincinnati and new orleans, while calls to missing persons decreased in baltimore, new orleans, and san diego. the decrease in medical-related calls in some cities may be a byproduct of the decreases in on-street activity resulting from lockdown measures. it is also possible that if local policies require police to be notified only of medical emergencies in public places, a higher proportion of medical emergencies were not notified to police since more emergencies were happening at home. figure 4 shows that the number of calls to dead bodies was significantly above the frequency forecast by the models in los angeles and new orleans, such that in the five weeks from 16 march, the number of such calls was above the forecast by 178 in los angeles and 111 in new orleans (the cities with the largest number of covid-19 cases). in all the other cities except phoenix, the number of dead-body calls was above the forecast but within the confidence interval. due to the rarity of such calls relative to other call types, the confidence intervals around the forecasts are relatively large. further research should look at the role of police in responding to dead bodies during the pandemic, including any additional difficulties associated with determining whether deaths were suspicious and the trauma experienced by officers called to dead bodies more often. police chiefs should also consider planning for increases in such calls during future similar situations. regulating motor-vehicle traffic is another substantial part of police work: in a typical week in 2019, police in los angeles responded to around 1,200 traffic collisions. figure 5 shows that during the early weeks of the pandemic, calls to collisions were significantly below that forecast by the models everywhere (except san jose and sonoma county), with about 10,400 fewer calls to collisions than forecast by the model in the 4 weeks beginning 16 march across eight cities, a decrease of 37% in the most recent week compared to the forecasts. calls to people driving while impaired by alcohol or drugs also fell significantly in los angeles, new orleans, and san diego. these changes are almost certainly driven by large decreases in the number of people travelling (valentino-devries et al., 2020) . while traffic collisions fell in almost all cities, fig. 5 shows that in many of them, the frequency of collisions began to slowly increase in later weeks. this may reflect changes in people's adherence to stay-at-home orders, for example, if 'quarantine fatigue' (zaveri, 2020) means people become restless after several weeks of lockdown. likewise, in some cities, it appears that collisions began to decrease before stay-at-home orders were made, potentially as people chose to work from home or otherwise limit their travel in response to increasing concern about coronavirus. it suggests that law enforcement agencies should be prepared to be flexible in their planning, responding to changes in the frequency of different types of calls over time. this requires rapid (e.g. weekly) analysis of call volume and illustrates the importance of having analytical support within an agency.although most calls for service originate with a member of the public, some calls are self-initiated by officers. the most common of these is the traffic stop, typically recorded as a call for service for officer safety. figure 6 shows that the frequency of traffic stops decreased after lockdown in every city except san diego. in some cities, stops ceased almost completely: stops in cincinnati in the week beginning of 23 march were 94% below forecast, with only 30 being recorded compared to 512 expected. as with traffic collisions, it appears that after initially dropping sharply, the frequency of traffic stops increased again in the later weeks of the lockdown: while in the week beginning of 23 march the number of traffic stops across all cities was 66% below forecast, 4 weeks later the number of stops had increased to 57% below forecast.traffic stops are interesting because (unlike most other calls for service) the stop is initiated by the officer. the factors influencing the frequency of stops are likely to be numerous (see ashby and tompson (2018) for a discussion), including the availability of vehicles to be stopped, the availability of time for pro-active policing between other calls, changing departmental guidance, and the motivation of officers to carry out stops. future research may wish to consider the relative importance of these factors, as well as how the dramatic decrease in stops (and potentially other pro-active policing) during the pandemic may have influenced crime.this study analysed how calls for service in 10 large us cities changed during the 16 weeks between the first us case of covid-19 on 20 january 2020 and the end of the most recent complete week of data on 10 may.there was no discernible difference between the forecast and actual frequency of calls between the first us case and early march when cities and states began to take action to enforce social distancing to slow the spread of the disease. this suggests that police are likely to have some time to refine and implement contingency plans in the early weeks of any future pandemics. the 'slow onset' or 'rising tide' nature of pandemic emergencies makes them different from most police major incidents (such as mass shootings or rail crashes), which require plans to be executed immediately and prioritize speed of action. this delay provides additional time to prepare, but also requires that managers know when best to execute each element of a pandemic response plan.after schools closed and stay-at-home orders were issued, the frequency of calls in many cities went down, although decreases were not seen everywhere. a decrease in calls was contrary to the expectations of previous predictions that calls for service would increase during a pandemic. since the widespread lockdowns seen during the covid-19 pandemic are largely unprecedented, it may be that contingency planners were not able to predict the effect such measures may have on police demand (although luna et al. (2007) did discuss the possibility of movement restrictions). it is noteworthy that many of the changes discussed here were more complicated than a simple shift from a pre-lockdown call frequency to a postlockdown frequency. this can be seen in the short spikes in calls to dead bodies seen in new orleans and seattle or the sudden drop in traffic collisions followed by a gradual increase. for researchers, this emphasizes the importance of using research designs that allow the detection of complex patterns over time. for practitioners, it illustrates the value of agencies having the capability to continually monitor patterns of demand, both so that action can be taken promptly and so that previous decisions (e.g. relating to resource allocation) can be revisited as circumstances change.while the overall frequency of calls decreased, this does not necessarily mean that the pandemic reduced pressure on police or created additional capacity that could be used for other tasks. as mentioned above, police departments themselves have had staff affected by the virus, either through being ill, staying at home due to particular vulnerability, or being away from work caring for relatives. in the absence of time-series data on how many officers were unavailable for duty as the pandemic developed, it is not possible to know whether overall demand-per-officer increased or decreased, or to identify the point of peak demand-per-officer (although these would be useful topics for further research). the increases seen in some types of calls may have meant increased pressure on some specialist departments within particular agencies. for example, the increase in calls to domestic incidents in some cities may have increased the workload of specialists trained to assess the risk of further incidents against the same victim. conversely, demand may have decreased in other departments, such as those processing traffic tickets or investigating collisions. it may, therefore, be possible for chiefs to move resources between different activities or to train staff in a team where demand has decreased to be able to provide support to others where demand has decreased.this study presents initial evidence on how police calls for service changed during the early months of the covid-19 pandemic. the results are inevitably provisional. further research, including on the research questions raised above, will be necessary to understand in more detail what changed, what did not, and what lessons police should draw. one important finding from this study is that there is unlikely to be a single universal experience of coronavirus among police departments: different agencies may experience different changes. this means that the availability of data from multiple agencies will be crucial in developing our understanding of reactive patrol policing during a major public health emergency.supplementary material is available at policing online.in operating rooms (ors), laminar airflow (laf) systems create a homogenous airflow with very little turbulence from the air conditioner outlet to the inlet. particularly, in ors with a vertical laf system, downward airflows from air-conditioner outlets on the ceiling are exhausted via air-conditioner inlets near the floor. contrarily, non-laminar airflow (nlaf) systems do not produce homogenous airflows; then, a mixed or turbulent flow is passed into the or, where air, aerosols, and particles can be homogenized. however, cost-effectiveness analyses found that laf systems are more expensive compared to nlaf systems. cacciari et al. reported that laf systems increased building costs by 24% and annual operating costs by 36% compared to the respective nlaf system costs. 1 to ensure a low infection rate in an ultra-clean air environment, the usage of laf as an air conditioning system has been recommended when performing surgery. [3] [4] [5] [6] the rate of reoperation or wound infection after artificial joint surgery in an laf-equipped or was reported to be smaller than that in an nlaf-equipped or. 7 contrarily, lidwell et al. reported that the use of prophylactic antibiotics was a more effective prevention method for development of joint sepsis after surgery than ventilation systems in the or (1.6% under ultra-clean air without antibiotics versus 0.8% under a conventional airflow system with antibiotics). 4 thus, perioperative prophylactic antibiotics are thought to be the most potent prevention factor for the development of surgical site infections (ssi). however, in gastrointestinal surgery, the effectiveness of prophylactic antibiotics varies among different types of surgery, and some studies reported that antimicrobial prophylaxis was not observed. 6, 8, 9 additionally, the efficacy of laf for ssi prevention was demonstrated under the gastric or vascular surgeries. 5, 6 on the other hand, laf operating theaters, long operating times, high hospital care volume, antibiotic-laden cement, and forced air warming (faw) systems have been reported as surgical risk factors for ssis. 10 additionally, the global guidelines of the world health organization (who) for ssi prevention indicate that the use of laf was not necessarily recommended for patients undergoing total arthroplasty surgery. these who 2016 guidelines were based on previous reports that showed that surgeries performed in laf-equipped ors resulted in increased ssis and expenditures. this led to a reevaluation of the cost-effectiveness of this method and the risks of ssis. 2, 11, 12 it is expected that the number of ors employing nlafs will increase in the future. however, the benefit of using an laf system for preventing ssis remains controversial.the safety of faw systems is also controversial, although the active warming of patients during surgery is indisputably beneficial. 13,14 in our previous study under an laf system, the upward faw airflow, above the head area, was completely counteracted by the laf, and the faw did not cause a meaningful airflow in the surgical site. 15 however, the effect of the faw airflow in an nlaf-equipped or has not been reported to date. therefore, we investigated the impact of faw on the airflow and sanitation quality of an nlaf-equipped or.the study was performed in an or within the munakata medical association hospital, which is equipped with a vertical nlaf system. the airflow speed at the diffuser an upper-body manikin was placed in the supine position; a lower-body warming blanket was placed underneath it and was covered with a surgical drape ( fig 1d) . a 3-dimensional ultrasonic anemometer (wa-790; sonic corporation, tokyo, japan) was used to measure the direction and speed of the airflow at intervals of 300 mm at 324 points (9 × 6 × 6): 9 points on the x-axis (in the right/left direction at 300 mm intervals with the cross-sectional point placed at point x4), 6 points on the y-axis (in the head or foot direction at 300 mm intervals with the head at point y6), and 6 points on the z-axis [at 100, 300, 500, 800 (operating table height), 1,100 and 1,400 mm from the floor] (fig 1b, c) . a "meaningful airflow" is defined as an airflow under 10 cm/s.the sanitation quality was evaluated with a cleanliness recovery test during the use of the lower-body blanket. for this test, dust was artificially generated in the surgical field with the nlaf turned off; then, the air conditioning was activated and the dust removal process was assessed. 16 we performed measurements at the center and lateral edges of the operating table at the y3 level ( fig 1b) ; three measurements were made at each height (800 mm and 1,500 mm) for 6 points. using a particle counter (kc-03a; rion co., ltd., tokyo, japan), suction sampling was performed at a rate of 1 ft 3 /min to measure the number of dust particles with a grain size of ≥ 0.5 µm. the air conditioning was turned on with an initial dust particle load of approximately 50,000 per cubic foot, and transitions in the number of dust particles were measured at 1 min intervals for 10 min. a comparison between the faw running group [faw (+)] and the faw stop group [faw (−)] was performed.the presented data are expressed as means and standard deviations. an unpaired t-test was conducted to compare the control levels between the faw (+) and faw (−) groups.a comparison between the two groups was performed via a two-factor repeated-measures analysis of variance (fig 4b) . the statistical analysis was performed using the prism 6 software (graphpad software: la jolla, ca, usa), where a p-value of p < 0.05 is considered statistically significant.examination of the operating table from the right and foot sides showed that the nlaf-induced downward air current moved along the floor toward the operating table causing an upward air current on both sides of the table (fig 2a) . contrarily, the faw caused no meaningful airflow above or around the table (fig 2b) , except for the airflow around the head area.at the x5 point, an upward air current was detected directly above the manikin's head in the area separated by the anesthesia screen (9-30 cm/s) (figs 3a and b, top row) , regardless of the presence of the nlaf. the faw caused no meaningful airflow above or around the operating table (figs 3b, top and bottom row) .at the y3 point, an air current (16 -28 cm/s) was detected moving along the floor from the outside towards the operating table (fig 3a, bottom row) . an upward air current (18 -34 cm/s) was detected at the edges of both sides of the operating table (fig 3a, bottom row).there was no significant difference in the number of dust particles per cubic foot before activation of the air conditioner, regardless of whether or not faw was present [faw (+): 52650 ± 1694 vs. faw (−): 51289 ± 3667, p = 0.48]. the number of particles per cubic foot 10 minutes after air conditioner activation was 17.2 ± 11.1 for faw (+) and 9.8 ± 4.5 for faw (−). there was no significant difference in the cleanliness recovery rate between the faw (+) and faw (−) groups (fig 4) .this is the first study to investigate the faw airflow under an nlaf system. it was found that faw caused no meaningful airflow or disturbance of airborne cleanliness in the surgical field under the nlaf system. however, the faw caused an upward air current above the head of the operating table, and nlaf could not counteract this upward air current. our previous study revealed that the upward air current caused by the faw was completely counteracted in the laf-equipped or, where the air-conditioner outlets were fully covered by the head area. 15 in the or used in this study, although vertical down airflow from the ceiling above the surgical field was not detected, the sanitary standard of the or was adequate. this cleanliness in this or could be mainly due to air circulation cycle times per hour.the nlaf system used in this study created an upward air current on both sides of the operating table flowing along the floor, operating table, and surgical drape. a downward air current from the air-conditioning inlets generated this upward air current on the ceiling. this phenomenon could be owing to the location or number of the air-conditioning inlets ( fig   1a) . the or used in this study has only two air-conditioning inlets in the corner of the room.thus, the airflow from the ceiling creates neither a homogenous flow nor a laminar airflow and becomes stagnant. these results indicate the possibility of contamination of the surgical field from surrounding operating beds and the importance of the layout of the air-conditioner outlets.many interventions have been suggested to affect the micro-organisms in ors. avoided. however, if the micro-organisms and bacteria are of considerable size, the contamination of large surfaces, such as floors, and the particle transfer throughout the surgical area should be measured and evaluated. the 0.5 micron size is the important standard size for determining if the environment is below or above the accepted level of particles for cleanroom standard. additionally, most commonly bacteria size is over 0.5 micron, so particle size smaller than 0.5 is not critical issue, then we measured particles over the 0.5 micron. the sanitary standard of the or used in this study was adequate, but potential contamination from the floor was expected because an air current from outside the operating table was detected at an airspeed between 16 and 31 cm/s. in almost all existing reports in which the air-conditioning type was found to be a risk factor for ssis, the air-conditioning outlet layout or airflow in the or was not discussed. if the airflow in the surgical field had been evaluated as a contributing factor, instead of the air-conditioning type, the conclusions in these reports might have been different.a limitation of this study is that we could not evaluate the effect of upward airflows on both sides of the operating table and head area on the number of airborne particles in the surgical field. the detection of point-to-point particle movement is practically difficult because artificially generated dust particles are quickly diffused. generating a fixed number of particles is also difficult. belani et al. generated the illuminate neutrally buoyant detergent bubbles into the head area separated by anesthesia drape using by bubble generator and shifting bubbles were counted in the surgical site by photography. 20 they reported that the number of shifting bubbles into the surgical field originating from the head area was higher when the faw was operative, but did not discuss the ventilation situation. however, the faw-induced upward airflow detected in this study could possibly transfer the airborne from the head area to the surgical field or spread respiratory droplets to non-intubated patients.nevertheless, further investigation is needed to address these concerns. further, neither the operating staff nor the equipment around the operating table were included in this study.these factors could play a significant role on the airflow.in this study, we demonstrated that the faw caused no meaningful airflow (> 10 cm/sec) and did not diminish the sanitation quality in the surgical field. however, above the head area, the upward faw-induced airflow was not counteracted by the nlaf system, which caused an upward airflow at the edges of the operating 밀접접촉자 1) : 2 a. ( , ,, , , , , , , , , 3.① 2 ② / / ( , )n95 , ) b.bal),( 1)* . 3) : / , ,( 1)1) 13)진단 기준 3.--who 4. 70%결과 판독 및 보고 a. [6] ① level d :. , n95 .② classⅱ : (to-deliver to-contain ), ) ,cases corresponding to a)-b) below: a. cases with pneumonia or acute respiratory syndrome (clinical or radiological diagnosis) accompanied by fever and at least one of the following: i. patients who developed symptoms within 14 days of visiting the middle east (see definition of 'middle east' below) ii. patients who have been in close contact with an individual who visited the middle east and developed fever and acute respiratory symptoms within 14 days b. cases with fever and respiratory symptoms (cough, dyspnea, etc.) and at least one of the following: i. individuals who developed symptoms within 14 days later after visiting a medical institution as a patient, visitor or staff in middle east ii. individuals in close contact with a confirmed mers patient while he or she is symptomatic. iii. individuals who developed symptoms within 14 days later after visiting a medical institution as a patient, visitor, or staff during the outbreak period, in which a mers-cov outbreak has been emerged; at least two confirmed cases.2) definition of middle east a. region: the arabian peninsula and surrounding countries b. countries: bahrain, iraq, iran, israel, jordan, kuwait, lebanon, oman, qatar, saudi arabia, united arab emirates, yemen 3. close contact 1) definition: individuals pertaining to two of the definitions below are classified as close contacts: a. individuals who do not wear appropriate personal protective equipment (individuals who were lacking any of the following: gown, gloves, n95 mask, goggles or facial shield) b. individuals pertaining to one of the following while a) is true: i. stay within two meters from a confirmed case ii. stay with a confirmed case together as a patient, visitor or staff in a clinic/procedure room/ward room iii. have a direct contact with respiratory secretions of a confirmed case 2) among close contacts, individuals who present with fever, coughing and other symptoms are classified as suspect cases.fee for detection test of mers rna are paid by the government except certificate purpose to travel abroad and the tests is indicated in the following cases.1) patients with confirmed mers must be treated in quarantine. 2) for removal of quarantine, the following conditions must be satisfied: a. forty-eight hours without any symptoms: absence of mers-related symptoms (fever, respiratory symptoms, digestive symptoms), normalization of general laboratory findings, improved chest x-ray findings b. two consecutive negative pcr tests with a 24-hour interval: lower respiratory or upper respiratory specimens, tracheal aspiratestracheal aspirate is preferred specimens for detection test of mers-cov rna.both upper and lower respiratory tract specimens, such as sputum or bronchoscopic specimens should be tested at the same time.* in order to increase sensitivity, a blood specimen can be tested. if detection test of mers-cov rna is not available, seroconversion of antibodies using acute-phase and recovery-phase serum is required to confirm mers.before close contact cases progress to full-brown mers an early diagnosis is essential to prevent further spread. therefore, both upper and lower respiratory tract specimens are collected at the same time for the diagnosis of close contact cases when the symptoms are not overt [5] . detection tests of mers-cov rna are performed at least two times on the 7th and 14th days after exposure or whenever related symptoms are developed. to collect sputum specimens from the cases with no purulent sputum, he or she is carefully instructed to exert cough forcefully until the secretion from trachea is produced. even if the tests are negative, close contact cases are quarantined until 14 days after exposure.for all patients with pneumonia accompanied by fever, the detection tests of mers-cov rna is incorporated to the diagnostic panels to differentiate the cause of sari during mers epidemics.* caution: there are many reports of co-infection of mers-cov with parainfluenza, rhinovirus, influenza a (h1n1) pdm09, herpes simplex, and influenza b. therefore, differential diagnosis for mers-cov infection is recommended even when one of the above pathogens is detected.1) both specimens from the upper and lower respiratory tracts are recommended at the same time. 2) lower respiratory tract specimens: sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage (bal), tracheal aspirate, etc (table 1) . * to collect sputum specimens from the cases with no purulent sputum, he or she is carefully instructed to exert cough forcefully until the secretion from trachea is produced. 3) upper respiratory tract specimens: combined naso-/oropharyngeal swab, nasopharyngeal swab, nasopharyngeal aspirate (table 1) . * for a naso-/oropharyngeal swab, a flocked swab is used and both specimens are added to the same viral transport medium (this combined specimen has been reported to increase the sensitivity). 4) blood specimen a. whole blood: to be considered for suspect cases when it is difficult to collect a proper respiratory specimen (children, etc.) although it is best to test within 3-4 days of symptoms appearing, testing is possible for up to one week, with 5-10 ml of blood taken from adults and children, and at least 1 ml of blood from infants. for the acute phase, both molecular detection tests and antibody tests can be performed, and in order to look for seroconversion (table 2), recovery-phase blood is also required. serum is refrigerated (4°c*) for storage, unless the tests are delayed by 72 hours or more, in which case the specimens are frozen and transported with dry ice. b. edta blood: for collection of buffy coat cells by request of the korea centers for disease control and prevention, it should be transported at room temperature.1) when collecting specimens such as sputum, tracheal aspirate, or bronchoscopic aspirate, follow the guidelines for infection prevention and control for aerosol-producing procedures. 2) when collecting blood and other non-respiratory specimens from suspected or confirmed patients, the collecting persons should wear personal protective equipment (n95 mask, gloves, long-sleeved gown, goggles, and face shield).infection prevention and control for aerosol-producing procedures 1. aerosol-producing procedures: sputum collection, tracheal aspiration, bronchoscopy. 2. principles of infection prevention.1) aerosol-producing procedures should be performed with the minimum of medical staff. 2) personal protective equipment should be worn: n95 mask or higher-level respirators, gloves, long-sleeved gown, goggles or facial shield. 3) before and after patient contact, and after removing personal protective equipment, hand hygiene policy must be adhered to. 3. location of procedure.1) negative pressure single room is recommended for aerosol-producing procedures, but when this is impossible, the procedure should be performed in an single room with isolated ventilation system, and change the total room air by 6-12 cycles/hour during the procedure; installation of a forced ventilation duct system is recommended. 2) after finish of the procedure, the room should be disinfected, and left vacant for enough time to ventilate; approximately 30 minutes if changes of 12 cycles/ hour. 3) entry to/exit from the e room should be minimized during the procedure.criteria for detection of mers-cov rna: a positive result for at least one of the following: 1. a positive result for at least two mers-cov-specific gene targets (upe, orf1a, orf1b, n) by real-time rt-pcr (rec- if the specimen container is open outside the bsc, it is essential to wear an n95 mask and goggles or facial mask, and the bench must be sterilized afterwards 3. the guidelines by the manufacturer of the diagnostic kits should be followed. 4. bsc or other precaution must be used to prevent cross-contamination during processing of nucleic acid extraction and making aliquots as below; a. during pre-treatment of specimens manually, one by one processing is recommended rather than batch of multiple specimens. b. the automatic nucleic acid extraction equipment devices should be in use with concern of contamination 5. in the cases of contamination with specimen, the bench should be disinfected with 70% alcohol immediately, or as soon as the procedure is finished 6. information to be added for the sputum pre-treatment procedure interpretation and report routes of transmission for middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) appear similar to typical respiratory viruses, with touch and droplet transmission being most important, but routes of transmission have still not been clearly investigated. taking into account the incidence and fatality of mers-cov, and the impact of laboratory transmission on public health, this virus demands strict safety control policies than other respiratory viruses. thus, the exchange of information between clinical physicians and laboratory physician is crucial to minimize transmission risk factors when handling test specimens from suspected mers-cov patients.laboratory and other healthcare workers collecting or handling blood and other body fluids must obey the standard precautions for handling infectious substances.1) respiratory tract specimens must be notified to the laboratory before sending: "suspected mers-cov" label attached to specimens 2) precautions to be taken by staff in charge of test requests before sending to the laboratory a. specimens should be stored by a designated member of staff until all tests are completed. b. while mers-cov is suspected, or confirmed, any laboratory tests involving respiratory specimens should be minimized where it is absolutely necessary for patient care.1) the specimen container should be made of a plastic material and be protected from leaks (e.g. screw-cap); containers made from breakable glass must not be used. 2) for all specimens (including any specimens not for mers-cov testing purposes), a label should be attached including the patient's identifying information (at least two types), specimen information (mers-cov warning label required), test information, and the time of collection.-the label should be made of a material that is not easily detached, and printed in a way that is not easily erasable, such as using a barcode printer. 3) specimens for virus isolation/molecular diagnosis a. store at 4℃ and transport immediately b. store at -70°c when it is not possible to transport within 72 hours. 4) edta blood: transport at room temperature 5) transport of infectious (respiratory) specimens a. transport by person: do not use pneumatic tube transportation b. transport within an institution: after decontaminating the surface of the primary container by wiping with a 70% alcohol swab, place in a zip-bag and package within a secondary container for transport. c. the secondary container should be made of a material that is hard and does not leak, such as plastic (pp) or metal. it must be possible to autoclave the material if it is contaminated. even if the container is not contaminated, it 67 should be cleaned and disinfected regularly. d. the specimen should be secure (with the lid facing upwards) so that it does not fall over or roll around within the secondary container. e. the transport personnel must be trained to deal with a spillage incident, and carry a spillage kit during transport. ☞ refer to the guidelines for spillage incidents within the hospital f. transport outside the institution: triple packing that adheres to korean cdc guideline for transport of infectious specimens triple package 1) after labeling, the primary container carrying the specimen collected from a patient should be sterilized with a sterilizing agent. * sterilizing agent: 70% alcohol, or 1% sodium hypochlorite 2) after sterilization, the primary container is wrapped in an absorbent (paper towels, etc.) before being placed in the secondary container.3) the lid of the secondary container is firmly sealed before placement in the tertiary container. 4) data relating to the specimen (test request form) is placed in the tertiary container before packing. 5) the sender, recipient, and emergency contact are written on the outside of the tertiary container. 6) after placing the tertiary container in an icebox, cooling media (ice packs) are inserted on all sides of the container. 7) the infectious substance label, un 2814, orientation, sender, recipient, and emergency contact should be written on the outside of the icebox.6) recommendations during laboratory testing a. use of protective equipment [6] i. level d personal protective equipment should be worn: disposable gloves and a laboratory gown should be worn at all times when handling specimens, and a dental mask and goggles should be worn when there is a risk of splashing from opening the specimen container (glasses are insufficient, and so goggles or a facial shield should be worn on top of glasses). after testing has been completed, all protective equipment should be removed and hands should be washed before leaving the testing area. when removing the protective equip-ment, care must be taken not to contaminate the hands and body; an n95 mask should be worn when there is a high risk of aerosol production. ii. class ii biosafety cabinet (bsc): a laboratory gown (long sleeves, covering the whole body, opening at the back) and disposable gloves must be worn. after completing work at the bsc, hands must be washed after removing gloves. iii. other safety devices -use of safety equipment installed by the manufacturer e.g.) centrifuge double cover when infectious specimens are centrifuged, the specimen should be loaded and unloaded from the bucket and rotor inside the bsc. b. when handling specimens outside the bsc, minimize unintended contact with the specimen. c. after work on the specimen has been completed, the bsc is sterilized with 70% alcohol. d. any objects that contact the infectious specimen should be disposable if possible, and if they become contaminated by the specimen, they need to be autoclaved before disposal. 7) specimen handling during common tests (biochemical, hematological, and other tests) a. when hematological or biochemical tests are performed using blood, serum, or urine specimens, standard precautions should be taken, as with any ordinary clinical specimen. b. use a bsc when producing smears (cytospin, etc.) or counting the number of cells in bodily fluids other than blood (e.g. bal). c. respiratory specimens and other body fluids (including feces) are infectious specimens, and must be processed at a class ii biosafety cabinet. d. tests that should be performed in standard precaution i. pathological tests of tissue that has been fixed in formalin or inactivated by another method ii. molecular tests using nucleic acid extract iii. examination using an electron microscope after fixation in glutaraldehyde iv. testing bacterial and fungal cultures in a microbial laboratory v. tertiary (final) package of infectious specimens: specimens already enclosed in the secondary container vi. inactivated specimens (specimens in nucleic acid extraction solution) e. procedures that should be performed using a class ii bscit is known to all that since the twenty-first century, there have been three human pathogenic coronavirus outbreaks, which have caused global transmission, bringing huge challenges to global public health and economic development [1] . they are the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) in 2003 [2] , the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012 [3] , and the new coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus2, sars-cov-2) in 2019 [4] . at present, there is no specific treatment plan.in early 2020, a case of novel coronavirus was confirmed in wuhan, china [4] . within a short period of time, the number of confirmed cases was increasing, and those infected could develop fever, cough, and even severe respiratory syndrome [5] , which quickly drew the attention of the chinese government [6, 7] . researchers found that 27 of the 41 initially confirmed cases had had direct contact with a local seafood market in wuhan, initially assuming that the new coronavirus might have come from wild animals sold in the market [8] . gao et al. collected alveolar lavage fluid from three infected patients and successfully isolated the new coronavirus [9] . electron microscopy has showed that the virus has an envelop, the particles are round or oval with the diameter of about 60-140 nm [4] . whole genome sequencing analysis has showed that the virus belongs to a new type of coronavirus of the β genus [4] . in addition, shi et al. obtained almost identical genome-wide sequences in virus samples from 5 patients. the sequence of the new coronavirus was 79.5% similar to sars-cov and 96% similar to the coronavirus carried by bats, which might be the potential source of infection [10] . another study found that the receptor binding domain of sars-cov-2 was the closest to the coronavirus carried by pangolins. thus, the origin of sars-cov-2 remains to be determined [11] .the world health organization (who) officially declared sars-cov-2 to be a public health emergency of international concern on january 31, due to its rapid spread. furthermore, the who declared sars-cov-2 to be a global pandemic on march 11, 2020 [12] . the last time that the who declared a pandemic was h1n1 in 2009, which affected more than 70 countries and infected more than 60 million people in the united states alone [13] . as of may 27, 2020, sars-cov-2 had a total of 5,715,077 confirmed cases worldwide, including 352, 912 deaths. therefore, it can be seen that it has strong transmission and pathogenicity (fig. 1) .this review mainly investigates the current status of the epidemic, provides information of sars-cov-2 on virology, clinical features, epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and the role of internet new media, highlights the major issues that still need to be studied and addressed.coronavirus is the longest known rna virus, with a length of 27-32 kb [14] . in 2014, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) divided coronaviruses into four genera, α, β, γ, δ. of the four coronavirus genera, seven have been found to be pathogenic to humans, α: hcov-229e, hcov-nl63; β: hcov-oc43, hcov-hku1, sars-cov, mers-cov. the newly discovered sars-cov-2 also belongs to the β genus [9, 15] .the reason that coronavirus can cause human pandemic is closely related to its special structure [16, 17] . the sequencing results of sars-cov-2 genome sequence showed that its genome contains about 29 kb bases and 11 protein-coding regions (fig. 2) , including 1ab, 1a, s, 3a, 4, m, 6, 7a, 7b, 8, n, 10 [16] . the entry of sars-cov-2 into host cells was mediated mainly by the use of spike protein (s) [18] . therefore, we performed phylogenetic analysis of s protein of the human pathogenic coronavirus (fig. 3) . s protein is a prominent trimer structure on the surface of the virus, containing two functional subunits s1 and s2, where s1 is responsible for binding to host cell surface receptors, and s2 is responsible for membrane fusion between the virus and the cell. there is a furan cleavage site at the boundary between s1 and s2 subunits, which is mutated during virus invasion, thus distinguishing sars-cov-2 from sars-cov [16] . veesler et al. showed that sars-cov-2 entered cells using s protein by utilizing the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor on the surface of host cells, which is widely present in fig. 1 the latest data on sars-cov-2 on 27 may 2020. a sars-cov-2 mainly affects countries; b top 10 confirmed sars-cov-2 cases; c top 10 sars-cov-2 deaths human respiratory and intestinal mucosal epithelial cells, enabling sars-cov-2 to infect humans and cause transmission in humans, which is similar to the transmission mechanism of sars-cov [16, 19] . in addition, studies have shown that the expression level of ace2 gene in the lungs of smokers is significantly higher than that of non-smokers, and smokers are more likely to be infected with sars-cov-2 [20] . these findings provide an important theoretical basis for drug development and epidemic prevention and control. in addition, an analysis of the sars-cov-2 genomic phylogenetic network revealed three types of variation, which the researchers tentatively named a/b/c, where a is the ancestor type, a and c mainly exist in europe and the united states, while b mainly exists in east asia, providing a new idea for the origin of sars-cov-2 [21] .the incubation periodthe incubation period, it is to point to from causative agent invader airframe or produce action to airframe commonly, arrive airframe begins to appear reaction or clinical symptom when arrive. the incubation period of different infectious diseases is different, mainly related to the number of pathogens, pathogenicity, feculence and the autoimmunity of the infected person [22] . determining the incubation period of infectious diseases is helpful for researchers to determine the time of infection of an person, track the source of infection, and determine the route of transmission [23, 24] . it can also provide an important theoretical basis for the air defense time of prevention and quarantine of infectious diseases. on january 31, 2020, the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) announced that all residents returning from the outbreak would be subject to a mandatory 14-day quarantine.through investigation and analysis of 88 patients diagnosed with sars-cov-2 in the early stage, backer et al. preliminarily proved that the average incubation period of the disease was 6.4 days (95% ci, 5.6 to 7.7 days) [25] . another study on the incubation period of sars-cov-2 showed that the incubation period of the infectious disease ranged from 2 days to 14 days [26] . the latest study analyzed 181 cases of sars-cov-2 infectious using the log-normal model and predicted that the patients would show clinical manifestations within 12 days [23] . the above research indicates that the average incubation period of sars-cov-2 is about 14 days, but it is possible to extend the isolation observation period appropriately if necessary.the clinical symptoms of patients infected with sars-cov-2 are mainly fever, fatigue and cough, but more than 50% of the infected patients even have no obvious symptoms, which is easy to cause missed diagnosis and misdiagnosis [27, 28] . in addition to respiratory symptoms, some people who are infected also experience digestive symptoms such as loss of appetite, nausea and vomiting [29] . some severe cases can progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome or even multi-organ failure (ecmo plays an important role in the treatment of critically ill patients) [30, 31] . diarrhea, a common symptom of sars-cov-2 infection, also accounts for a high proportion of sars-cov-2 infections [32, 33] . in addition, the total number of white blood cells in adult infected patients is normal or slightly decreased in general laboratory examination, in which the decline of lymphocytes is more obvious, c-reactive protein (crp) can have a slight increase, and there is a slight increase in erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) [34] . in obese patients, aspartate aminotransferase, ldl cholesterol and lymphocyte counts decreased significantly [35] . meanwhile, a retrospective study found statistically significant reductions in eosinophil levels in patients with poor prognosis [36] . imaging finding suggested that most of the infected patients had pneumonia. chest ct is usually characterized by ground-glass opacity (ggo). progressive chest ct indicated increased lesions, the accumulative range of lesions was expanded, and in severe cases, diffuse consolidation of both lungs presented as "white lung" [37, 38] . so far, most of those infected have mild symptoms and a good prognosis, but the mortality is as high as 17% for the elderly or those with chronic disease [39] . according to the statistical analysis of the current infected data, the infected age is mainly between 40 and 60 years old, among which the male patients are slightly more than the female patients, the infected children are rare, and most of the families of infected children have other family members infected [40] . in addition to the typical clinical manifestations of the respiratory and digestive systems, many patients were treated for obvious skin manifestations (mainly red rash on the back of trunk, urticaria, etc.). therefore, it is necessary for our clinicians to find such patients in time to avoid misdiagnosis and missed diagnosis [41, 42] .although the current statistical analysis shows that the infection rate of children is low, it does not mean that children are not susceptible to disease, perhaps because children have less contact with the outside environment and most families pay more attention to the health protection of children, which need to be taken into account. some studies have found that the average incubation period of children is longer than that of adults, the clinical manifestations of infected children are relatively mild, cough and fever are also common manifestations, symptoms tend to subside, slightly infected people or even no symptoms, just positive nucleic acid test [43] . more than 80% of infected children have detectable viral nucleic acids in their faeces [44] . one study found that of the 10 children infected outside the wuhan, 8 had direct contact with adults with a history of travel to the city. the symptoms of infection in children are relatively mild and not easy to be found, but the imaging examination often shows patchy infiltration, if not timely treatment, children's growth and development is seriously affected [27, 45] . therefore, children who may contact with high-risk groups should be closely monitored and isolated for early detection and intervention [45, 46] . since the symptoms of infected children are mild, treatment with large doses of antiviral drugs or empirical antibiotics is not necessary, unless the condition is severe and no other specific treatment options are available [47] .studies have shown that coronavirus α and β originated in bats, and the other two viruses originated in birds [1] . a comparative analysis of genome sequences showed that sars-cov-2 was 96% similar to coronavirus from bats, and bats were likely the natural host of sars-cov-2 [10, 48] . however, there may be one or more unkonwn intemediate hosts between bats and humans, just as the intermediate host of sars-cov is civet cat and the intermediate host of mers is dromedary camel [49, 50] .most of the original sars-cov-2 infections came from a local seafood market in wuhan [51] . the internal environment of the market was similar to the place where sars-cov was discovered in 2003 [52] . the wet and dirty environment provides favorable conditions for the virus to survive and reproduce. in addition, a variety of seafood was sold in the market, and there was also illegal trafficking of wild animals, the pathogen was likely to be one of the intermediate hosts or some wild animals [53] . according to the latest research, the virus strain isolated in pangolins is 99% similar to sars-cov-2 in sequence [54] . it is suspected that pangolins may be the potential intermediate host of the virus. pangolins were also sold in the market [55] . it was likely that the first infected people ate the infected pangolins, causing human-to-human transmission. after the outbreak, the local government moved quickly to close the market and conducted a thorough disinfection. of course, pangolins may not be the only intermediate host, as coronaviruses have been found in many animals, such as camels, pigs, goats, and pangolins. with further research, it is believed that more potential intermediate hosts will be found [56] . in addition to wild animals, the researchers found that chickens, ducks, pigs and dogs were less susceptible to sars-cov-2, while cats were more susceptible to sars-cov-2, providing important information for future animal management [57] . after the outbreak, many regions in china have introduced relevant laws and regulations, and some animals have been put on the fasting list.at present, the pathogenic mechanism of sars-cov-2 is still little studied, and its transmission route and transmission mode are also greatly uncertain due to virus mutation and other factors. epidemiological data show that sars-cov-2 has a strong infectious capacity and is highly infectious. the known transmission route is mainly based on the history of the infected person, and the sample of sars-cov-2 can be detected to make a guess. the presence of sars-cov-2 was found in nasopharyngeal swab specimens of the infected person, and the cases of cluster infection all suggested that airborne droplet transmission was the possible main transmission route [58] [59] [60] . confined space, poor ventilation and so on are important causes of cluster infection [61] . to this end, on january 23, 2020, the chinese government imposed a "city closure" on wuhan and travel restrictions on other cities to minimize unnecessary crowds. currently, disseminated by respiratory droplets and direct contact is clear, a study collected in different regions of the hospital air sars-cov-2 testing, found in the region of the medical staff and room toilet space existing in the small area is relatively high concentrations of the virus nucleic acid, but whether these aerosol form of the virus has spread ability is not yet clear, these need to pay attention to the prevention and control of hospital [62, 63] . sars-cov-2 rna was also detected in blood samples from infected patients [5, 64, 65] . the real-time fluoresence quantitative pcr showed that the pcr cycle threshold was 35.1, indicating that there was a low concentration of viral nucleic acid in the blood samples, and blood transmission might also be a potential transmission route of sars-cov-2 [66] . it also increases the difficulty of blood donation in blood centers and blood banks. the high expression of ace2 receptor in the gastrointestinal tract indicates that sars-cov-2 can use ace2 receptor in the gastrointestinal tract to enter the human body, so the fecal-oral pathway may be a potential transmission route of sars-cov-2 [67] . it is reported that the chinese center for disease control and prevention isolated the sars-cov-2 strain from stool samples from a confirmed patient in heilongjiang province, indicating that sars-cov-2 could survive in feces. a similar study found low levels of sars-cov-2 in the feces of some infected children [44] . in addition, the government of paris detected a novel coronavirus in a non-potable water system and an active novel coronavirus in sewage in massachusetts, usa. these studies have shown that a novel coronavirus can survive in water and be transmitted using water. therefore, if the water is infected by the virus, even with the current stringent control measures, there is still a high risk of human infection. a newborn born during the outbreak at a local children's hospital in wuhan was reported to have been diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection 30 h after birth, and it was considered that sars-cov-2 might also cause an epidemic through vertical transmission [68] . however, another study did not find the presence of sars-cov-2 in the samples of amniotic fluid, breast milk and other body fluids of 9 pregnant women infected with sars-cov-2 [69] . the newborns were not infected, and no evidence of vertical transmission of pregnancy was found, possibly due to the small sample size. for health workers, the possibility of vertical transmission still exists and needs to be taken seriously in the process of disease control [70] . in addition, there have been reports of infection in laboratory specimens, and human conjunctival epithelium is susceptible to infection by infectious aerosols [71] .an important indicator to measure the ability of the disease to spread: basic reproduction number (r0), refers to the average number of infectious diseases that can be transmitted to others without the need for external intervention [72] . the critical value is 1. the greater the r0 value, the more difficult to control the epidemic. with the participation of all countries in the world, the r0 value is also changing. initially, zhao et al. estimated that the initial r0 value of sars-cov-2 was between 3.5 and 5.5, slightly higher than sars-cov. the latest study shows that r0 is around 2.68, roughly the same as the r0 reported by the who and the chinese cdc [73, 74] . at present, sars-cov-2 is spreading rapidly all over the world, with the cumulative number of infected people excedding 160,000. if no corresponding measures are taken, the epidemic situation will worsen. as a "global village" such a big family, the global countries should unite and work together to control the r0 value below 1 [75] . a retrospective study of patients infected with novel coronavirus in a local hospital in wuhan found that elderly men, patients with hypertension and heart disease were more likely to suffer from serious complications, with a poor survival prognosis and a high mortality rate, which were required close attention [76] .the diagnosis of infectious diseases depends on the identification of the pathogen [77, 78] . the identification of pathogens mainly includes "virus isolation" and "nucleic acid detection", but because "virus isolation" requires a high level of biosafety in the laboratory, it is mainly used in scientific research. clinical diagnosis of sars-cov-2 mainly relies on "nucleic acid testing". according to the transmission characteristics of sars-cov-2, nasopharyngeal swabs, sputum, respiratory secretions, alveolar lavage fluid, blood, feces and other samples of the infected person can be used as the source of samples for viral nucleic acid detection [79] . in a study, by detecting the nucleic acid content of novel coronavirus in sputum samples of 92 infected patients, it was found that the virus content in sputum samples of severely infected patients was higher than that of mildly infected patients, among which 11 patients with aggravated illness had higher nucleic acid content of novel coronavirus in sputum samples [80] . in addition to detecting viral nucleic acids, antibody detection in serum of healthy people is a relatively fast screening method. studies have shown that igg and igm can be detected in the second week after sars-cov-2 infection [81] . at present, sars-cov-2 nucleic acid detection kit approved by china national medical products adminstration mainly uses real-time fluorescence quantitative pcr method to detect specific genes of viral nucleic acid [82] . the detection kits of real-time fluorescence quantitative pcr are mainly divided into two categories: double realtime fluorescence quantitative pcr and triple real-time fluorescence quantitative pcr, both using taqman probe method. the target genes detected by double method were mainly 1ab and n gene, while those detected by triple method were 1ab, n and e gene. in addition, viral genome sequencing can also identify the sequence and function of sars-cov-2. this method is better than the real-time fluorescence quantitative pcr method for the detection of early samples with low virus content, but it is also less applied due to the lack of sequencing equipment and bioinformatics analysts. therefore, real-time fluorescence quantitative pcr is the main method to detect viral nucleic acid. as a designated hospital for local nucleic acid testing, the department undertakes the testing of most suspicious samples in the region and surrounding areas. in order to ensure reliable test results, we have developed a set of quality control procedures, hoping to provide assistance for nucleic acid testing.the quality of samples determines the sensitivity and specificity of viral nucleic acid detection. the virus detection rate of bronchus/alveolar lavage fluid is relatively high due to the relatively high viral load in the respiratory tract specimens of infected persons, but sampling is difficult to get. routine clinical collection of nasopharyngeal swabs, blood, stool and other samples, but the collection of these samples is susceptible to sampling materials, sampling sites, sampling time and sampling personnel's operation. therefore, it is recommended to test negative specimens for patients with suspicious clinical symptoms multiple times, take samples from multiple sites, and conduct standard sampling by skilled personnel.due to the sudden outbreak of the epidemic, there are not enough clinical samples of the detection kits developed by various companies or scientific research insitutions for complete performance confirmation. therefore, the stability and reliability of various nucleic acid detection kits need to be further verified. here, it is recommended to use the detection kit containing the control, and it should match with the laboratory equipment, and extract virus samples in strict accordance with the standard operating procedures of the kit, and set up detection procedures.the detection personnel should also analyze the situation of the whole amplification curve and the individual amplification curve after amplification, and the amplification curve is required to present a single peak specific smooth curve, followed by adjusting the detection procedure according to the dissolution curve. in addition, a reasonable indoor quality control scheme is of vital importance. we suggest that one weak positive quality control and three negative quality controls should be set up for each batch of test. all three negative quality controls should be negative, and weak positive quality control should be positive, which is considered as the control of this batch of test. otherwise, it is out of control and cannot issue a test report. if necessary, it should be retested. for positive results, we should ensure that the fluorescence quantitative pcr results of at least two targets (1ba/n/e) in the test are positive. when only one target is positive, rechecking and even resampling should be requested as much as possible. for the negative results, the infection cannot be completely excluded, and comprehensive analysis of the patient's symptoms, medical history and imaging findings is also needed [83, 84] . standard and reasonable test report is very important for clinicians to make correct judgment. with the spread of sars-cov-2, countries all over the world need rapid and effective methods to detect their own people. a rapid detection method of crispr-cas12 was found, which was mainly used to detected sars-cov-2 in respiratory throat swab, with a sensitivity of up to 95% and specificity of 100% [31] . there are similar colloidal gold immunochromatography, side flow immunoassay, which can quickly and sensitively detect specific antibodies in the serum [85] .in addition to laboratory tests, imaging findings are critical for disease diagnosis. routine x-ray examination is convenient and quick. however, because the overlapping images will affect the observation of doctors on the lesions, and the sensitivity and specificity are low, it is easy to miss diagnosis, which has not played an obvious role in this outbreak. ct examination is another important imaging examination for respiratory diseases and plays an important role in the diagnosis of sars-cov-2 pneumonia [86] . patients infected with sars-cov-2 can be divided into three stages according to their condition. the early ct manifestations of the lesion were mainly local lesions, patchy, segmental distribution, and the lesions were mostly seen in the outer 1/3 lung field and subpleural. in the progressive stage, ct mainly presents increased lesions with expanded scope, involving multiple pulmonary lobes, with most of the lower lobes. in the critical stage, ct mainly presents diffuse lesions, lung consolidation, distorted structure, and "white lung" in severe cases [37, 38] . imaging findings of diseases also played a crucial role in early diagnosis, which should be paid more attention in the case of epidemic [87, 88] .in addition to early detection and early diagnosis of the disease, early treatment is crucial to the prognosis of the disease. since the outbreak, many research institutions around the world have been conducting clinical trials, using existing potential drugs for in vivo and in vitro research. at present, there are mainly antiviral drugs, antiinflammatory drugs, and some drugs have achieved significant effects, but it is still some time before the treatment of covid-19 patients [89, 90] . studies have shown that ace2 is the receptor for sars-cov-2 to enter cells, and ace2 is present in large quantities in human lung and small intestinal epithelial cells, which is essential for the spread of the epidemic. similarly, ace2 is a potential therapeutic target [91, 92] . it has been found that recombinant human soluble ace2 can inhibit the growth of sars-cov-2 and significantly block the early stage infection of novel coronavirus, which is an important discovery for the treatment of patients with new crown disease [93] . in addition, the use of ace inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) can provide protection to the cardiovascular and renal systems of covid-19 patients [94] . there are many similar therapies that inhibit the action mechanism of s protein and ace2 [95] . a combination of broadspectrum antiviral drugs, lopinavir and ritonavir has been recommended for clinical trial in the latest guidelines [96] . in addition, remdesivir, also a broadspectrum anti-coronavirus drug, has been shown to inhibit sars-cov-2 cell infection in vitro [89] . the first sars-cov-2 patient in the united states showed a marked improvement in symptoms after being treated with rdv, which opened the possibility for further clinical application [97] . clinical trials of the drug have also been carried out in china, which has a large number of infected people. favipiravir was approved for the treatment of influenza virus infection in 2014. through the clinical comparison of 200 covid-19 patients, it was found that the pneumonia symptoms of the patients receiving favipiravir were significantly improved, with no obvious side effects [98] . with the increasing number of studies on confirmed cases, some drugs with immunoregulatory and anti-inflammatory effects have also been used in the treatment of covid-19 patients. studies have found that the hypercoagulable state of blood is related to the severity of the disease. an anticoagulant drug dipyridamole (dip) can inhibit the replication of novel coronavirus, significantly improve the condition of severe patients, and play a positive role in the treatment of patients [63] . chloroquine, originally used to treat malaria, was found to inhibit the activity of the sars virus in vitro during the sars epidemic, mainly by altering the glycosylation of the viral receptor ace2, thereby affecting the virus to invade cells. recent studies have shown that the combined application of ridsivir and chloroquine can effectively inhibit the in vitro activity of sars-cov-2 [99] . in addition, chloroquine also has immunomodulatory effects, can inhibit the emergence and progression of viral diseases [100] . abidol has a broad spectrum antiviral effect on respiratory virus and can also inhibit the activity of sars-cov-2 in vitro [101] . currently, the treatment of new coronavirus pneumonia by abidol has entered into phase 4 clinical trials, and is likely to be applied in treatment in the future. many studies have shown that steroids can effectively suppress lung inflammation, but they can also inhibit the body's immune response and pathogen clearance [102] . steroids were widely used during the sars and mers outbreaks, but their side effects also had a huge impact on patients' health. in the current outbreak of sars-cov-2, the who on clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection recommend against the use of steroids unless specifically requested. if steroids are used, it is necessary to pay attention to monitor blood sugar, electrolytes during use, and may even appear symptoms of central excitation, such as insomnia, etc., can be symptomatic treatment. in general, steroid therapy is not recommended in the clinical treatment of sars-cov-2 [103] . fibrinolytic enzyme levels and increased activity were found in blood tests of confirmed patients. in vitro experiments, it was found that the serine protease inhibitor tmprss2 could prevent novel coronavirus from entering cells, significantly improving the clinical prognosis of patients [104] . vaccines are essential for preventing and treating infectious diseases. in addition to protecting healthy people from infection in an outbreak, vaccines can also help those infected rebuild their immune systems to control or cure the disease. currently, many research teams are developing new coronavirus vaccines. the university of pittsburgh study found a vaccine against sars-cov-2, which in animal studies has shown to make mice produce antibodies against sars-cov-2 and neutralize the virus [105] . in addition, some medical teams in china are using plasma from infected patients and traditional chinese medicine treatment regimens. a study using convalescent plasma therapy found that in four of five infected patients, body temperature returned to normal after the infusion of convalescent plasma, and in three patients, mechanical ventilation was not required after 2 weeks. although the number of cases in the study is small and the effect of convalescent plasma therapy still needs to be further verified, the effect is quite significant [57] . at present, there are successful cases of patients with new crowns all over the world, but it is difficult to carry out these protocols on a large scale due to the lack of systematic control analysis. therefore, we look forward to the early development of effective treatments [106, 107] .in the current situation of rapid spread of the epidemic, and there is no special treatment, effective epidemic prevention measures, to contain the spread of the epidemic is crucial. at present, china's "sealed" measures, restrictions on residents' travel and traffic control have played a significant role in controlling the spread of the epidemic. retrospective studies have found that traffic restrictions have significantly reduced the number of cases outside hubei [108] . for china, which is celebrating the traditional "spring festival", the traditional way of commemorating has been changed. all live parties have been cancelled, all scenic spots have been closed to tourists and crowds have been avoided by all means. meanwhile, in an effort to prevent further spread of the virus, the chinese government paid for the construction of two new hospitals in wuhan in 10 days to treat the infected, and sent medical teams across the country to provide support. for countries outside china, the monitoring of passing tourists has been increased at airports, ports and other transportation arteries, mainly including temperature detection and symptom screening, to avoid the occurrence of imported cases. at present, china's epidemic control is relatively stable, and its various measures have been copied by other countries [109] . although the source and transmission route of sars-cov-2 are not clear enough, the main method is still to control the population flow, the early detection of cases, isolation of cases, and isolation of susceptible groups, do a good job of disinfection measures to prevent the further spread of the disease. in addition to significantly limiting the spread of the disease, the closure has also resulted in significant improvements in the city's air quality [110] . in the event of a global pandemic, unnecessary travel should be avoided. in addition to limiting the movement of people and cutting off potential transmission, it is also important to protect individual residents from travel. in the early stage of the outbreak, due to the shutdown of various enterprises, insufficient production capacity of medical protective equipment such as masks and protective clothing, residents could not buy enough protective equipment, or even buy fake protective equipment, which could not play a protective role. a study of both surgical and cotton masks found that the virus appeared on the outside of the masks and did not completely prevent the virus from spreading, so hands must be disinfected when came into contact with the surface of the masks [36] .the general publicto prevent outbreaks during epidemics, it is usually necessary to isolate high-risk groups and areas, restrict travel and movement of people, and try to avoid transmission between people. since the outbreak, some measures have been taken all over the world, especially in china, where there has been a massive quarantine. for those who have experienced isolation, it is often an unpleasant experience. for uninfected people, during the period of isolation, they lose their freedom, lose their security, and tend to be impulsive and angry. during the period of isolation in various areas, there will often be conflicts between residents and epidemic prevention personnel. for those who are infected or may be infected, they will lose their freedom during the period of isolation, be separated from their families, and have insufficient understanding of their own illness. as a result, they are more likely to have psychological problems. in severe cases, they even give up their lives and commit suicide. therefore, for large-scale isolation, it must be implemented on the basis of adequate measurement. in response to the outbreak, tens of thousands of infected people in china, where quarantine measures were first introduced, did not experience mass unrest. instead, everyone was very cooperative with medical workers. people living in isolated homes and interacting with each other have been reported in the global media. good mental attitude is also crucial for the recovery of the disease.as front-line medical workers, during the epidemic period, their workload significantly increased and their work risk also significantly increased. therefore, their mental health needs more attention. high intensity medical work, lack of rest, but also need to undertake some patients do not understand the negative emotions, easy to focus on the work, poor emotional control and other uncomfortable performance. in order to timely understand the psychological health of medical staff, the anonymous psychological questionnaire can better help medical staff to solve psychological problems, help psychological counseling staff to better reduce pressure, enhance the information of medical staff, help them relieve psychological pressure, and better engage in medical work.in a word, in order to minimize and avoid psychological and social problems caused by isolation, the most important thing is to shorten the isolation time as far as possible, the longer the isolation, the greater the impact. scientific and reasonable isolation period may be able to make people more understanding, understanding, willing to accept, cooperate. in addition, the quarantined should actively provide more information to the quarantined during the quarantine period, and fully understand themselves' health conditions and the status of the epidemic control, so that the quarantined can reduce fear. in addition, the quarantined personnel during the period of isolation, the loss of economic resources, the loss of basic security of life. therefore, adequate material support is necessary for the quarantined people to meet their basic living needs and provide them with psychological comfort, making them more willing to believe that the national community can help them survive the epidemic [111] [112] [113] [114] .the emergence of new infectious diseases is a great challenge to global human health, public health and social development. in today's society with developed network technology, the sharing of epidemic information plays an important role in the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases [115] . under the strict epidemic prevention measures, the network and new media play an irreplaceable role of traditional media. but because cyberspace is a virtual world, there are real messages, but also false messages. some malicious organizations or individuals use false information to cause social panic and hinder the prevention and control of the epidemic. at this point, the mainstream media needs to clarify in a timely and accurate manner to prevent the situation from getting worse.the internet and new media have played a crucial role in the outbreak. 1、be the first to disclose the epidemic situation and play an early warning role. network media workers as social current affairs scouts, with keen eyes, flexible ears and wise mind, constantly monitor the situation around, and can be the fastest speed to convey all kinds of news to the public. 2、assisted traditional media to transmit epidemic information. after the outbreak of the epidemic, the public has an urgent need for information. new online media can disclose information timely, accurately and comprehensively, and some mainstream media can even invite the authorities to give professional explanations on the epidemic situation to meet the public's information needs. 3、actively guide public opinion, set up a correct value orientation. in a sudden outbreak, the general public will experience panic and negative behavior to some extent. in addition to timely transmission of information, mainstream network media can also carry out public opinion guidance, help the public correctly understand and analyze events, and cultivate the public's psychological bearing capacity.sars-cov-2 is a highly transmissible virus that has caused a worldwide epidemic. at present, there is no specific treatment plan, which can only reduce the incidence of new cases by reducing the crowd gathering, virus elimination, personal protection and other work. in the nearly 4 months since the outbreak was discovered, more than a million people have been infected worldwide. most countries around the world are testing their populations for potential cases, isolating them as nearly as possible and preventing the spread of the disease [116] . at first, it was thought that the virus would disappear in nature as temperatures rose, but the current global outbreak appears to be under control, with thousands of cases still being diagnosed in many countries every day. some scholars predict that sars-cov-2 may persist in nature and may erupt repeatedly each winter [117] . in this outbreak, china performed very well and actively supported other countries to fight the epidemic after its own outbreak was under control. facts have proved that china's action to close down the city is correct. the rapid control of the epidemic cannot be achieved without the joint efforts of the government and the public. the whole country and all walks of life have paid a huge price. most chinese companies have gradually resumed production and most schools have opened. wuhan, which had been "sealed", has reopened. to prevent a repeat of the outbreak, the chinese government has mandated that all returning workers and students be quarantined for 14 days, and that everyone in high-risk areas and occupations be tested for antibodies. besides have obvious symptoms of infection, the crowd, there are a large number of asymptomatic infection, although these people themselves in good health, but will be coronavirus is positive for nucleic acid detection, and these asymptomatic infections can still will infect the others around you, the prevention and control of epidemic diseases bring huge challenges, only symptomatic infection control is not enough [118] [119] [120] [121] . there are still many difficulties in preventing and controlling the epidemic. thousands of people are diagnosed every day in the united states, italy, russia and other countries. as the currently has the largest number of the united states, confirmed its domestic unemployment increased, many small and medium-sized enterprise bankruptcy, the stock market turmoil, several historic fusing, part of the supply of medical resources, cost huge financial resources and forced the united states to increase the printing of dollars. this has also had a major impact on countries with dollar reserves, with some governments declaring bankruptcy [122] . one breath, one destiny, for all countries in the world, only by working together to fight the sars-cov-2 and help each other can we overcome the difficulties and restore prosperity as soon as possible.abbreviations sars-cov: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; mers-cov: east respiratory syndrome coronavirus; sars-cov-2: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus2; who: the world health organization; ictv: the international committee on taxonomy of viruses; ace2: angiotensinconverting enzyme 2; cdc: centers for disease control and prevention; esr: erythrocyte sedimentation rate; ggo: ground-glass opacityin late december 2019, a novel coronavirus was officially named as sars-cov-2 by world health organization(who) and identified as the pathogen causing outbreaks of sars-like and mers-like illness in chinese city of wuhan, which was a zoonotic disease. as of march 13, 2020 , the outbreak of sars-cov-2 has been reported in many areas of the world, with more than 130,000 people infected [1] . with an alarmingly human-to-human transmissibility, the reproductive number of sars-cov-2 has been computed to around 3.28 [2] . according to the data in ngdc(national genomics data center), at 15:00(gmt+8) on march 13, 2020, 482 genomic variations of sars-cov-2 has been reported, which has aroused widespread concern.the b cell epitope of viral surface protein can specifically bind to the host's b cell antigen receptor and induce the body to produce protective antibody and humoral immune response. the discovery of epitopes is helpful to the development of sars-cov-2 vaccine and the understanding of sars-cov-2's pathogenesis [3] . 3 proteins embedded in the virus envelope of sars-cov-2 have been identified, spike(s) protein, envelope(e) protein, membrane(m) protein. at present, due to the lack of study of the crystal structure of surface protein of sars-cov-2, the study of epitopes is timeconsuming, power-consuming, cost and difficult [4] .in this work, we analyzed the surface protein of sars-cov-2, predicted the structures with bioinformatics methods. on the basis, we predicted the linear and conformational b cell epitopes, analyzed the conservation of the epitopes, the adaptability and other evolutionary characteristics of the surface protein, which provided a theoretical basis for the vaccine development and prevention of sars-cov-2.the primary structure and physicochemical properties of the s/e/m protein were analyzed. the results revealed that the s protein has an average hydrophilic index of -0.079( figure s1a) . on the basis of hydrophilicity, it also showed amphoteric properties. there was an outside-in transmembrane helix in 23 residues from position 1214 th to position 1236 th at the n-terminal( figure s2a ). the protein instability index was 33.01, which revealed the s protein was stable. the e protein has an average hydrophilic index of 1.128( figure s1b ). it was hydrophobic. an inside-out transmembrane helix in 23 residues from position 12 th to position 34 th at the n-terminal was predicted( figure s2b ). the protein instability index was 38.68, which revealed the e protein was stable. the m protein has an average hydrophilic index of 0.446( figure   s1c ). on the basis of hydrophobicity, it also showed amphoteric properties. there were two outside-in transmembrane helices, one was in 20 residues from position 20 th to position 39 th , the another one was in 23 residues from position 78 th to position 100 th , and an inside-out transmembrane helix in 20 residues from position 51 st to position 73 rd , at the n-terminal( figure s2c ). the protein instability index was 39.14, which revealed the m protein was stable.the optimal template for homology modeling of the s protein of sars-cov-2 was the s protein of sars(pdb id: 6acc.1), with the sequence identity of 76.47% and the gmqe score of 0.73. according to the evaluation of the structure by ramachandran plot (figure 1a) , 99.3% of the residues were located in the most favoured regions and the allowed regions, 0.7% of the residues were located in the disallowed regions, the high-energy regions( table 1) , which was possibly due to some energy was spent in the protein processing to make these residues enter the high-energy regions [5] . the result generally showed that the structure was reliable. the structure of s protein( figure 1b) of sars-cov-2 is a trimer, which can be divided into a tightly curled tail and a distributed head. the head is mainly composed of β-sheet, irregular curl and turn, which is exposed to the envelope of the virus, contributes to the formation of epitopes. the tail is mainly composed of several α-helices, part of which is embedded in the envelope, hinders the formation of epitopes.the optimal template for homology modeling of the e protein of sars-cov-2 was the e protein of sars(pdb id: 5x29.1), with the sequence identity of 91.38% and the gmqe score of 0.73. according to the evaluation of the structure by ramachandran plot( figure 1c ), 100% of the residues were located in the most favoured regions (table   1 ), indicating that the structure was reliable. the e protein of sars-cov-2 is a pentamer( figure 1d ), which can be divided into the concentrated transmembrane part and the head located outside the envelope. the head is mainly composed of α-helix, irregular curl and turn, which is exposed to the envelope, contributes to the formation of epitopes. the tail is mainly composed of long α-helix, most of which are embedded in the envelope, hinders the formation of epitopes.the optimal template for homology modeling of the m protein of sars-cov-2 was the effector protein zt-kp6-1(pdb id: 6qpk. 1. a), with the sequence identity of 20.00% and the gmqe score of 0.06. the sequence identity between the optimal template and the m protein of sars-cov-2 and the gmqe score are too low, so that the template is not suitable for homology modeling.all linear b cell epitopes of the surface protein were filtered according to the table s1 ) and abcpred(cut off to 0.51) (table s2 ). based on the results obtained with these methods and artificial optimization, 4 potential linear b cell epitopes of the s protein were predicted(table 2, figure 3a ), including 601-605 aa, 656-660 aa, 676-682 aa, 808-813 aa, and they were named as the epitope a, b, c, d, respectively; 1 epitope of the e protein was selected(60-65 aa) and named as the epitope f(table 2, figure 3c ); 1 epitope of the m protein was selected (211-215 aa) and named as the epitope h( table 2) .the conformational b cell epitopes of surface protein were predicted with ellipro (table s3 ) and seppa 3.0 (table s4) table 2 ). it is obvious that the region located on the head of the s protein( figure 3b ), which is the outside of sars-cov-2, making it easy to form an epitope. we selected it as a dominant conformational epitope and named it as the epitope e. additionally, one conformational b-cell epitope(60-65 aa) of e protein was predicted (table 2) , which is consistent with the epitope f of the e protein. similarly, this region located on the outside( figure 3c ), we selected it as a dominant conformational epitope and named g. however, the conformational epitope of the m protein could not be predicted due to the failure of credible homology modeling.the consurf server was used to predict epitope conservative sites with the structure of surface proteins and the alignment results in different datasets (table s5 ).all the epitopes of the s, e, m protein were absolute conservative among all sars-cov-2 sequences (table 3a , figure s3a -g). to further calculate the conservation of the epitopes in different coronavirus datasets, the representative sequences from sars-cov-2 were selected to participate in the human coronavirus dataset and the coronavirus dataset, due to amino acid sequences of some s or e or m protein were absolute conservative in sars-cov-2. the conservation was a little lower in human coronavirus than those of in sars-cov-2 (table 3b , figure s4a -g), and the epitope d was easy to mutate. the other epitopes were conservative and the epitope f/g was the most conservative one. as for the coronavirus (table 3c , figure s5a -g), in the 5 epitopes of s protein, 4 of which obtained the conservative score less than 1, ranging from -0.854 to 0.256. it showed that the epitope c with the minimum score is the most stable and not easy to mutate. besides, the score of the epitope d was 1.247, showing the relatively high possibility to mutate. the epitopes of the e protein were stable with the conservative score less than 1. the site conservation of the m protein could not be predicted due to the failure of credible homology modeling.sars-cov-2 caused huge impact to human production, living and even life, has become a major challenge confronting the whole world. development of vaccine is one of the effective means of prevention and treatment of the virus long-term. epitope vaccine is the trend of development of vaccine due to the advantages of strong pertinence, less toxic and side effects and easy to transportation and storage [6] . the determination of epitopes is the basis of the development and application of vaccine, and the clinical diagnosis and treatment. currently, the methods which were mainly used are x-crystal diffraction method, immune experiment method and bioinformatics method. the first two are time-consuming and laborious, the bioinformatics method is gaining more and more credibility among researchers [3, 6, 7] . there are many factors to be considered in the prediction of epitopes by bioinformatics method, such as the surface probablity and flexibility of the epitopes. at the same time, it is necessary to exclude the structurally stable and non-deformable α-helix, β-sheet, glycosylation sites which may obscure the epitopes or alter the antigenicity, etc [8] . even so, the predicted epitopes are still inaccurate [4] . compared with the current study on sars-cov-2, this work adopted various prediction methods and 3d structure databases developed in recent years, which were based on artificial neural network, hidden markov model(hmm), support vector machine(svm), etc, such as abcpred, bepipred2.0, seppa 3.0, iedb, etc. compared with prediction by a single method [9] or on the basis of epitopes of sars [10] , these methods and databases greatly improved the accuracy of prediction and had more bioinformatic meaning. we comprehensively analyzed the prediction results from the tools which were widely used, set up screening criteria on the basis of primary structure, secondary structure and tertiary structure, so that the prediction results would more accurate and reliable.the s protein, the e protein and the m protein are surface proteins of sars-cov-2, which have the potential as antigenic molecules. however, the current study on the epitopes prediction of sars-cov-2 [11] , due to the s protein has been reported to be the directly binding molecule of sars-cov-2 to ace2 [12] , the prediction of epitopes is mainly focusing on the s protein, with few studies on the e protein and the m protein.in this work, we analyzed the s protein, the e protein and the m protein, predicted their epitopes. on the basis, 7 b cell epitopes were predicted, including 2 conformational and 6 linear b cell epitopes, one of the conformational and one of the linear are coincide.all of the epitope a, b, c, d located on the surface of the tail of the s protein, which is relatively easy to bind. the epitope e is located on the head of the s protein, which is the key area where the s protein recognizes and binds to ace2 [12, 13] , has the potential to block the infection process. the epitope f and the epitope g located on the end of the head of the e protein, the two epitopes coincide, this may due to they are all consecutive and the secondary structure avoided the α-helix and the β-sheet. the epitope h is derived from the m protein, the structure and conservation could not be determined due to the inability to predict reliable structure. however, it could be known from the surface probablity scores that the epitope h is more likely to be located on the surface of the m protein.the higher the conservation score calculated by the consurf server is, the more likely the site is to be mutated in the evolutionary process. when the score<1, the site is likely to be a conservative site; when the score is between 1 and 2, the site is a site which is likely to be a relatively easy mutation; when the score>2, the site is likely to be an easy mutation site [14] . in the 7 epitopes obtained, all the epitopes of the s, e, m protein were absolute conservative among all sars-cov-2 sequences. for the human coronavirus dataset and the coronavirus dataset, only the average conservative score of the epitope d is higher than 1, which is prone to mutation. the epitope d should not be used as an epitope of the s protein. the conservation of the epitope h could not be calculated by the pdb file, the application value of the epitope h needed further experimental verification. although the epitopes could be integrally considered to be conservative, the independent residues of these epitopes could still easy to mutate.except the epitope e, all of 6 dominate epitopes contain 1-2 residues which has a conservative score higher than 1 (table 3c ), indicating that these residues were likely to be easy mutation sites. these residues mostly located at the head or the tail of the epitopes, therefore, the mutation of these residues should be paid attention to, and the length of the epitopes should be adjusted according to the actual effect in application.the scores of epitopes in different datasets were different, which could due to the quantity of sequences in the datasets and the structures were analyzed in different situations.in this work, we predicted 6 reliable epitopes: a, b, c, e, f/g and h. the reliability of the epitopes of the s protein was relatively better than that of the epitopes of the e protein and the m protein, indicating that the s protein is still the optimal choice for the prediction of epitopes and the development of vaccine. all of the 6 epitopes were able to achieve absolute conservation in sars-cov-2, and to achieve relative conservation in the data set, including sars, etc. therefore, the epitopes not only have the potential to be directly applied on the treatment in this disease, but also have the potential to prevent the possible threats caused by other types of coronavirus. in addition, although various factors of prediction were integrated in this work, more experimental data are needed to further verify whether all the 6 epitopes can induce the body to produce corresponding antibodies and generate specific humoral immunity, due to the limited data set and other factors.all of the analysis was based on the ncbi reference sequence: nc_045512.2.we obtained the sequence of s, e and m protein and its proximal sequences by blast, which got 420, 334 and 329 sequences in total from ncbi database respectively. we obtained the whole genome sequence of sars-cov-2 from genbank and gisaid(959 in total), which were used to be a dataset after genome annotation. the genome sequences, which performed mistakes of translation, were deleted.the physical and chemical properties of target protein were analyzed by the port-param tool in expasy [15] , including the primary structure of the target protein, molecular formula, theoretical isoelectric point, the protein instability index(the index<40 means the protein was stable), etc. online software, protscale, was used to deeply analyze the hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity of target protein and the distribution of hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity of polypeptide chains [15] . sars-cov-2 carried the s/e/m protein through the virus envelope, the transmembrane region of the protein was predicted online by tmhmm 2.0 [16] .with the amino acid sequences of the surface protein of sars-cov-2 of nc_045512.2 as templates, based on homology modeling method, we predicted the 3d structure through the online server swiss-model [17] , selected and optimized the optimal structure based on the template identity and gmqe value [17] , the rationality of the structure was evaluated by ramachandran plot [18] with pdbsum server. the structures were displayed and analyzed by swiss-pdb viewer v4.10 [19] .based on the structures, the conformational b cell epitopes were predicted by seppa 3.0 [20] and ellipro [21] respectively, and the common predicted conformational b cell epitopes from two methods were selected for the further analysis.the protean module of dnastar was used to predict the flexibility [21] , surface probablity [22] and antigenic index [23] of the target protein of sars-cov-2. the linear b cell epitope was predicted by abcpred [24] and bepipred 2.0 [25] respectively and the common predicted linear b cell epitopes from two methods were selected for the further analysis. coupled with the secondary structure, the tertiary structure and the glycosylation sites [26] etc, the linear b cell epitopes were finally determined.based on the pdb model and the multiple alignment result, we used the consurf server to analyze the conservation of amino acid sites of the epitopes online [27] . the conservation of epitopes on the surface protein of sars-cov-2 was analyzed by multiple alignment with mafft and logo was drawn with weblogo [28, 29] . [24] , the tail contains the basic elements required for the membrane fusion, the end of the tail is a transmembrane region and is embedded in the envelope of sars-cov-2. b. the 3d structure of the e protein predicted by homology modeling. it is a pentamer with ion channel activity [25] . its head is short, the middle of the tail is a transmembrane region which help the e protein embed in the envelope of sars-cov-2. c. the ramachandran plot analysis of the 3d structure of the s protein (without gly and pro). most residues located in the red (core) regions, and few in the white regions. d. the ramachandran plot analysis of the 3d structure of the e protein (without gly and pro). all of the residues located on the red(core) region. table 1 the plot statistics of the ramachandran plot  table 2 the composition and the antigenic index of the epitopes of sars-cov-2 table 3a the conservation of the epitopes in sars-cov-2 table 3b the conservation of the epitopes in human coronavirus table 3c the table 2 the composition and the antigenic index of the epitopes of sars-cov-2note: the scores of the epitope e and the epitope g were calculated by ellipro, the others were calculated by bepipred 2.0. note: the calculation was independent and based on the coronavirus data set.province of southern china in the fall of 2002. the pneumonia was highly contagious and affected those who had been in close contact with the patients, such as health care workers and family members of the patients. the etiologic agent of this atypical pneumonia was not identified initially, and in many patients, their chest condition rapidly deteriorated and resulted in death. 1 in late february 2003, the centers for disease control and prevention termed this condition severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). 1 in hong kong, sars was first seen in a tourist from southern china. he was a medical doctor who had been taking care of patients with atypical pneumonia in guangzhou and had had symptoms of a respiratory tract infection for 1 week before checking into a hotel in hong kong. this 64-year-old physician died from his chest infection 2 weeks later. those other hotel guests staying on the same floor as this medical doctor, as well as their visitors, contracted the disease through social contacts. when the visitors returned to their residences in hong kong, they brought with them the disease, which led to its dissemination. other guests staying at the hotel in hongkong-an american-chinese businessman who flew to hanoi, vietnam, 3 singaporeans, and 2 canadians-returned home, which then led to the outbreaks of sars in vietnam, singapore, and canada. 2 the 2 canadians who returned to toronto infected another 6 individuals. four of the infected individuals were from the same household, and the other 2 were infected while seeking medical treatment at the hospital where other patients were treated: 1 at an outpatient clinic and 1 at the emergency department. 3 contact tracing of 21 germans who had stayed in this hotel during this period was carried out, and 1 of them showed laboratory evidence of sars. thus, environmental contamination should be considered as a possible source of infection. 4 by early june 2003, the total number of patients affected globally was 8384, and of these, 770 had died. 5for a patient who has contracted sars, the incubation period ranges from 2 to 16 days; the median incubation period is 6 days. more than 99% of patients presented with a persistent fever of 38°c or higher, and approximately 70% had associated chills and rigor. a nonproductive cough was noted in 70% of patients, and approximately 50% of patients complained of myalgia and dyspnea. 6 less common symptoms included headaches, sputum production, sore throats, nausea and vomiting, and diarrhea. 7 physical examination of the chest shows inspiratory crepitus and percussion dullness, most of which is located in the base of the lungs. 1 as in all types of atypical pneumonia, the respiratory symptoms and clinical features of sars are disproportionately mild compared with the findings of imaging studies. indeed, less than 25% of patients with atypical pneumonia had upper respiratory tract symptoms; gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting and diarrhea were present in 10% of patients. 8 common laboratory features included elevated lactate dehydrogenase levels in about 70% of patients; lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia and hypocalcemia were found in approximately 50% of the patients. 6, 7 the identification of the etiologic organism among the conventional pathogens from patients with sars was not successful initially. eventually, a virus belonging to the family coronaviridae was isolated from a lung biopsy specimen and from a nasopharyngeal aspirate. subsequent investigations found that patients with sars showed a serologic response to this virus. 8 the family coronaviridae includes the genus coronavirus and torovirus. both of these are rna viruses that are known to cause a variety of diseases in human beings and animals. a major cause of the common cold is related to the coronavirus: types 229e and oc43. 9 these viruses occasionally are responsible for causing pneumonia in neonates or in elderly, debilitated, or immunocompromised patients. some animal coronaviruses such as the avian infectious bronchitis virus might cause respiratory, gastrointestinal, or neurologic diseases. 10 using the reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction technique (rt-pcr), investigators first identified the sequence of a polymerase gene from a coronavirus in the nasopharyngeal aspirate of 1 patient. 8 with the use of similar techniques, the isolation and identification of segments of this viral rna were also confirmed from the throat swabs of patients with sars. 11 the genome of the sars-associated coronavirus has now been sequenced, and this might be useful in the development of an antiviral agent or vaccine. 12imaging studies for patients with sars complements the clinical diagnosis. chest radiographs show a ground-glass appearance in the early phase of the infection, which rapidly progresses to focal or diffuse patchy involvement of the lung field (fig 1) . unilateral pulmonary consolidation is common in the early phase, although many of them extend bilaterally when the infection becomes more advanced. the radiographic opacities were most evident at 8 to 10 days after the onset of clinical symptoms. 13 high-resolution computed tomography may show focal or patchy consolidation before the abnormalities are seen on chest radiographs (fig 2) .the definition developed by the world health organization for the diagnosis of sars was broadly inclusive and nonspecific (table  1 ). 14 with the identification of the new coronavirus 15,16 and the rapid sequencing of its genome, 12,17 new molecular assays were developed for diagnosis. these included rt-pcr tests targeting the polymerase gene of the virus and serologic tests using the enzymelinked immunosorbent assay and immunofluorescent assay to detect the sars-associated coronavirus antibodies. the rt-pcr test is sensitive when specimens collected from the lower respiratory tract or stool are used. serologic tests are reliable when patients show a rising titer, although the seroconversion time lag may be long in some patients. 18 future research along this line should be directed at the development of a more sensitive test that would detect alter-chest x-ray film: there is focal consolidation in the right upper zone (arrows), which is an early feature in atypical pneumonia related to coronavirus infection.high-resolution computed tomography: an area of ground-glass opacification with superimposed reticulation noted in the posterior segment of the right upper lobe is another feature of atypical pneumonia that is part of the manifestation of severe acute respiratory syndrome.nate target genes such as the nucleocapsid gene, which is more abundant than the replicase gene of the virus. 19studies have identified coronaviruses genetically similar to those responsible for the sars infection in a number of animal species indigenous to the southern part of china and parts of southeast asia. these are the masked palm civet and the raccoon dog. another animal, the chinese ferret badger, also has antibodies against the sars coronavirus. these animals are traditionally considered to be delicacies for human consumption in markets throughout southern china. 20 the infection initially affected those individuals handling, slaughtering, and selling these animals as food or those individuals preparing the animals and serving them as food. the transmission of the viral particles leading to sars infection in patients occurred first through aerosols and droplets from respiratory secretions 21 and second through contamination of inanimate materials or objects by infectious respiratory secretions or body fluids such as feces, urine, saliva, and tears. 22 the coronavirus survives for 4 days in diarrheal stool and at least for 2 days on plastic surfaces at room temperature. it survives for less than 30 minutes in a cultural medium at 56°c and for less than 5 minutes in formaldehyde and 75% ethanol. 23 as a newly emerging infectious disease, sars is highly contagious and, on infection of an individual, leads to significant morbidity and mortality. the route of infection is through the mucosal membranes or conjunctiva. the mode of spreading is through direct contact of the virus, which is believed to be transported via aerosol and fine droplets. this has posed a significant threat to medical and nursing staff caring for these patients, especially when the patients are receiving ventilatory support, in which frequent suctioning to remove bronchial secretions is mandatory. postmortem examination of patients who died of sars showed that most had diffuse alveolar damage affecting the lungs. the morphological changes identified included bronchial epithelial denudation, loss of cilia, and squamous metaplasia. the increased presence of macrophages and hemaphagocytosis suggests that cytokine dysregulation was responsible for the clinical picture. 24 the therapeutic regimens developed included the combined use of an antiviral agent, ribavirin, and pulsed methylprednisolone. more than 50% of patients showed a rapid and sustained response, and 45% showed steady improvement with these management strategies. 25 with this treatment regimen, the associated morbidity was acceptable, and the patient mortality rate was markedly reduced.it has been reported that viral dna is present in the aerosol generated by co 2 lasers used to treat papillomavirus-infected verrucae. 26 recent studies 27 have shown that these viral particles are infective and may be responsible for the transmission of disease. thus, generation of aerosol should be reduced to a minimum during the care of patients with sars so that transmission of the coronavirus can be prevented. the size of aerosols considered to carry particles in a hospital environment is 0.3 to 0.5 µm, 28 and filters used to trap particles in the plume generated by laser therapy are 0.22 µm. 29 for health care workers taking care of patients with sars, one piece of personal protective equipment is the n95 mask, which will filter 95% of particles 0.1 to 0.3 µm. 30 the effort to reduce the spread of disease through direct contact or droplet contact in hospitals managing these patients involved generating, implementing, and enforcing a series of guidelines. 31 these included the identification and reporting of affected patients, dissemination of information to the public, enforcement of infection control measures, development of diagnostic tests, evaluation of therapeutic regimens, and the coordination of clinical services. these measures are primarily directed at tracing and isolating the contact of patients as soon as possible before they spread the virus further. 32 the various measures used to prevent transmission of infection by direct contact include the use of gloves, surgical masks, gowns, goggles, n95 masks, face shields, and total body coverings such as barrier man suits. the choice of personal protective equipment has to balance the need for adequate protection with the need to easily move and carry out various procedures during patient care. wearing masks, gowns, and gloves and frequent washing of hands were adequate in significantly reducing the risk of cross-infection during the care of patients with sars. 33 overall, about 20% of patients infected with sars require endotracheal intubation and ventilatory support during the course of the disease; the risk of disease transmission at the time of intubation is quite significant. 34 necessary precautions must be taken when caring for these patients who require the use of a ventilator. the risk of being infected with sars when carrying out surgical procedures such as tracheostomies or other emergency operations for infected patients is high. measures should be taken to reduce the risk of transmission during surgery.in the wards and intensive care units (icus) designated for the management of patients with sars or suspected sars, space must be adequate between beds to reduce the chance of direct or indirect contact. if possible, a screen should be placed between the beds. this will reduce the transmission of the coronavirus and the spread of disease.airflow in these wards and icus should have a negative pressure gradient, that is, the current of air flow should be directed from the outside to the interior of the rooms, thus reducing the transmis-severe acute respiratory syndrome sion of droplets to other areas in the hospital. a designated air outlet should be constructed to release air from the ward or icu to an uninhabited space within the hospital compound. nursing staff should wear water impermeable caps, gowns, and goggles and should wash hands frequently. gloves should be worn only when carrying out an assigned procedure and should be removed when the procedure is completed. all personal protective equipment should be disposed of properly after it has been used.when a patient needs ventilatory support in the icu, suction of the tracheobronchial tree should be carried out with a closed suction system. viral filters should be placed at the exhaust end of the ventilator system to prevent the dissemination of infected material to the rest of the system.a separate operating suite should be designated for patients with sars or suspected sars so that transmission of the infection to other patients who need an operative procedure can be avoided. the ventilation system of the operating room should also have a negative pressure gradient so that a controlled flow of air is allowed into the operating room from outside and is then directed to a designated exhaust, which will reduce the transmission of droplets to health care workers in the operating room.surgeons carrying out an operation on a patient with sars are advised to wear caps, n95 masks, goggles, gowns, gloves, and face shields. at the completion of the surgical procedure, this protective equipment should be removed gently and smoothly in the reverse order of how it was put on. careful removal of personal protective equipment is essential; otherwise, surgeons might contaminate themselves with the virus found on the outside of this protective equipment during the removal process.the use of equipment that produces aerosols or droplets should be limited, as it might contribute to the spread of the virus. this kind of equipment includes nebulizers, suction devices, and flexible endoscopes used for the examination of the upper aerodigestive tract.nebulizers should not be used at all, and the use of suction devices should be limited; if necessary, a closed suction system device should be used. viral filters should be used whenever applicable so that the chance of spreading droplets and viral particles is reduced. endoscopic examinations, in particular nasopharyngoscopy and bronchoscopy, should be performed only when absolutely necessary because the instruments used in these procedures have suction systems that produce aerosols that could contribute to the spread of the virus.endotracheal intubation of a patient with sars is risky for health care workers. 21 the physician and nursing staff should wear full protective equipment: caps, n95 masks, goggles, gowns, gloves, and face shields. patients should receive adequate oxygen before being completely paralyzed and immobilized at the time of endotracheal intubation. the use of suction devices should be minimized, and viral filters should be used whenever applicable. flexible bronchoscope-assisted intubation is not advisable.the surgeon contributes to airway management in the following 3 circumstances:1. perform a tracheostomy for patients with sars in need of a ventilator 2. when on standby for an expectedly difficult intubation in a patient with sars 3. when attending a failed emergency intubation in a patient with sars when indicated in a patient who is receiving mechanical ventilation, a surgical airway should ideally be done as an elective tracheostomy. for an expectedly difficult intubation, a surgeon should be on standby in readiness for immediate intervention if needed. in the case of failed attempts at emergency intubation, the surgeon is called on for urgent surgical airway insertion. 35 the staff of the tracheostomy team should include 1 surgeon, 1 intensivist or anesthetist, and 1 standby staff member, either a physician or a nurse. every member of the team should wear full personal protective equipment, including a cap, an n95 mask, goggles, a gown, gloves, and a face shield. surgeons should wear an additional pair of gloves and surgical boots. they should also wear 1 disposable, water-impermeable surgical gown next to the body and a second water-impermeable gown externally.the patient should receive adequate oxygenation before the procedure and then should be completely paralyzed to abolish any movement, especially reflex coughing during the incision on the trachea and during the insertion of the tracheotomy tube.all forms of assisted ventilation must be stopped before the tracheotomy.open suction for tracheal secretions should not be used, and diathermy should be used sparingly. jet ventilation is prohibited under these circumstances.in case of a failed endotracheal intubation, either electively or under emergency conditions, manual ventilation with a tight mask is given until the patient has attained adequate oxygenation. the surgeon can then decide on either a cricothyroidotomy or a tracheostomy.caused by the coronavirus, sars was a new disease in early 2003; initially, there was much controversy concerning the diagnosis, patient management, and isolation strategies. in hong kong, the total number of patients who were admitted to hospitals because of sars was 1755, and 299 of them died of the disease. among those who died, 8 were health care workers; these included 4 physicians, 1 nurse, and 3 other hospital support staff. after the epidemic, 3 official inquiries were carried out by the government and related authorities. these have led to the resignations of the secretary for health, welfare, and food and the chairman of the hospital authority, who are responsible for the management of public hospitals in hong kong. during the epidemic, the people of hong kong became acutely aware of public heath, the hygienic status of their living environment, and the importance of the nature and devastation of this infectious disease. this alertness has continued to the present and has helped to make hong kong a much healthier city.from this moment until that in which the enemy shall have been driven from the soil of the republic, all frenchmen are in permanent requisition for the service of the armies. the young men shall go to battle; the married men shall forge arms and transport provisions; the women shall make tents and clothing and shall serve in the hospitals; the children shall turn old linen into lint; the aged shall betake themselves to the public places in order to arouse the courage of the warriors and preach the hatred of kings and the unity of the republic. (halsall 2020) this call for mass conscription (literally, a 'mass uprising') would transform the french military, replacing the professional army within the year with a vast, national army of 800,000 trained soldiers made up of citizens. but the levée meant more than the creation of a mass army, being built on two key ideas. the first was a new relationship to the state, with an implicit post-revolutionary compact whereby all those united and protected as citizens owed a similar duty of protection to the state: from now on, the body of the citizen was intimately tied to the survival of the body politic. the second, following from this, was that the entire society would be mobilized to support the military. as ernst junger notes here, 'the image of war as armed combat merges into the more extended image of a gigantic labour process': now the military army is joined by-and to-'the modern armies' of commerce, transport, foodstuff and munitions, until 'there is no longer any movement whatsoever-be it that of the homeworker at her sewing machine-without at least indirect use for the battlefield' (junger 1991, 126) .the levée-en-masse transformed warfare, with conscription and mass armies becoming common and, during conflict, states increasingly transforming themselves into war-time economies, diverting huge resources to military service. wwi saw the fruition of these processes, with the mass mobilization of populations for mass warfare, supported by the mass mobilization of home industries. for some, this mobilization was insufficient. in his 1930 essay 'total mobilization', ernst junger complained of germany's only 'partial' mobilization (1991, 125) . for revolutionary conservatives like junger, true greatness required a 'total mobilization' with its 'unlimited marshalling of potential energies', a mobilization 'that requires extension to the deepest marrow ' (1991, 126) . this mobilization was itself a reflection of the kinetic rhythms of the machine age:it suffices simply to consider our daily life, with its inexorability and merciless discipline, its smoking, glowing districts, the physics and metaphysics of its commerce, its motors, airplanes, and burgeoning cities. with a pleasure-tinged horror, we sense that here, not a single atom is not in motion-that we are profoundly inscribed in this raging process. total mobilization is far less consummated than it consummates itself; in war and peace, it expresses the secret and inexorable claim to which our life in the age of masses and machines subjects us. (1991, 128) the totally mobilized peace of modernity, therefore, prefigured and produced the total mobilization of modern war. junger's hopes for a new german youth who would throw themselves into this project of renewal-through-mobilization soon found its expression in nazism's blitzkrieg and the 'total mobilization' of wwii that definitively erased the difference between civilian life and military action.though conscription continued in the west in the postwar period, gradually the experience of war changed for its populations, becoming more remote from everyday life. by the time of the 1991 gulf war, smaller, professional armies dominated again, defined now by their total mobilization not of men, but of technologies. by then, war itself was in crisis in the west, with questions being asked as to whether western societies could sustain casualties and still support military action. the solution was a new phase in the history of mobilization. with the military and media collaborating in the gulf to produce and disseminate the global spectacle, domestic populations would now be mobilized as its audience. in this new levée-en-masse-medias, the public's role was to watch television: to consume the war, to follow the press briefings, marvel at the 'smart-bomb' footage and 'clean war' and applaud the military operation.in this new imploded home front, 'war' now meant enjoying the scopic pleasures of a video-game war (taylor 1998, 75; knightley 2000, 483) , with little risk for western combatants and none at all for its viewers. a steve bell cartoon of the time showed a penguin grandfather replying to his grandchild's question of what he did in the war with, 'me? i watched television and i'm proud of it!' (merrin 2019, 24) . it was a model of war and mass-media mobilization that would dominate in the west in the following decades, through kosovo in 1999 , afghanistan in 2001 and iraq in 2003 , albeit one increasingly left behind as the 'war on terror' developed. with the move to unseen drone strikes and special-forces operations, it was better if no-one knew what was happening; hence, the public were effectively stood down. that demobilization would last until the 2020 covid-19 lockdown which inaugurated a new era of total demobilization.when the 2020 coronavirus pandemic broke, political leaders immediately reached for military metaphors. xi jinping vowed to wage a 'people's war' on the virus; in a speech on 16 march, emmanuel macron repeatedly declared france was 'at war'; on 17 march, italy's special commissioner for the coronavirus emergency called for a 'war-time economy'; on 18 march, donald trump presented himself as a 'wartime president'; in his 23 march address to the nation, uk pm boris johnson told the public this was 'a fight' in which 'every one of us is directly enlisted', whilst on 6 april, the us surgeon general warned of the 'pearl harbour moment' coming for this generation (see serhan 2020; momtaz 2020; woodward 2020). of course, as many equally quickly pointed out, 'war' metaphors were neither accurate or helpful, as war is a purely human phenomenon, representing a clash of wills, to which a human solution is always possible, whilst the victims' deaths did not represent a personal failure to fight (serhan 2020 ). freedman notes all this but nevertheless suggests 'there are similarities between pandemics and war, especially if a realistic view of modern war is adopted' in terms of effects and governmental responses (freedman 2020) . but perhaps we can go even further? perhaps our concept of 'war' itself needs redefining: perhaps, biologically, this is a war?in 2000, the atmospheric chemist paul crutzen declared 'we are in the anthropocene' (ellis 2018, 1)-a proposed, new era marking the impact of humanity on the world, distinguished from the holocene by the record of human activity in the geological strata. we have long known that humans have transformed the world and have done so since huntergathering times, but recent decades have seen a growing awareness that the scale and speed of human transformation has exponentially increased. though the concept of the anthropocene remains controversial, with disagreements as to what geological records to accept and when the anthropocene began (with the mid-twentieth century being seen by many as a key moment), the broader trends it identifies in climate change, systemic pollution, the transformation of habitats and ecosystems and the loss of biodiversity are beyond dispute.there is, of course, a long history of pandemics and plagues, stretching from the earliest time, through outbreaks like leprosy in eleventh-century europe, the black death in mid-fourteenth-century europe, the first of seven cholera pandemics in 1817, the chinese plague from 1855, the 1875 fiji measles pandemic, the 1889 russian flu, the 1918 spanish flu, the 1957 asian flu, aids/hiv after 1981, through to contemporary outbreaks such as sars. many were spread by human activity and can thus be seen to have an anthropogenic element. perhaps the most famous example here is the fifteenth-sixteenth-century 'columbian exchange' which included the transferral of small pox and other diseases to the americas, killing up to 56 m people and eradicating entire civilizations (ellis 2018, 95-96) .the global risk of a new pandemic had been known for decades, even appearing in popular culture. the first episode of the bbc's (1975) show survivors opened with a flu virus escaping an asian laboratory, globally spreading via air travel and ending, 50 minutes later, with 99% of the world's population dead. health organization warnings of a global influenza pandemic became common over the following decades, being reinforced by the outbreak of sars there is a very real threat of a rapidly moving, highly lethal pandemic of a respiratory pathogen killing 50-80 million people and wiping out nearly 5% of the world's economy. a global pandemic on that scale would be catastrophic, creating widespread havoc, instability and insecurity. the world is not prepared (ó mongáin 2020) meanwhile, every year the world health organization (who) has released its 'threats to global health' report, with the 'threat of a global influenza pandemic' appearing in its top-ten list in 2019 (who 2019).covid-19 proved to be an equivalent threat, launching its own microbiological assault on the human system. like many pandemics, its scale, impact and potential long-term effects eclipsed that of many 'wars'. on 5 april, the total uk hospital deaths reached 5373 (itv 2020), a figure exceeding, in just over a month, the death toll of british military servicemen across all conflicts since 1945. with the 9 april hospital toll of 980 deaths (tidman 2020) , the uk lost more lives in 1 day than servicemen killed in the near-38-year northern ireland deployment, or than were lost in the falklands war, gulf war, kosovo war, afghanistan war and iraq war put together. in the usa, on 29 april, the death toll of 58,964 exceeded within months the us death toll in the decades-long vietnam war. the deadliest day of that war, 31 january 1968, saw only 246 servicemen killed, compared to days such as 8 may when the usa reported 2746 dead (mulraney 2020). by 14 may, more americans had died from covid-19 (over 75,000) than in the vietnam, afghanistan and iraq wars put together (65,096) (bbc 2020i).where baudrillard in 1991 explained how the 'war' in the gulf was really a 'nonwar' (baudrillard 1995) , here the nonwar of covid-19 had all the appearance of a war in its casualties, impact and long-term implications as a global, biological attack on the entire species. the covid-19 pandemic is essentially anthropogenic, as a zoonotic disease most likely arising out of changes in habitat and interaction with humans. whilst the wuhan wet market is not the proven source of the outbreak, these markets are an important example of humanly created transmissible environments. though the dating of the anthropocene is still open and though earlier anthropogenic pandemics have existed, we can see that covid-19 is the first global pandemic requiring a truly global response since our recognition of the anthropocene. it is the first anthropocenic world war.covid-19 was intimately linked with globalization and the hyperconnected economy. wuhan, a city of 11 million, is a major transportation hub, a centre of manufacturing and, as part of the post-2004 rise of central china plan, a hub of hi-tech production and research. benefitting from the movement of rural workers to urban centres, the growth of cheap industrial labour, and developments in it, communications, transport and shipping, it is closely tied to the global economy and globalization (liu 2020) . even the wet market was linked to globalization in serving both the growing working population and in its trade in exotic animals for the wealthy. despite this global character, few in the west understood the risks. western exceptionalism, the belief that the virus would be contained in asia and the unthinkability of similar restrictions meant the threat was ignored.those hit first were the countries most connected to china and the most globally connected. with its spread, the global system itself went into lockdown: global travel stopped, travel restrictions and quarantine were imposed and each nation forced its populations indoors. with it came a lockdown on international relations. the us-iran hostility that, only weeks earlier, many feared would escalate into 'world war iii' (bogart 2020) was now forgotten, with trump warning against any resumption (barnes 2020) . conflict shifted instead into posturing and soft power, from trump's insistence on calling it the 'chinese virus' and attacks on the who as pro-chinese (al jazeera 2020; shear 2020), to china's post-lockdown reframing of themselves as benevolent global providers of ppe (the economist 2020).the lockdown of the international order was also a lockdown of events, at least as far as national audiences were concerned, as covid-19 crowded out all other news. the only international news of note was how other nations were coping with their own lockdowns. the global system of communications was ruptured by the virus. a system defined by motion-by the hypercirculation of goods, commodities, people, money, data and communications-was fundamentally interrupted, slowed down and even paused, forced in its extremes into idleness, into furlough, even hyperredundancy. the whole remained in motion, but with its systems disrupted-with employment and consumption locked-downit lacked both its meaning and the means to complete its circuits.the greatest symbol of this pause of the global was the fate of oil: the source of fuel for all global transport and motion. demand crashed in the global lockdown and on 20 april for the first time ever, the price of us oil went negative, falling from $18 a barrel to $38 (ambrose 2020a). crucially, the cause of that crash was not simply the lack of demand but the immobility of the oil itself, as places to store the oversupply ran out. now, tankers that a few weeks earlier were crossing the world laden with up to 2 m barrels sat motionless around the coasts of the world, full of the very means of movement itself (ambrose 2020b).war, at its heart, is motion. paul virilio, the theorist of dromocracy, is fond of quoting sun tzu's claim 'speed is the essence of war', as well as frederick the great's dictum, 'to win is to advance' (virilio 1986, 133; 55) . indeed, war's violence is, first of all, the violence of movement itselfthe speed of assault-recall, again, sun tzu: 'the onset of troops is like the rush of a torrent which will even roll stones along in its course' (sun tzu 2020, ch.5, part 12). war, therefore, is the rapid transferral of bodies and energies from one point in space and time to another point already occupied by other bodies, with the aim of displacing or destroying them. it is a kinetic phenomenon with the destructive force and character of a projectile: one that begins and ends with movement, with mobilization and demobilization.in the covid-19 world war, however, the entire war was demobilization. within each nation, the mass of the population was immediately demobilized, being asked to do nothing, to not leave the house, to not move and to remain essentially inactive. in a reversal of the levée-en-masse and of junger's call for 'total mobilization', this global, specieswide world war produced instead the total demobilization of the population. the essence of war reverses here from speed into immobility and inertia. whereas, in modern societies, junger suggests 'not a single atom is not in motion', ours immediately dedicated itself to eradicating it. if, for virilio, the speed of contemporary weapons technologies brings an advantage over the enemy, in allowing us 'to gain fractions of seconds ' (1986, 137) , this was a war that worked in the opposite direction, with demobilization hoping to gain weeks, even months, worth of advantage. whereas marinetti proclaimed that the futurists would glorify war, describing it as 'the world's only hygiene' (marinetti 2009, 22) , here the proto-fascists desire to destroy human life reversed into a new defence of the human against covid-19: for today, for the period of viral infection, hygiene became the world's only war.if this was the potential end of the species, it was a curious apocalypse, lacking, in the west at least, the pain, violence and collapse of civilization we had expected. here, for many, the end was merely an entropic sloth, anaesthetized with alcohol and marked by longer hair, weight gain and binge watching. this was the apocalypse as a dull sunday afternoon-as alan partridge's famous appeal to the heavens: 'sunday, bloody sunday!' (brand 2014) . for virilio, when wwi ended as a war of space-as a war of movement-bogged down in the stalemate of the trenches, it became instead a 'war of attrition', a war of time, where 'duration was survival ' (1986, 52-53;56) . this was our fate too. with the lockdown closing down space and movement, this world war was turned into a war of time with duration again representing survival. to live meant to bunkerdown: to cut oneself off from space and survive time. life was reduced to endurance, and especially to the endurance of oneself.with the national invasion of the virus and the lockdown of events, there emerged instead a global civil war. each infected nation withdrew, closed itself off and declared their own war on the virus. to win it, each nation had, first of all, to wage war on human life itself-on our very 'being-in-the-world'.this global, legal lockdown was historically unprecedented. whole nations immediately transformed themselves into carceral societies-or rather, in our compliance, into self-incarcerated societies. this was a self-imposed house-arrest, a concept to be understood only secondarily in its legal sense, for the word 'arrest' means, first of all, 'to cause to stop' (from the late fourteenth-century-old french, 'arester', 'to stay, stop', with its roots in the latin 'arrestare', meaning 'to stop, restrain'), and this was our primary experience. this stopping is traditionally a punishment, as the arrested person is imprisoned and refused space to move, whilst motionlessness has also been used as torture-central to the 'enhanced interrogation techniques' used against iraqi prisoners at abu ghraib, for example, were 'stress positions', handcuffing people into painful, prolonged immobility. here, therefore, we put ourselves under house arrest: we stopped ourselves, locked ourselves in and placed ourselves into stress positions, torturing the public body for weeks with enforced immobility. or perhaps this was more medieval in tone-responding to the plague-like, miasmic threat with a self-siege warfare, with each individual retreating behind their walls to hold out with their stores?this atmospheric element is important. sloterdijk's 2002 book terror from the air explores the movement in the twentieth century from targeting the body to targeting the environment and the new 'military climatology' that resulted (sloterdijk 2009, 19) . following heidegger, he emphasizes how our 'being-in-the-world' was always a 'being-in-the-air or more exactly a being-in-the-breathable' (2009, 48) , tracing how chemical warfare, nazi gas chambers and nuclear weapons created an 'unliveable milieu ' (2009, 16) , devastating the 'life world ' (2009, 55) . for virilio, similarly, the 'new climactic reality' of environmental warfare and bombardment in wwii led, in response, to the discovery of the 'bunker form'-our new 'survival machines' (virilio 1994, 39) . 'just as there are two times, the time of peace and the time of declared war', virilio argues, 'there are two atmospheres and not just one': those we can breathe in and those which kill us (1994, 42) . hence, bunkers became 'a shelter for man in this critical period, the place where he buries himself to subsist ' (1994, 46) . so, in this lockdown, the terror from the air became a terror of the air, and military bunker architecture was democratized and generalized to all, as we locked ourselves in our 'casement' (literally, a 'stronghouse') (1994, 46) . being-in-the-world became being-inthe-bunker, with sloterdijk's claim that 'we are condemned to being-in …' describing now not only the fatality of phenomenological reality, but the fate of the body within an unbreathable world.there was something dystopian about the resulting exodus from public space, echoing science-fiction warnings of abandoned landscapes, from the domed, bunker cities of logan's run and blake's 7 set on a ruined earth, to the environmental catastrophes of ballard's the drowned world and the drought, to the emptied urban landscapes of the twilight zone's 'where is everybody?', wyndham's the day of the triffids, i am legend and the walking dead. but this was a dream our military had long planned for us. during the cold war, samuel cohen helped invent the neutron bomb, an 'enhanced radiation weapon' (erw), which he claimed was more humane in killing fewer humans and leaving buildings intact (strauss 2014 ). covid-19 had a curiously similar effect: the explosion of this enhanced biological weapon and our desperate bunkerization showing us a world without us in it. stories spread of the environment's recovery-the reduction in industrial emissions (regan 2020) and animals reclaiming the world-and a new photographic-essay genre emerged of covid-19-emptied cities (liubchenkova 2020; manning 2020 ; the guardian 2020). these realized for us an impossible vision: a post-human sublime of our own perfectly preserved and lost civilization; a pompeii-of-the-present we could appreciate online from within the self-buried safety of our survival machines.it was a self-burial anticipated in e.m. forster's 1909 novella 'the machine stops' which tells the dystopian tale of a future humanity, locked into vast, underground, honeycomb tiers of individual, hexagonal 'cells', cut off from the real world, with fully automated services and tubes and screens bringing everything to the immobilized individual, under the aegis of a single, networked 'machine' (forster 2013, 5; 15; 43; 47) . here, there is a 'terror' of physical contact, human proximity and real-world experience (2013, 12;15) , hence vashti's horror at the idea of meeting her son, as 'people never touched one another. the custom having become obsolete owing to the machine' (2013, 18) . it is a world where travel outside is illegal, where the greatest threat is 'homelessness'-being forced outside-and where muscles are discouraged (2013, (21) (22) (23) . instead, each individual self-isolates, connected through the machine to all they need, busying themselves consuming content and producing their own for their 'several thousand' friends (2013, 50) . it is a world that is instantly recognizable. this is the world too of virilio's 'terminal citizen' (virilio 1997, 21) . we pass, virilio says, from a society of speed to a society of immobility and inertia (1997, 20) , moving with the 'transmission revolution' to the final human vehicle, the 'static' audio-visual vehicle: 'the body terminal of that interactive being who is both transmitter and receiver ' (1997, 21; 11) for virilio, this immobilized, 'generalized interactivity' (1997, 21) is a threat to our experience:paul klee hit the nail on the head: 'to define the present in isolation is to kill it'. this is what the teletechnologies of real-time are doing: they are killing 'present' time by isolating it from its here and now, in favour of a commutative elsewhere that no longer has anything to do with our 'concrete presence' in the world, but is the elsewhere of a 'discreet telepresence' that remains a complete mystery. (1997, (10) (11) it is hard to read this without thinking of our lockdown in an isolated, hyperextended present, disconnected from the real experience of time and space and engaging through real-time interfaces. for virilio, this loss of the terrestrial body has another, theological meaning: as the loss of motion ('anima'-the root of 'animation') is also the loss of our soul (latin: 'anima') (1997, 25) . hence, the body terminal, in only being 'mobile on the spot ' (1997, 20) , is fundamentally a terminal body.in committing us to this condition, therefore, the lockdown saved lives by killing life. our 'survival machines' became our sarcophagi, ultimately threatening to be more dangerous than going out. as virilio says, 'stasis is death ' (1986, 67) .the key battleground in this war against covid-19 was the reversed home front of everyday life. where previously the 'front line' was the battlefield, supported by logistics and medical aid, with the 'home front' far removed, now the home-front was the battlefield, with the front line even reversing behind this to encompass the medical and logistical workers (the health and care staff and gig-economy workers) who risked their lives to keep the home front alive. in recognition of this service, uk tabloid the sun began a campaign to award the george cross media for gallantry to the nhs itself (fairbairn 2020) .'everyday life' had long been theorized by post-war western marxists as a key site of ideological contestation and a space requiring liberation (lefebvre 2014 (lefebvre , 2016 vaneigem 1994) . marx, in the german ideology, famously ruminated on the future eradication of the division of labour for a life allowing one to hunt, fish, rear-cattle and criticize as one wished, 'without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or critic' (marx 2020) , whilst the situationists dreamed of a liberation from drudgery and the opportunity for selfrealization. as raoul vaneigem convincingly explains:in an industrial society which confuses work and productivity, the necessity of producing has always been an enemy of the desire to create. what spark of humanity, of possible creativity, can remain alive in a being dragged out of sleep at six every morning, jolted about in suburban trains, deafened by the racket of machinery, bleached and steamed by meaningless sounds and gestures, spun dry by statistical controls, and tossed out at the end of the day into the entrance halls of railway stations, those cathedrals of departure for the hell of weekdays and the nugatory paradise of weekends where the crowd communes in a brutish weariness? from adolescence to retirement each twenty-four hour cycle repeats the same shattering bombardment … (vaneigem 1994, 52) against this bombardment, vaneigem hymned the 'rage to live', but covid-19 perhaps exposed these dreams. though some spent their time refining their craft skills, for most the experience of liberation from both the division of labour and consumerist leisure owed more to blaise pascal's 1670 claim that 'all of humanity's problems stem from man's inability to sit quietly in a room alone' (pascal 1995, 37) . with selfisolation, sartre's 'hell is … other people!' reversed itself upon ourselves (sartre 2000, 223) .what saved us from the entropic death of bunkerized terminal boredom was our activity: our participation in this civil war. this was a complex, intra-state conflict defined not only by the fight of the human body and the body politic with the virus, but also by the division within the population between those promoting demobilization and those resisting it. unlike in 1991 where the gulf war levée-en-masse-medias mobilized the far-removed western public as audiences, in this imploded home-front-line the web 2.0 revolution transformed us into active participants in the war: into vital keyboard warriors whose primary targets were not the virus but each other. in the uk, this meant the devotion of the public to the creation of both feel-good and disciplinary propaganda.here, the uk public joined the government and media in producing and sharing heart-warming, humorous and human-interest stories, as well as memes, gifs, inspirational quotes and videos to raise war-time morale. hence, the endless media and social media paid attention to pensioners walking up stairs to raise money, 'captain tom' walking round his garden, care-home residents singing and public applause for health workers (young 2020; bbc 2020a; kiddey 2020; robertson 2020). in this war-time lockdown, a simulacral 'blitz-spirit' dominated uk sentiment, celebrating public resilience and 'suffering' and treating events such as boris johnson's recovery and the birth of his child as rousing victories. the 8 may 75th anniversary of ve day seemed to implode time itself, with the street parties, singalongs, johnson's simulated churchillianism and the queen's speech seeming to convince people it was 1945 and that they personally had done their duty and achieved something great. one family even retreated into 1945, banning technology, wearing period costume and running nighttime air-raid drills (johnston 2020) .the bbc played a key role here. just as the british broadcasting company, afraid of losing its licence in 1926, took the opportunity of the general strike to secure its future by turning itself into a compliant government mouthpiece (williams 1998, 98-101) , so too, in 2020, did a bbc that only weeks earlier was facing an 'existential threat' to its service and funding (barker and di stefano 2020) take the opportunity of covid-19 to demonstrate its value as a national unifier and feel-good, war-time propagandist. whilst 60% of the population thought it was doing a good job (fletcher et al. 2020) , on key issues such as austerity-era underfunding, lack of pandemic preparedness, testing, ppe stocks and the care-home death toll the government received only light-touch questioning from the bbc, whose bulletins favoured instead sentimental, diversionary human-interest stories and charity efforts. their interest in 'captain tom' transformed the national shame of needing a 99-year-old to walk round his garden to fund basic ppe for nhs staff into the feel-good media event of the lockdown (bbc 2020b).the participant-warrior's role, however, was not just to produce positive propaganda. they also devoted themselves to public-policing, denouncing any activity departing from the legal code of the lockdown (uk government 2020a), discovering the 'enemy within' in anyone abusing the 'permitted exercise' or 'reasonable excuse' to leave the house. social media feeds, twitter, community facebook groups and messaging apps burned with outrage at the 'covidiots', social-shaming food waste, poor social distancing, poor queuing, unnecessary shopping, park sunbathing and ball-games (see carr 2020; layton 2020; noor 2020). and opposed to this were all those determined to resist the code and its policing, those determined to travel and exercise, those unhappy at the new police state and those annoyed by the social-shamers. across the whole range of social media, covid etiquette and shaming flame wars played out in real time, all accompanied by photographs of offenders. just as virilio claims that today 'arms of communication' prevail over 'arms of destruction ' (2002, 113-114) so, in this lockdown, we were simultaneously the demobilized, telespectators of this war against the human body and the active, hypermobilized, telepresent producer of our own informational civil war, deploying our personal arms of communication against the covidiot enemy.this informational civil war included the online battle against conspiracy theories. the us and european far-right, especially, promoted disinformation and the scapegoating of particular groups (doward 2020; parveen 2020; wilson 2020) , whilst others promoted anti-5g claims (tempterton 2020) , leading to phone masts being vandalized and phone workers abused (waterson and hern 2020) . coronavirus 'deniers' spread their message around facebook, youtube, instagram and whatsapp (randall 2020) , prompting takedown actions and anti-fake news responses by platforms and governments (carrie wong 2020a; chadwick 2020a, b; hern 2020; pa media 2020; bbc 2020c). but the civil war also had an important, on-the-ground reality. virilio's theory of 'dromocracy' (of governments of speed) suggests different speed classes-different 'orders of speed' (1986, 119)exist: hence, the lockdown class division between those who did not have to move and those who did: the health and care workers, delivery drivers, and warehouse and retail workers who faced the risk of exposure and death; and hence, the division too between those for whom money continued to move into their accounts and those for whom it stopped.then, there were the other inequalities in the civil war, with higher death rates for those in poorer areas, for black and asian minority ethnic people, and for men, the elderly and those with existing medical conditions (bbc 2020d; siddique and marsh 2020; duncan 2020). the uk government especially waged a war on the vulnerable, preparing for the expected surge in hospital demand by mass evacuating the ill and weak back into their homes with little or no care, or into care homes, which became centres of infection. for weeks, the protection of care workers and rising number of care-home deaths were ignored, with the latter left out of official hospital-death figures (bbc 2020e). add to this, the problems of the elderly, ill or vulnerable getting supplies; the rise in mental-health problems including self-harm and suicide (mills 2020; mohdin 2020) ; families going hungry (iqbal 2020); a rise in domestic violence (graham-harrison et al. 2020) ; lockdown murders; the digital divide of those without adequate internet access (kelly 2020) ; the rise in problem-drinking (campbell 2020); a rise in online child exploitation and child abuse imagery (solon 2020) ; increased online videos of abuse and nonconsensual sex (grant 2020) ; and an increase in cybercrime with new, covid-19-related scams (uk government 2020b). we had long got used to the idea of civilian 'collateral damage' in the wars we watched on television, but in this imploded home-front-line, the collateral damage was us.in the west, the usa experienced the most intense covid-19 civil war. instead of unifying the country, trump, more concerned with his polls and re-election, seemed determined to exculpate himself, blame others and push political and cultural divisions. having failed to act for 6 weeks, leading to the world's highest death toll (pilkington and mccarthy 2020) , trump used his press conferences to attack political opponents and journalists (spocchia 2020; reuters 2020; smith 2020b) , to play his own 'propaganda video', praising himself (c-span 2020) and to divert anger towards china and the who (bbc 2020g; smith 2020a; bbc 2020h). one report, on 27 april, calculated he had spent 27 times longer in his press conferences attacking his personal enemies than expressing sympathy for the bereaved (spocchia 2020). the need for a scientifically based response was especially problematic for an administration built on anti-scientific and proconspiracy credentials (pilkington 2020) , and trump seemed determine to troll his own advisors, praising the virus as 'a genius' (cockburn 2020) , pushing his 'hunches' about drugs (carrie-wong 2020b) and speculating about injecting disinfectant (bbc 2020f). throughout the crisis, trump also pursued direct conflict with state governors regarding policy decisions and equipment availability (mccarthy 2020a; naughtie 2020; wallace wells 2020).trump's posturing increasingly risked an actual civil war, with his tweets calling for people to 'liberate' minnesota, michigan and virginia, his support for far-right linked anti-lockdown protests (smith 2020c) and his claim that his presidential authority over state lockdown rules was 'total' (mccarthy 2020a, b) . in an echo of his comments on charlottesville's 'very fine people' (klein 2018) , trump tweeted his support for the hundreds of 'very good people', some heavily armed, who massed at the michigan state capitol on 30 april (beckett 2020; liptak 2020) . ongoing antilockdown protests, encouraged by trump, were increasingly dominated by far-right militia groups and conspiracists, prompting fears of serious political violence (perkins 2020) . whilst trump's critics saw his handling of the crisis as a disaster, in fact he was playing to his strengths. what trump achieved was to transform the covid-19 civil war into an extension of his already successful political and cultural civil war against the american people and its democratic institutions. this was politics as a continuation of civil war by identical means.in his 1990 essay, 'postscript on the societies of control', gilles deleuze argues we have left behind the nineteenthcentury foucauldian 'disciplinary societies' and moved to new 'societies of control' (deleuze 1992, 3-4) . we have passed from societies defined by concentration, enclosure and the disciplinary power of incarceration-to new computer (1992, 6) and code-based (1992, 5) technologies and systems whose 'modulation' (1992, 4) allows 'continuous forms of control ' (1992, 7) . his example of this in practice is guattari's suggestion of 'a control mechanism' able to track an individual around a city in real time, with electronic systems modulating behaviour by giving or withdrawing access (1992, 7) . in the space of months, we repeated this historical trajectory, turning first back into societies of incarceration, before our gradual remobilization-passing back out into the world through the continuous controls of digital surveillance.this was not easy. recent years had seen the systematic pathologization of the internet, as the optimism of web 2.0's participative society gave way to an antipathy to public over-participation and fear of manipulation. by the time covid-19 hit, the internet was seen as an out-of-control 'toxic' realm of trolling, abuse, death threats, hate speech, political extremism, populism, russian hacking, information warfare and disinformation, 'fake news', electoral manipulation by paid, targeted advertising, cybercrime, government surveillance and mass-harvested personal data with few privacy protections. almost overnight, this reversed again, with the real world and human relations becoming toxic and the internet being transformed into our saviour, allowing safe work, education, entertainment and communication. within weeks, we became, like the cell-bound inhabitants of forster's tale, afraid of human contact. the outside world was no longer a site of possible risk, but instead was absolutely impure. 'the sacred', caillois writes, 'is always more or less "what one cannot approach without dying" ' (2001, 21) , and this was how we now treated life. the arbitrary 2 m distancing was treated as a meeting point between the safe, profane and the sacred world of contagion, impurity and death: to get close to another was not simply a risk, it was a passage between orders of being.hence, remobilization was more difficult and anxious than demobilization. in the uk, the relaxation of restrictions was confusing and the suggestion that some could return to work emphasized the reality of speed classes, with middle classes more able to remain at home, teleworking, whilst the working classes had to take their chances with public transport and work (jones 2020) . despite the most effective model of remobilization being the labour-intensive process of mass testing, contact tracing and isolation, many nations preferred technological solutionism, embracing the continuous controls of digital surveillance, with electronic tagging replacing house arrest. china pioneered this approach, as a logical extension of their massive, near-ubiquitous surveillance system deployed against the uighurs in xinjiang (wall street journal 2017; byler 2019) and the 'social credit' systems and facial-recognition cameras used against their domestic populations (mistreanu 2018; dudley 2020) . here, cctv facial recognition, drones, qr codes, location tracking by telecoms and technology companies and voluntary or mandatory apps formed a network of sensors enmeshing individuals in exactly that city-wide 'control-mechanism' guattari foresaw. the same systems were widely adopted beyond china, highlighting an underlying trend within global political systems: the movement of all governments towards informational totalitarianism.we are still too bewitched by twentieth-century totalitarianism-distracted by the spectacle, uniforms, speeches and rallies, the symbolism, and the public terror. nazi germany, stalinist ussr, maoist china were all hypervisible, aesthetically organized states aiming to abolish the separation of public and private life, to lay everything open to its eye-especially by force-and fulfil mussolini's dreams of 'totalitario': 'all within the state, nothing outside the state, none against the state'. now, at a historical distance from its political theatrics, the essence of totalitarianism is finally revealed: it is about the right of the state to penetrate-to oversee-the totality of life within it. this is, clearly, an informational project. stripped of its politico-aesthetics and aided by the rise of digital technology, it reverses now from spectacle to secrecy and from public to private, to silently access, monitor and evaluate every aspect of personal interiority and singularity.hence, totalitarianism quietly fulfils itself today as an ideology of transparency: of absolute recording, access and exposure. it is freed here not only from the burden of terror, the manpower of policing and the cost of costumery, but, most importantly, from ties to any political system or ideology, existing simply as the technocratic aim and result of digital systems. today, therefore, even western liberal democracies are informationally totalitarian, in their mass surveillance, their treatment of personal data and their systems of monitoring and control, in their desire-no different to that of authoritarian regimes-to access everything and their absolute conviction that they have the right to do so. once again, this is for our benefit-what was once for our 'security' is now for 'public health'-but it nevertheless remains an internal attack on the data integrity of the state's own citizens. the us and uk governments had joked about this, archly naming two of their spy programmes, 'bullrun' and 'edgehill', after civil war battles (ball et al. 2013) . that data civil war against private data has continued without a pause since snowden's revelations, and it is likely that the advances allowed by the covid-19 crisis will never be rolled back.the heart of the post-covid-19 'new normal', therefore, will not be the physical regimes of cleanliness and distancing but the new data regime. we thought this had already been accomplished in the existing system of 'surveillance capitalism' (zuboff 2019) , but covid-19 will supercharge this process, representing the moment when our public and private spaces and lives imploded, opening up previously limited areas for total data colonization. as naomi klein argues, 'the future that is being rushed into being as the bodies still pile up treats our past weeks of physical isolation not as a painful necessity to save lives, but as a living laboratory for a permanent-and highly profitable-no-touch future'. it is a future 'in which our homes are never again exclusively personal spaces, but are also, via high-speed digital connectivity, our schools, our doctor's offices, our gyms, and, if determined by the state, our jails' (klein 2020) . it is the future of the bunkerized terminal citizen, with an increasing reliance on internet and phone infrastructures and remotely delivered services and systems, delivering ever-greater quantities of personal data to private companies and states.the work of remobilization will be one of the great state projects of our lifetime. the movement of bodies out of homes, of labour into the work place, of the market back to life and the recirculation of capital will require great effort. the cardiac-arrest of capitalism-saved in the uk only through the effective nationalization of the economy and a simulacral-communist state responsibility for the economic and physical welfare of the population-will require a massive defibrillation of the economy to shock it back to life, but there are doubts as to how fast this can be achieved. the imf has warned that the world faces the worst recession since the great depression (bbc 2020j), or, for the uk, for '300 years' (morris 2020) , whilst the who warns that covid-19 'may never go away' (bbc 2020k) . with this economic 'slowdown', the covid-19 civil wars will continue to be fought within each nation for years to come.the remobilization of the world order will also be difficult. on 7 may, trump commented that impact of the coronavirus on the usa was 'worse than pearl harbor … worse than the world trade center' (bbc 2020l) . judged by casualties, this is certainly true (the 73,573 coronavirus deaths by 7 may far eclipsed the 2403 deaths at pearl harbor or 2977 killed in 9/11), but the meaning of those events really lay in their political significance and impact on the world order. if we consider the global scale of this pandemic, the global lockdown of populations, the global death toll, the halt to economic and international relations and the differential and ongoing impact of the virus, we can see that covid-19 may prove an event of equally, or potentially, greater historical significance. there was pre-covid-19, and there was the time after its first great wave.the hyperconnected world of global travel and contact will take a long time to recover and as with domestic life, much that can be transferred online will be. international conflict will not end but one possibility is nations will be more inward looking and less interested in others. on 12 may, it was revealed, for example, that the uk's national security council had not met since january, with the government focused on covid-19 (sabbagh 2020) . military action may be more difficult with the expected slashing of military budgets and a possible mindset that might resent spending on international action or aid when the domestic economy remains to be fixed (warrell 2020) . the emphasis may shift, therefore, to strengthening the national and civilian infrastructure in anticipation of future human, or human-created threats. military action is also physically difficult right now, with the need for social distancing impacting on military bases, ships and submarines, on training and exercises, and parades and future operations.but that is why we can expect an acceleration of one particular trend in warfare. since the 1991 gulf war, with the allied air supremacy that allowed them to bomb with utter impunity, through the zero-casualty aerial 1999 nato kosovo war, to the development of drones, the usa has led the way in socially-distanced warfare. we can expect to see the post-covid-19 explosion, therefore, of drones, surrogate robotics and autonomous systems, all controlled from remote shipping containers or box-room bunkers. this will be a new phase of clean war, defined now not by the absence of civilian casualties but by the hand sanitizer available for the next shift of pilots and the plastic screen between them and the camera and weapons operators. here, the act of washing one's hands before taking over the controls will take on a macabre moral dimension.there are other reasons why conflict may have an expanded future. in a world where international powers are more reluctant to intervene, regional powers will have far more leeway to pursue their aims. china's ongoing actions in the south china sea (nicol 2020 ) and imposition of new security laws in hong kong (kuo and davidson 2020) are one example of this, but others have seen the opportunity. data analytics company babel street recorded an apparent increase in military activity in may by iran. despite being badly hit by covid-19, iran's support for offensive cyberoperations and for proxy forces in yemen and iraq rose in the previous 2 weeks (tucker 2020a) .international conflict has continued online during the pandemic. already poor us-chinese relations have worsened, as trump tries to direct domestic anger towards china and as china tries to divert international attention from the virus's origins and their poor handling of medical reports. this has all the making of a new, viral, respiratory cold war. as the us cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency noted, 'china and other authoritarian governments have promoted false claims about the origins of the virus in an attempt to shift blame overseas and divide free societies against themselves', using tactics such as 'censoring news, injecting false narratives onto social media platforms and promoting slick government-produced videos' (baksh 2020 (timsit 2020) . this was not traditional state propaganda. designed as viral, sharable social media content, this was troll-warfare. instead of a hot war, china had launched a burn war against the usa. it did not matter that its own claims were false, here you win with the lulz.beyond china, russia and iran were also using the opportunity to extend their online disinformation campaigns against the west (beaumont et al. 2020; tucker 2020b) . even cyberwar was changing, with espionage now targeting not military, political or economic secrets, but research into the coronavirus and vaccines, as reports emerged of china, russia and iran hacking western laboratories (cole 2020a, b; davidson 2020) . overall, we can expect computer network exploitation (cne), disinformation, propaganda and trolling to continue with, perhaps, greater impact.the post-covid-19 era has the potential for considerable national economic, political and social instability, including backlashes against governments and their responses, the scapegoating of particular groups, unrest at the economic impact so soon after the 2008 crash and its enforced 'austerity', and a more nationalist, isolationist, anti-globalitarian mood. the uk lockdown, for example, prompted a surge in hate crimes against asian communities (grierson 2020) , and continuing anger, hostility and fear seem likely to be one inheritance of this crisis. the entire post-covid-19 world will be more unpredictable and more volatile. the virus did not affect each nation the same, and within each country, the responses of governments and populations will be different. globally, an already fragile world order-still recovering from the 2008 crash, suffering the after-effects of the 'war on terror', facing the reassertion of russian power and the rise of china and india, hit by the retreat of liberal democracy, the success of populist strongmen leaders and ethnonationalist movements, and struggling with long-term civil wars, refugees and immigration flows, climate change and a us president pursuing an unpredictable, random and oftendangerous foreign policy-will only become more unstable. if the seismic political shift of the fall of communism in 1991 led many to speculate about a possible 'new world order', the seismic political shift of covid-19 brings the possibility of an epoch-defining new world disorder.the war of the world h. g. wells' 1897 novel the war of the worlds told the story of the martian invasion of earth and the alien's eventual defeat, not by human hands, but 'by the putrefactive and disease bacteria against which their systems were unprepared' (wells 2019) . the book was an attack on hubris, using 'invasion literature' to question both evolutionary theory and imperialism and the idea that humanity in general, and victorian, colonial britain in particular, were superior to all others: for how superior were we if we had to be saved by 'the humblest things that god, in his wisdom, has put upon this earth'? actually, bacteria were not the smallest things-it would take years before the much smaller viruses were discovered-but wells was correct about our hubris. although in his 'scientific romance' these bacteria were our 'microscopic allies', we failed, in the subsequent years, to take seriously the threat of these microbial forces. covid-19 was a reminder of the power of the world and our place within it. with this anthropogenic pandemic, the war of the worlds gave way to its inevitable sequel: the war of the world.why the battle against covid-19 and the concept of anthropocenic war are important is because they help us recognize that, from now on, human conflict will be increasingly accompanied by, exacerbated or even sparked by anthropogenic environmental factors. environmental change or phenomena will increasingly impact upon human societies, destabilizing them, creating poverty and increasing political violence and competition. hence, the anthropocene has definitively announced itself as the final global superpower, replacing the limited realms of human state power with its own, singular, environmental force. the aftershocks of covid-19 will be serious, as it spreads through the global south, as it pits nations into competition, as it introduces new pressures into areas already riven by natural disasters, civil war, or political extremism, as it impacts domestically on each nation's economy, politics and world view and as it destabilizes the international order.given the likelihood of more pandemics to come and the growing impact of anthropogenic environmental problems, the first anthropocenic war will not be the last. the war of the world will continue.mers-cov is an emerging viral pathogen of humans discovered in saudi arabia in late 2012 [1] . there are 2449 laboratory-confirmed cases from 27 countries reported to the world health organization (who) as of aug 2 nd , 2019. of these, a total of 845 people passed away, with a case fatality rate of almost 34.5% [2] . dromedary camels are the main reservoir of the virus. the infected camels shed the virus in large quantities into through their body secretions, particularly the nasal secretions [3] . humans that come into close contact with dromedary camels or consume their products are at potential risk of infection [4] .the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) emerged in southern china at guangdong in 2012 [5] . mers-cov and sars-cov are members of the family coronaviridae and the order nidovirales. asian palm civet paradoxurus hermaphroditus was the main reservoir of sars-cov [6] . eradication and culling of the palm civet in china contributed substantially to the eradication-of sars-cov [7] . another example of the use of one health approach to control zoonotic viral diseases was practiced in case of the hendra virus in australia. this virus causes serious problems for in close contact with hendra virus infected or dead horses. the main reservoir of hendra virus are the flying foxes (fruit bats). adoption of some one health control strategies helped in the minimizing human exposure of this virus in australia [8] [9] [10] . these strategies included the culling trials of bats as well as vaccination of horses. all these measures reduced the potential risk of human infection with hendra virus [9, 11] . adoption of similar strategy for mers-cov in the light of the one health approach could be a promising control trend.another across the market freely. camel herders may visit several pens of different animals each day freely. every afternoon, markets hold large-scale animal sales (haraj) in the central square of the market. animals are brought from different animal pens and even from outside the market from the neighboring regions as well as remote cities in the square. thus, a large number of animals are mixed for at least 4 hours per day. they are sold for different purposes including slaughtering, breeding, and camel show. these animals are mixed together with animals from the market as well as from outside in one large square. at the end of the haraj, some animals are returned to their pens in the market, some are sold and transferred to the regional or neighboring abattoirs to be slaughtered, and some are transferred to other regions for a variety purposes.most of the abattoirs are designed to have several slaughtering halls ( fig. 1 ). each hall is used for slaughtering and processing of one species of animals ( fig. 1 ). in many cases however, the slaughtering halls are physically connected. animals are usually admitted to the entrance region where they subjected to physical examination. sick animals, or those for which they have concerns, are kept in a quarantine area for further testing and action. the customer hall, is connected with the main slaughtering and processing halls but separated by glass partitions. the veterinarians, staff, and employees in the abattoirs usually move freely between slaughtering halls and come in close contact with live animals and their body fluids and tissues before and after slaughtering.live dromedary camels are usually transported from one place to another for different purposes including sale, treatment in regional veterinary clinics, etc. the imported animals are transferred from the ports to their destinations in various regions. animals may be moved from one place to another. animals are usually packed together and transported in open vehicles. sometimes large trucks are used to transfer a large number of animals in one shipment. camel transportation by truck is not common in most of the cases especially during grazing time. usually, camels are driven by camel herders parallel to national highways over large distances and passing, sometime, in close proximity to many cities on their way.camel shows are one of the traditions in the arabian peninsula. mazaeen involves a mass gathering of dromedary camels from across the arabian peninsula and is held annually at different places. in this, gathered animals are used in several multistage competitions. animals are kept in only large place for almost two months. mazaeen attracts a large number of people to attend for entertainment in addition to the camel owners, staff and employees.camels are outdoor animals. they graze in deserts for most of their time. in the arabian peninsula, animals are moved for grazing after the rainy seasons in search of pasture. animals usually move across the borders of different countries in the arabian gulf.breeding in dromedary camels is mainly practiced through natural insemination. usually a common high pedigree male camel is used to inseminate several female animals within the herd and from other herds. in most of the cases, some camel owners may transfer their female camels for long distance in the sake of high pedigree male camel. on the other hands, a high pedigree male camel may be transferred over a long distance to another in a far distance to inseminate large number of female animals. this procedure usually occur during the ratting season from november to april each year. during the process of mating both male and female animals, come in close contact. each mating time between the male and female camels is about 20 minutes. it is usually accompanied by gurgling and frothing which may exaggerate virus shedding [12] . this may pose a risk of transmission of mers-cov from infected to the non-infected animal. this may contribute to the amplification of mers-cov in certain region.the main theme of these one health control strategies is to reduce the mers-cov transmission from camel to camel and from camel to human thus, reducing the shedding from camel to camel and from camel to human thus the potential risk to human can be minimized (fig. 2) . (a) the animal market consists of several pens to accommodate several species of animals especially dromedary camels, sheep, and goat. each pen is assigned for one group of animals on the two sides of the market. some pens assigned to accommodate the foreign imported breed of camels from sudan and somalia. the daily haraj market is designed at the center of the market. some animals from all pens in the market and from outside from the neighboring regions participate in this daily sale held in every afternoon. some of the sold animals are transferred directly to the adjacent abattoir. some other animals transported to the other regions for various purposes (breeding, slaughtering, showing, etc). the non-sold animals return to their pens in the market. (b) design of a slaughterhouse in the arabian peninsula. it consists of several slaughtering halls assigned for each species. some halls are connected to each other. there is an animal quarantine zone in front of the market. there is a customer hall, which is connecting the slaughtering halls and separated with glass partitions. some animals transferred from the local adjacent market to the abattoir for further slaughtering and processing.several studies showed a high prevalence of the mers-cov in dromedary camels in camel markets and animals admitted to the abattoirs in the arabian peninsula, north and central africa and pakistan [13] [14] [15] [16] . camel market thus enable amplification and recombination of the mers-cov [17] [18] [19] . there are several potential ways to reduce the animal-to-animal transmission in the markets, thus reducing the potential human risk. the animal markets should be relocated to a far distance from major cities and villages. the ideal location of the market should be downstream of the prevailing wind. the market should be re-organized into separate isolated pens per each group of animals. special consideration should be paid to ensure enough space for each animal and between adjacent animal pens. overcrowdings of animals may facilitate the virus transmission between animals particular among the active viral shedders. thus, reducing the number of animals per each pen will minimize the risk of transmission of the virus between animals in the same pen and to neighboring pens. it is recommended to separate the pens of dromedary camels from other species as sheep and goat. restriction of animal movement between markets should be encouraged. imported breed of camels should be placed in separate pens apart from the local breeds. one study showed an absence of specific antibodies in sera of some camel herders, veterinarians, and abattoir staff [20] . however, several studies showed the detection of mers-cov antibodies in sera of people, camel particular camel workers, veterinarians and abattoir employees [15, 16, [21] [22] [23] [24] . one recent study reported a high prevalence of mers-cov antibodies among camel workers in saudi arabia [25] . regardless of the discrepancy between the research group and the sensitivity of the techniques to detect the virus-specific antibodies as well as antigen in the at-risk people, special precautions should be taken by these groups of people who get in close contact with dromedary camels.people in the abattoirs should wear special ppe, particularly n95 mask, gowns, and goggles during their active contact with camels during the whole process of slaughtering including inspection, slaughtering evisceration, etc. a separate hall should be assigned for slaughtering each species of animal. customers should not be allowed in close contact with slaughtered animals, until they receive the final meat. the carcasses should be transported from the abattoir in well-equipped leak-proof vehicles, which do not allow any leakage of the body fluids of the slaughtered animals. the liquid wastes from the abattoirs should not be allowed to be merged with the common municipal sewage system. special decontamination processes should be practiced to get rid of the animal waste after slaughtering. animal skins should be chemically treated before leaving the abattoir to avoid harboring any contamination from the body fluids of the animals.more recently, most animals in shows are microchipped, with such information as birth date, sex, breed, and owner information recorded. this is a very useful tool in careful monitoring all animals through the duration of the camel show, which may extend to more than two months. special attention should be paid to test the animals prior to the introduction to the camel shows. active mers-cov shedding animals should be placed in a remote quarantine area. they should be sampled regularly at weekly interval until they show no virus shedding in their body secretions. random sampling of animals participating in the shows and exhibition during the period of the show should be conducted to ensure the absence of active shedders in a certain group of animals. people who come in close contact with animals should wear ppe. people attending the show are advised not to come in close contact with camels.camel movement could be from one region to another within the same country or between different countries. there is an active international trade marketing between countries from the arabian peninsula and countries from north and central africa particularly sudan, somalia, kenya, mali, ethiopia, burkina faso, nigeria, morocco, etc. saudi arabia is the largest camel importer from these countries especially during the pilgrimage season every year. dromedary camels from these countries show high mers-cov seroprevalence and virus shedding [3, 13, 15, [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . a recent study showed the circulating strains of mers-cov in africa are somewhat different in the genomic level from the currently circulating strains in the arabian peninsula [32] . the african strains lack the orf-4 of the mers-cov. thus, this may explain the possibility of recombination and mutations between different strains of mers-cov. special attention should be paid to the importation and movement of dromedary camels between different countries. imported camels should be sampled and tested for the presence of mers-cov antibodies and antigens at the country of origin. they must be quarantined upon arrival, sampled and tested by serology and for the presence of virus in nasal secretions in their nasal secretions. sero-positive or virus-shedding camels should be quarantined before being allowed into the country. special attention should be given to camels imported for other purposes such as breeding and shows. these animals will eventually be mixed with local breeds and therefore poses greater risk of mers-cov to the local camel breeds. internal transport of animals should be done in well-equipped vehicles, which should be ventilated and closed. overcrowding of animals in one vehicle should be prohibited. shipping act as one of the stress factors posed on the animals and the very close contact between animals favor the transmission not only of mers-cov but also other pathogens they may harbor.dromedary camels usually spend most of their times on pasture for grazing. they are moved from one place to another in a search of pasture. several herds of animals may get into close proximity and share the same land for grazing at the same time. some countries have banned grazing in their lands or in certain regions. camels move across the border of the countries and are mixed with the animals from the neighboring countries. theoretically, there should be rules governing the grazing and crossing of borders. animals should be monitored not only for mers-cov but also for other pathogens before being allowed contact with other animals. regular monitoring of animals on the open grazing regions is highly recommended to follow up on the health status fig. 2 . proposed model for the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus/dromedary camels/ human interaction. the mers-cov is transmitted among dromedary camels through the respiratory routes. strong evidence of the transmission of the virus from dromedary camels to human. human to human transmission is well documented. blockage or minimizing the virus shedding from camels will reduce the potential risk of infection with mers-cov, pathways marked by the symbol (x). the non-confirmed pathway is marked by a question mark (?). of animals. this will help in the identification of active shedders of the virus, which may contaminate the pasture and act as a source of infection of any subsequent grazing by other herds.one study showed the stability of mers-cov experimentally introduced into camel milk [33] . another study showed the detection of some mers-cov neutralizing antibodies and rnas in camel milk collected by the traditional methods used in qatar [34] . an expert opinion study was recently conducted to assess the hazard posed by the consumption of raw camel milk and raw or undercooked camel meat [35] . thorough boiling or pasteurization of camel milk before consumption should be practiced to avoid any potential risk of transmission of mers-cov through the ingestion of contaminated milk. similarly, thorough cooking of camel meat and meat products before consumption is highly recommended.several studies reported the molecular and serological surveillance of mers-cov among dromedary camels in many countries in asia and africa [13, 15, 16, 26, 27, 36, 37] . however, these studies have been conducted on a random basis. some of them included only a partial population of a camel at a certain region in a country. moreover, there is a lack of information from some african countries that have large camel population such as sudan, mauritania, and somalia. there is an urgent need for a more systematic and well-designed surveillance system where intensive dromedary camels are raised and exist. these surveillance systems will help in mapping the camel population that shed or seroconvert to mers-cov in various regions. careful monitoring of the genetic changes of mers-cov in both camel and human population should be done at a regular intervals.who established a standard operating protocol (sop) for the handling of the active human mers-cov cases [38, 39] . however, there are no established strategies for dealing with active shedder animals as is the in case for other viral pathogens such as the highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses. although, some countries have started to develop their own protocols, they are not applicable on a large scale across the world. one major burden is that mers-cov does not produce obvious clinical signs in camels despite mild nasal discharge and lacrimation [3, 40] . this makes it very difficult to identify mers-cov infected camels or to assess their health conditions based on the clinical signs. the gold standard for the identification of the active infected animal is laboratory testing. who established another sop for laboratory examination, processing and testing of suspected human cases with mers-cov [35] . animal to animal transmission is reported during the course of mers-cov infection in a certain animal population v [41] . animal to animal transmission is reported during the course of mers-cov infection in certain animal populations [3, 27, 42] . ideally, regular monitoring of the dromedary camel population should be scheduled. special precautions should be adopted for dealing with the positive active shedder animals either within a herd or in camel markets. when positive animals are detected in camel markets, application of quarantine measures should be applied in that market. none of the animals should get in or out of the market during the course of the viral infection. periodic testing of a statistically significant number of animals from all corners as well as the center of the market should be also conducted. special precautions should be paid from handlers and camel attendants as well as veterinarians. the workers must wear the appropriate ppe all the time when dealing with animals. testing and data analysis of animals on a weekly basis should be performed. thorough cleaning and disinfection of the market should be practiced regularly. the market should not be opened again to the public until all animals are tested free from shedding the virus for at least two consecutive time interval with two weeks apart. a similar approach could be adopted in case of detection of positive mers-cov animal in a particular herd. additionally, the positive camel herd should not be moved during the active course of virus shedding. they should not allowed to graze in an open pasture to avoid spreading of the virus through their secretions.there is a controversial discussion about the idea of using vaccines against mers-cov in camels and humans. some studies showed a high seroprevalence of mers-cov among dromedary camels in asia and africa [13, 15, 16, 26, 36, 37, [43] [44] [45] . other research showed the possibility of reinfection of dromedary camels with mers-cov in the presence of neutralizing antibodies in sera of the infected animals [42] . however, several experimental approaches were adopted to prepare and test the efficacy of some vaccine candidates for mers-cov in experimental animals, dromedary camels and alpaca [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] . a recent study showed that application of an adjuvant-mers-cov-s1 vaccine in dromedary camels and alpaca resulted in the production of robust neutralizing antibodies [46] . this study supported the notion that vaccinating young camels under two years will reduce the virus shedding from these naïve animals. thus, the risk of human infection could be minimized by vaccination.who issued some standard operating protocols for dealing with positive mers-cov human and dromedary camels [51] . the elder and immunocompromised people suffering from some chronic diseases such as diabetes, high blood pressure, cancer should practice extreme precautions if they visit camel barns or market especially in the middle east. people come in close contact with dromedary camels on daily basis such as camel owners, veterinarians; slaughterhouse employees should protect themselves by adopting standard personal hygiene. this include wearing the proper ppe, taking showers after finishing their work, leaving their clothes and gowns in special laundry where they can be thoroughly decontaminated [51] . they should not accompany these clothes to their homes or outside the camel market or slaughterhouse.although mers-cov had emerged almost seven years ago, there are many aspects of the virus/human/animal that interactions are not well identified. furthermore, there is no effective medication or vaccine to treat or prevent viral infection in both human and animals. the one health approach has many applications, which can be of great help in the control of the pathogens of animal origin. adoption of the abovementioned strategies will have a great impact on the reduction of the virus shedding from the dromedary camels to the environment and subsequently to the human. thus, the risk of human infection with mers-cov could be minimized.authors declared there is no conflict of interest.mers-cov is an emerging viral pathogen of humans discovered in saudi arabia in late 2012 [1] . there are 2449 laboratory-confirmed cases from 27 countries reported to the world health organization (who) as of aug 2 nd , 2019. of these, a total of 845 people passed away, with a case fatality rate of almost 34.5% [2] . dromedary camels are the main reservoir of the virus. the infected camels shed the virus in large quantities into through their body secretions, particularly the nasal secretions [3] . humans that come into close contact with dromedary camels or consume their products are at potential risk of infection [4] .the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) emerged in southern china at guangdong in 2012 [5] . mers-cov and sars-cov are members of the family coronaviridae and the order nidovirales. asian palm civet paradoxurus hermaphroditus was the main reservoir of sars-cov [6] . eradication and culling of the palm civet in china contributed substantially to the eradication-of sars-cov [7] . another example of the use of one health approach to control zoonotic viral diseases was practiced in case of the hendra virus in australia. this virus causes serious problems for in close contact with hendra virus infected or dead horses. the main reservoir of hendra virus are the flying foxes (fruit bats). adoption of some one health control strategies helped in the minimizing human exposure of this virus in australia [8] [9] [10] . these strategies included the culling trials of bats as well as vaccination of horses. all these measures reduced the potential risk of human infection with hendra virus [9, 11] . adoption of similar strategy for mers-cov in the light of the one health approach could be a promising control trend.another across the market freely. camel herders may visit several pens of different animals each day freely. every afternoon, markets hold large-scale animal sales (haraj) in the central square of the market. animals are brought from different animal pens and even from outside the market from the neighboring regions as well as remote cities in the square. thus, a large number of animals are mixed for at least 4 hours per day. they are sold for different purposes including slaughtering, breeding, and camel show. these animals are mixed together with animals from the market as well as from outside in one large square. at the end of the haraj, some animals are returned to their pens in the market, some are sold and transferred to the regional or neighboring abattoirs to be slaughtered, and some are transferred to other regions for a variety purposes.most of the abattoirs are designed to have several slaughtering halls ( fig. 1 ). each hall is used for slaughtering and processing of one species of animals ( fig. 1 ). in many cases however, the slaughtering halls are physically connected. animals are usually admitted to the entrance region where they subjected to physical examination. sick animals, or those for which they have concerns, are kept in a quarantine area for further testing and action. the customer hall, is connected with the main slaughtering and processing halls but separated by glass partitions. the veterinarians, staff, and employees in the abattoirs usually move freely between slaughtering halls and come in close contact with live animals and their body fluids and tissues before and after slaughtering.live dromedary camels are usually transported from one place to another for different purposes including sale, treatment in regional veterinary clinics, etc. the imported animals are transferred from the ports to their destinations in various regions. animals may be moved from one place to another. animals are usually packed together and transported in open vehicles. sometimes large trucks are used to transfer a large number of animals in one shipment. camel transportation by truck is not common in most of the cases especially during grazing time. usually, camels are driven by camel herders parallel to national highways over large distances and passing, sometime, in close proximity to many cities on their way.camel shows are one of the traditions in the arabian peninsula. mazaeen involves a mass gathering of dromedary camels from across the arabian peninsula and is held annually at different places. in this, gathered animals are used in several multistage competitions. animals are kept in only large place for almost two months. mazaeen attracts a large number of people to attend for entertainment in addition to the camel owners, staff and employees.camels are outdoor animals. they graze in deserts for most of their time. in the arabian peninsula, animals are moved for grazing after the rainy seasons in search of pasture. animals usually move across the borders of different countries in the arabian gulf.breeding in dromedary camels is mainly practiced through natural insemination. usually a common high pedigree male camel is used to inseminate several female animals within the herd and from other herds. in most of the cases, some camel owners may transfer their female camels for long distance in the sake of high pedigree male camel. on the other hands, a high pedigree male camel may be transferred over a long distance to another in a far distance to inseminate large number of female animals. this procedure usually occur during the ratting season from november to april each year. during the process of mating both male and female animals, come in close contact. each mating time between the male and female camels is about 20 minutes. it is usually accompanied by gurgling and frothing which may exaggerate virus shedding [12] . this may pose a risk of transmission of mers-cov from infected to the non-infected animal. this may contribute to the amplification of mers-cov in certain region.the main theme of these one health control strategies is to reduce the mers-cov transmission from camel to camel and from camel to human thus, reducing the shedding from camel to camel and from camel to human thus the potential risk to human can be minimized (fig. 2) . (a) the animal market consists of several pens to accommodate several species of animals especially dromedary camels, sheep, and goat. each pen is assigned for one group of animals on the two sides of the market. some pens assigned to accommodate the foreign imported breed of camels from sudan and somalia. the daily haraj market is designed at the center of the market. some animals from all pens in the market and from outside from the neighboring regions participate in this daily sale held in every afternoon. some of the sold animals are transferred directly to the adjacent abattoir. some other animals transported to the other regions for various purposes (breeding, slaughtering, showing, etc). the non-sold animals return to their pens in the market. (b) design of a slaughterhouse in the arabian peninsula. it consists of several slaughtering halls assigned for each species. some halls are connected to each other. there is an animal quarantine zone in front of the market. there is a customer hall, which is connecting the slaughtering halls and separated with glass partitions. some animals transferred from the local adjacent market to the abattoir for further slaughtering and processing.several studies showed a high prevalence of the mers-cov in dromedary camels in camel markets and animals admitted to the abattoirs in the arabian peninsula, north and central africa and pakistan [13] [14] [15] [16] . camel market thus enable amplification and recombination of the mers-cov [17] [18] [19] . there are several potential ways to reduce the animal-to-animal transmission in the markets, thus reducing the potential human risk. the animal markets should be relocated to a far distance from major cities and villages. the ideal location of the market should be downstream of the prevailing wind. the market should be re-organized into separate isolated pens per each group of animals. special consideration should be paid to ensure enough space for each animal and between adjacent animal pens. overcrowdings of animals may facilitate the virus transmission between animals particular among the active viral shedders. thus, reducing the number of animals per each pen will minimize the risk of transmission of the virus between animals in the same pen and to neighboring pens. it is recommended to separate the pens of dromedary camels from other species as sheep and goat. restriction of animal movement between markets should be encouraged. imported breed of camels should be placed in separate pens apart from the local breeds. one study showed an absence of specific antibodies in sera of some camel herders, veterinarians, and abattoir staff [20] . however, several studies showed the detection of mers-cov antibodies in sera of people, camel particular camel workers, veterinarians and abattoir employees [15, 16, [21] [22] [23] [24] . one recent study reported a high prevalence of mers-cov antibodies among camel workers in saudi arabia [25] . regardless of the discrepancy between the research group and the sensitivity of the techniques to detect the virus-specific antibodies as well as antigen in the at-risk people, special precautions should be taken by these groups of people who get in close contact with dromedary camels.people in the abattoirs should wear special ppe, particularly n95 mask, gowns, and goggles during their active contact with camels during the whole process of slaughtering including inspection, slaughtering evisceration, etc. a separate hall should be assigned for slaughtering each species of animal. customers should not be allowed in close contact with slaughtered animals, until they receive the final meat. the carcasses should be transported from the abattoir in well-equipped leak-proof vehicles, which do not allow any leakage of the body fluids of the slaughtered animals. the liquid wastes from the abattoirs should not be allowed to be merged with the common municipal sewage system. special decontamination processes should be practiced to get rid of the animal waste after slaughtering. animal skins should be chemically treated before leaving the abattoir to avoid harboring any contamination from the body fluids of the animals.more recently, most animals in shows are microchipped, with such information as birth date, sex, breed, and owner information recorded. this is a very useful tool in careful monitoring all animals through the duration of the camel show, which may extend to more than two months. special attention should be paid to test the animals prior to the introduction to the camel shows. active mers-cov shedding animals should be placed in a remote quarantine area. they should be sampled regularly at weekly interval until they show no virus shedding in their body secretions. random sampling of animals participating in the shows and exhibition during the period of the show should be conducted to ensure the absence of active shedders in a certain group of animals. people who come in close contact with animals should wear ppe. people attending the show are advised not to come in close contact with camels.camel movement could be from one region to another within the same country or between different countries. there is an active international trade marketing between countries from the arabian peninsula and countries from north and central africa particularly sudan, somalia, kenya, mali, ethiopia, burkina faso, nigeria, morocco, etc. saudi arabia is the largest camel importer from these countries especially during the pilgrimage season every year. dromedary camels from these countries show high mers-cov seroprevalence and virus shedding [3, 13, 15, [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . a recent study showed the circulating strains of mers-cov in africa are somewhat different in the genomic level from the currently circulating strains in the arabian peninsula [32] . the african strains lack the orf-4 of the mers-cov. thus, this may explain the possibility of recombination and mutations between different strains of mers-cov. special attention should be paid to the importation and movement of dromedary camels between different countries. imported camels should be sampled and tested for the presence of mers-cov antibodies and antigens at the country of origin. they must be quarantined upon arrival, sampled and tested by serology and for the presence of virus in nasal secretions in their nasal secretions. sero-positive or virus-shedding camels should be quarantined before being allowed into the country. special attention should be given to camels imported for other purposes such as breeding and shows. these animals will eventually be mixed with local breeds and therefore poses greater risk of mers-cov to the local camel breeds. internal transport of animals should be done in well-equipped vehicles, which should be ventilated and closed. overcrowding of animals in one vehicle should be prohibited. shipping act as one of the stress factors posed on the animals and the very close contact between animals favor the transmission not only of mers-cov but also other pathogens they may harbor.dromedary camels usually spend most of their times on pasture for grazing. they are moved from one place to another in a search of pasture. several herds of animals may get into close proximity and share the same land for grazing at the same time. some countries have banned grazing in their lands or in certain regions. camels move across the border of the countries and are mixed with the animals from the neighboring countries. theoretically, there should be rules governing the grazing and crossing of borders. animals should be monitored not only for mers-cov but also for other pathogens before being allowed contact with other animals. regular monitoring of animals on the open grazing regions is highly recommended to follow up on the health status fig. 2 . proposed model for the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus/dromedary camels/ human interaction. the mers-cov is transmitted among dromedary camels through the respiratory routes. strong evidence of the transmission of the virus from dromedary camels to human. human to human transmission is well documented. blockage or minimizing the virus shedding from camels will reduce the potential risk of infection with mers-cov, pathways marked by the symbol (x). the non-confirmed pathway is marked by a question mark (?). of animals. this will help in the identification of active shedders of the virus, which may contaminate the pasture and act as a source of infection of any subsequent grazing by other herds.one study showed the stability of mers-cov experimentally introduced into camel milk [33] . another study showed the detection of some mers-cov neutralizing antibodies and rnas in camel milk collected by the traditional methods used in qatar [34] . an expert opinion study was recently conducted to assess the hazard posed by the consumption of raw camel milk and raw or undercooked camel meat [35] . thorough boiling or pasteurization of camel milk before consumption should be practiced to avoid any potential risk of transmission of mers-cov through the ingestion of contaminated milk. similarly, thorough cooking of camel meat and meat products before consumption is highly recommended.several studies reported the molecular and serological surveillance of mers-cov among dromedary camels in many countries in asia and africa [13, 15, 16, 26, 27, 36, 37] . however, these studies have been conducted on a random basis. some of them included only a partial population of a camel at a certain region in a country. moreover, there is a lack of information from some african countries that have large camel population such as sudan, mauritania, and somalia. there is an urgent need for a more systematic and well-designed surveillance system where intensive dromedary camels are raised and exist. these surveillance systems will help in mapping the camel population that shed or seroconvert to mers-cov in various regions. careful monitoring of the genetic changes of mers-cov in both camel and human population should be done at a regular intervals.who established a standard operating protocol (sop) for the handling of the active human mers-cov cases [38, 39] . however, there are no established strategies for dealing with active shedder animals as is the in case for other viral pathogens such as the highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses. although, some countries have started to develop their own protocols, they are not applicable on a large scale across the world. one major burden is that mers-cov does not produce obvious clinical signs in camels despite mild nasal discharge and lacrimation [3, 40] . this makes it very difficult to identify mers-cov infected camels or to assess their health conditions based on the clinical signs. the gold standard for the identification of the active infected animal is laboratory testing. who established another sop for laboratory examination, processing and testing of suspected human cases with mers-cov [35] . animal to animal transmission is reported during the course of mers-cov infection in a certain animal population v [41] . animal to animal transmission is reported during the course of mers-cov infection in certain animal populations [3, 27, 42] . ideally, regular monitoring of the dromedary camel population should be scheduled. special precautions should be adopted for dealing with the positive active shedder animals either within a herd or in camel markets. when positive animals are detected in camel markets, application of quarantine measures should be applied in that market. none of the animals should get in or out of the market during the course of the viral infection. periodic testing of a statistically significant number of animals from all corners as well as the center of the market should be also conducted. special precautions should be paid from handlers and camel attendants as well as veterinarians. the workers must wear the appropriate ppe all the time when dealing with animals. testing and data analysis of animals on a weekly basis should be performed. thorough cleaning and disinfection of the market should be practiced regularly. the market should not be opened again to the public until all animals are tested free from shedding the virus for at least two consecutive time interval with two weeks apart. a similar approach could be adopted in case of detection of positive mers-cov animal in a particular herd. additionally, the positive camel herd should not be moved during the active course of virus shedding. they should not allowed to graze in an open pasture to avoid spreading of the virus through their secretions.there is a controversial discussion about the idea of using vaccines against mers-cov in camels and humans. some studies showed a high seroprevalence of mers-cov among dromedary camels in asia and africa [13, 15, 16, 26, 36, 37, [43] [44] [45] . other research showed the possibility of reinfection of dromedary camels with mers-cov in the presence of neutralizing antibodies in sera of the infected animals [42] . however, several experimental approaches were adopted to prepare and test the efficacy of some vaccine candidates for mers-cov in experimental animals, dromedary camels and alpaca [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] . a recent study showed that application of an adjuvant-mers-cov-s1 vaccine in dromedary camels and alpaca resulted in the production of robust neutralizing antibodies [46] . this study supported the notion that vaccinating young camels under two years will reduce the virus shedding from these naïve animals. thus, the risk of human infection could be minimized by vaccination.who issued some standard operating protocols for dealing with positive mers-cov human and dromedary camels [51] . the elder and immunocompromised people suffering from some chronic diseases such as diabetes, high blood pressure, cancer should practice extreme precautions if they visit camel barns or market especially in the middle east. people come in close contact with dromedary camels on daily basis such as camel owners, veterinarians; slaughterhouse employees should protect themselves by adopting standard personal hygiene. this include wearing the proper ppe, taking showers after finishing their work, leaving their clothes and gowns in special laundry where they can be thoroughly decontaminated [51] . they should not accompany these clothes to their homes or outside the camel market or slaughterhouse.although mers-cov had emerged almost seven years ago, there are many aspects of the virus/human/animal that interactions are not well identified. furthermore, there is no effective medication or vaccine to treat or prevent viral infection in both human and animals. the one health approach has many applications, which can be of great help in the control of the pathogens of animal origin. adoption of the abovementioned strategies will have a great impact on the reduction of the virus shedding from the dromedary camels to the environment and subsequently to the human. thus, the risk of human infection with mers-cov could be minimized.authors declared there is no conflict of interest.the physiology of the human being is optimized for existence at sea level. most individuals, however, can ascend to around 8000–10 000 ft (2500–3000 m) above sea level before hypoxia begins to have ill effects and reduces performance.with increasing altitude, there is a fall in the atmospheric pressure, together with a decrease in density and temperature. the pressure at sea level in the standard atmosphere is 760 mmhg and this falls to half at 18 000 ft (5500 m), where the ambient temperature is about −20°c. the composition of the atmosphere remains constant up to the tropopause (36 000 ft or 11 000 m), the most abundant gases being nitrogen (78%) and oxygen (21%), with the remaining 1% being argon, carbon dioxide, neon, hydrogen and ozone.the relationship between the oxygen saturation of hemoglobin and oxygen tension minimizes the effect on the human of the reduction in partial pressure of oxygen. ascent to an altitude of 10 000 ft (3000 m) produces a fall in the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli, but only a slight fall in the percentage saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen. once altitude exceeds 10 000 ft (3000 m), however, the percentage saturation of hemoglobin falls quickly, resulting in hypoxia. indeed, above 8000 ft (2500 m), the effects of lack of oxygen will begin to appear and a decrease in an individual's ability to perform complex tasks and a reduction in night vision can be measured.1  figure 46.1 shows the oxygen dissociation curve of blood. the concentrations of physically dissolved and chemically combined oxygen are shown separately and the curve illustrated is the average for a fit young adult. the actual shape of the curve will be influenced by factors such as age, state of health, tobacco use and ambient temperature.healthy individuals can tolerate altitudes of up to 8000–10 000 ft (2500–3000 m) with no harmful effects. however, in the case of the elderly or of individuals suffering from some diseases of the respiratory or circulatory system, there is less tolerance of the mild hypoxia at even this altitude. in an ideal world, the cabin would be pressurized to maintain sea level conditions. to achieve this would require an extremely strong and heavy aircraft structure with severe implications on load carrying capacity, fuel consumption and resulting effects on the external environment. as a result, a compromise has to be struck, and airworthiness regulations (us federal aviation regulations and european joint aviation requirements) state that ‘pressurized cabins and compartments to be occupied must be equipped to provide a cabin pressure altitude of not more than 8000 ft (2500 m) at the maximum operating altitude of the aeroplane under normal operating conditions.’2 pressurization is achieved by tapping bleed air from the engine compressors and passing this flow of air through the air-conditioning packs into the cabin. the outside air is very dry and cold, and the temperature is controlled via the air-conditioning packs. the cabin pressure is maintained at the desired level by regulating the flow of air overboard. figure 46.2 illustrates ambient and cabin altitudes for a typical flight.  figure 46.3 shows how the air circulates in the cabin in the case of a single aisle, while figure 46.4 shows the airflow patterns in a twin aisle cabin.as a result of the required cabin pressure change during climb and descent, it is possible for individuals to suffer discomfort as a result of expansion of gas trapped within the body. in particular, gas can be trapped within the gut and within the middle ear and sinuses. normally, this trapped gas is able to escape without any problem, but there may be occasions when this is not so, such as when the individual is suffering from upper respiratory tract congestion due to infection or allergy. in particular, the human ear is very sensitive to rates of pressure change, the threshold for detection being 0.132 psi (0.910 kpa). this is equivalent to a change in cabin altitude of 250 ft (76 m) at sea level. in the human ear, the cavity of the middle ear is separated from the outer ear by the tympanic membrane. it communicates with the nasopharynx and, in turn, the atmosphere by way of the eustachian tube, the proximal two-thirds of which has soft walls that are normally collapsed. during ascent to altitude, the gas in the middle ear cavity expands and escapes along the eustachian tube into the nasopharynx, equalizing the pressure across the tympanic membrane. the pharyngeal portion of the eustachian tube acts as a one-way valve, thus allowing expanding air to escape easily to the atmosphere. this can be sometimes felt as a ‘popping’ sensation as air escapes from the tube during ascent.during descent, air from the nasopharynx must enter the middle ear to maintain equilibrium. in some individuals, the one-way valve mechanism of the eustachian tube can prevent passive flow of air back into the middle ear cavity. this causes a relative increase of pressure on the outside of the tympanic membrane, pushing it into the middle ear cavity and causing a sensation of fullness, a decrease in hearing acuity and eventually pain. it is possible to perform active maneuvers to open the eustachian tube, such as swallowing, yawning, and jaw movements. in some people, these simple maneuvers are not effective and it may be necessary to occlude the nostrils and raise the pressure in the mouth and nose to force air into the middle ear cavities. this increase in pressure can usually simply be achieved by raising the floor of the mouth with the glottis shut, while other individuals raise the pressure in the lungs and the respiratory tract by contracting the expiratory muscles while forcibly exhaling (valsalva's maneuver).in addition to regulating the airflow rate required to pressurize the aircraft, the environmental control system controls the flow rate of outside air required to remove contaminants and controls the temperature in the cabin. this requirement is facilitated by the practice of recirculation of approximately 50% of the cabin air. this is achieved by extracting air from the cabin and mixing it with conditioned outside air. recirculation provides two benefits: one, it allows the total airflow rate to be higher than the flow rate of the outside air, so good circulation in the cabin can be maintained independently of the outside airflow; and two, the conditioned air is mixed with comparatively warm recirculated air before being introduced into the cabin. as a result, the conditioned air is supplied at a much lower temperature without causing discomfort from cold drafts. the recirculated air will also have picked up moisture from the cabin occupants and the cabin activities, improving the humidity level. in older generation jet aircraft, all the air supplied to the cabin came from outside air, without the benefits of recirculation (improved humidity, reduction in perceived drafts). this practice was inefficient with a substantial energy, and hence environmental, cost.in pressurized jet aircraft manufactured since the beginning of the 1980s, the recirculated air is passed through filters. these are high efficiency particulate (hepa) filters, which have an efficiency of 99.97% for 0.3 μm particles. they are effective in removing bacteria and viruses from the recirculated air, so preventing their spread through the cabin by this route. air filters are changed during routine aircraft maintenance, as specified by the manufacturer in the servicing schedule.recirculated air is obtained from the area above the cabin or under the floor; air from the cargo bay, lavatories and galleys is not recirculated. the flow rate of outside air per seat ranges from 3.6 to 7.4 l/s (7.6–15.6 cubic ft/min) with the percentage of recirculated air distributed to the passenger cabin being of the order 30–55% of the total air supply.3 the result of filtering the recirculated air is a significant improvement in cabin air quality by the removal of particles and biological microorganisms. it is not necessary to pass the compressed air from outside through hepa filters, because the ambient air at high altitude is free of microorganisms and particulates.the use of recirculation has been common in the design of building environmental control systems for many years. building environmental systems are commonly designed and operated with up to 90% of recirculated air, which compares with the maximum recirculated air flow in aircraft of 55%.the air supply to the flight deck (or cockpit) is derived from the same source, but is delivered at a slightly higher pressure than the air supplied to the cabin. this ensures a positive pressure differential to prevent the ingress of smoke or fumes to the flight deck in the event of a fire or similar in-flight emergency. the flow rate of the flight deck air supply is also slightly higher than that to the cabin because this supply is used for cooling the avionics and other electronic equipment.humidity is the concentration of water vapor in the air. relative humidity is the ratio of the actual amount of vapor in the air to the amount that would be present if the air was saturated at the same temperature, expressed as a percentage. saturated air at high temperatures holds more water vapor than at low temperatures, and if unsaturated air is cooled, it becomes saturated. high humidity can lead to passenger and crew discomfort when it is accompanied by high temperature. high humidity can cause condensation, dripping and freezing of moisture on the inside of the aircraft shell, which may lead to safety problems such as corrosion. condensation can also give rise to biological growth thus causing adverse effects on cabin air quality.at a typical aircraft cruising altitude of 30 000 ft (9150 m), the outside air temperature is in the region of −40°c and is extremely dry, typically containing about 0.15 g/kg of moisture. for pressurized aircraft flying at these levels, the conditioned air entering the cabin has a relative humidity of <1%. exhaled moisture from passengers and crew, together with moisture from galleys and toilet areas, increases the humidity to an average level of 6–10%, which is below the 20% normally accepted as comfort level.4 research has shown that the maximum additional water lost from an individual during an 8-h period in 0% humidity, compared with normal day-to-day loss, is around 100 ml. the sensation of thirst experienced by healthy individuals in the low humidity environment is due to local drying of the pharyngeal membranes, and this itself may lead to the spurious sensation of thirst. there is no evidence that exposure to a low-humidity environment itself leads to dehydration, although local humidity can cause mild subjective symptoms, such as dryness of the eyes and mucous membranes.5., 6. no significant effect has been shown on reaction time or other measures of psychomotor performance, although there can be some changes in the fluid regulatory hormones.5., 6. it is unlikely that low humidity has any long- or short-term ill-effects, provided overall hydration is maintained by drinking adequate amounts of fluid.7 the body's homeostatic mechanisms ensure that central hydration is maintained, although the peripheral physical effects can lead to discomfort. dry skin can be alleviated by using moisturizing aqueous creams, particularly just before flight, and dry eye irritation can be alleviated by the use of moisturizing eye drops. individuals prone to develop dry eyes are advised not to wear contact lenses during long flights in pressurized aircraft.8 a national academy of sciences report identified humidity as one of the areas deserving more attention in future research concerning aircraft cabin environment.9 the aircraft cabin is similar to many other indoor environments, such as homes and offices, in that people are exposed to a mixture of external and recirculated air. the cabin environment is different in many respects (e.g. the high occupant density, the inability of the occupants to leave at will and the need for pressurization). in flight, there is a combination of environmental factors including low air pressure and low humidity, as well as low frequency vibration and constant background noise. although the noise and vibration can contribute to fatigue, the levels are all below those which are accepted as potentially harmful to hearing.9., 10. ozone is a highly reactive form of oxygen found naturally in the upper atmosphere. it is formed primarily above the tropopause as a result of the action of uv light on oxygen molecules. the amount and distribution of natural ozone in the atmosphere varies with latitude, altitude, season and weather conditions. the highest concentrations in the northern hemisphere are generally found at high altitude over high latitude locations during the winter and spring.the effects of high ozone concentration on human beings can include eye irritation, coughing due to irritation of the upper respiratory system, nose irritation and chest pains. as a result of this, the airworthiness regulatory authorities (e.g. us federal aviation authority, european joint aviation authorities) require that transport category aircraft operating above 18 000 ft (5500 m) must show that the concentration of ozone inside the cabin will not exceed 0.25 parts/million by volume (sea level equivalent) at any time, and a time weighted value of 0.1 parts/million by volume (sea level) for scheduled segments of >4 h.11 for this reason, long haul transport jet aircraft are now equipped with ozone catalytic converters that break down or ‘crack’ the ozone before it enters the cabin air circulation.natural radiation consists of cosmic rays from outer space (galactic radiation) and the gamma rays from rocks, earth, and building materials. cosmic radiation is produced when primary photons and alpha particles from outside the solar system (galactic cosmic radiation) interact with components of the earth's atmosphere. a second source of cosmic radiation is the release of charged particles from the sun, which becomes significant during periods of solar flare (‘sun storm’). cosmic radiation is an ionizing radiation; ionizing radiation also includes x-rays and that from radioactive materials. ionizing radiation is a natural part of the environment in which we live and is present in the earth, buildings, food we eat, and even in the bones of our bodies. the other type of radiation is known as non-ionizing radiation and this includes uv light, radio waves and microwaves.humans, animals and plants have all evolved in an environment with a background of natural radiation and, with few exceptions, it is not a significant risk to health.the amount of cosmic radiation that reaches the earth from the sun and outer space varies and depends on the latitude and height above sea level. the amount of cosmic radiation entering the atmosphere follows an 11-year cycle, with the intensity of galactic radiation being lowest when solar activity is at its highest. this is because during high levels of solar activity, the resulting magnetic flux between the sun and the earth deflects much of the galactic cosmic radiation. cosmic radiation is effectively absorbed by the atmosphere and is also affected by the earth's magnetic field. the effect on the body will depend on the latitude and altitude at which the individual is flying and also on the length of time in the air.cosmic radiation may be measured directly using sophisticated instruments, as was done in the concorde supersonic transport and subsonic long range aircraft, or can be estimated using a computer software program. these programs look at the route, time at each altitude and the phase of the solar cycle, and calculate the radiation dose received by the aircraft occupant for a particular flight. a number of airlines and research organizations have compared actual measurements taken on board an aircraft with the computer estimations, and the two are very similar.12 the effect of ionizing radiation depends not only on the dose absorbed, but also on the type and energy of the radiation and the tissues involved. these factors are taken into account in arriving at the dose equivalent measured in sieverts (sv). however, doses of cosmic radiation are so low that figures are usually quoted in microsieverts (μsv, millionths of a sievert) or millisieverts (msv, thousandths of a sievert).when ionizing radiation passes through the body, energy is transmitted to the tissues, which affects the atoms within the individual cells. very high levels of radiation, such as that from a nuclear explosion, will cause severe cell damage in a human being, particularly to the bone marrow cells and the reproductive cells, which cannot be repaired by the body. low-level doses of radiation, such as cosmic radiation or medical x-rays, do not cause such severe damage to the cells and in most cases, any such damage is repaired satisfactorily by the body's own mechanism. it is not possible to predict a maximum safe threshold of exposure to low levels of radiation, because individuals vary in their biological response.8., 12. the international commission for radiological protection (icrp) recommends maximum mean body effective dose limits of 20 msv/year (averaged over 5 years) for workers exposed to radiation as part of their occupation (including flight crew), and 1 msv/year for the general population, with an additional recommendation that the equivalent dose to the fetus should not exceed 1 msv during the declared term of pregnancy.when the concorde supersonic transport aircraft was flying, the effective dose rate for the occupants at cruising altitude was measured to be in the range of 12–15 μsv/h. on ultra long-haul flights at high latitudes, such as a boeing 747-400 flying between london and tokyo, the effective dose rate at cruising altitude is around 5 μsv/h. on short-haul commercial operations, the effective dose rate in europe is in the region of 1–3 μsv/h.for typical annual flight schedules, crew members accumulate around 4 or 5 msv/year operations, and between 1 and 2 msv/year on european short-haul operations from cosmic radiation.for airline passengers, the icrp recommended limit for the general public of 1 msv/year equates to about 200 flying hours/year on the trans-equatorial routes. there are essentially two types of airline passenger: the occasional social traveler and the frequent business traveler. the public limit (1 msv/year) will be of no consequence to the social traveler but could be of significance to the frequent business traveler. the 1 msv annual limit would be exceeded if the business traveler were flying more than eight transatlantic or five antipodean return journeys per year. business travelers are exposed as an essential part of the occupation, and it is entirely logical to apply the occupational limit of 20 msv/year to this group.cosmic radiation is of no significance at altitudes below about 25 000 ft (7600 m) because of the attenuating properties of the earth's atmosphere. there is no evidence from epidemiological studies of flight crew of any increase in incidence of cancers linked to ionizing radiation exposure, such as leukemia. in general terms, as far as the risk of developing cancer induced by radiation exposure is concerned, it has been calculated that an accumulated dose of 5 msv/year for 20 years increases the risk of developing cancer (in the general population) from 23–23.4%, i.e. an increase of risk of 0.4% over 20 years. compared with all the other risks encountered during a working life, this is very low.cosmic radiation is both a complex and emotive subject. it cannot be seen, touched, smelled or tasted and yet it is present all around us. while it is known that there is no level of radiation exposure below which effects do not occur, all the evidence indicates that there is an extremely low probability of airline passengers or crew suffering any abnormality or disease as a result of exposure to cosmic radiation.the world health organization and the international civil aviation organization recommend that aircraft arriving through countries reporting certain indigenous infectious diseases, be treated with pesticides.13 this remains a controversial issue. while it is understandable that countries such as new zealand would not want to risk the entry of certain vector-borne diseases transmitted by mosquitoes, there remains concern about the safety and efficacy of various pesticides used, particularly while passengers are in the cabin (top of descent spraying). there appears to be less concern about using residual pesticides during routine aircraft maintenance. at this time, however, the us environmental protection agency has not promoted the registry of any pesticides in the usa for use in aircraft disinsection on american carriers. as vector-borne diseases re-emerge, however, these policies may need re-evaluation in order to prevent the transmission of disease. further education of air crew and passengers will be needed, and these issues are being reviewed.the transmission of mycobacterium tuberculosis (tb) during air travel has been most extensively studied. tb is transmitted by the inhalation of droplet nuclei (air-borne transmission). two of six investigations conducted by the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) between 1992 and 1995 have indicated that the transmission of tb from a symptomatic person to other passengers or crew members does occur during air travel.21., 22. in one investigation, a flight attendant was diagnosed with cavitary pulmonary tuberculosis in november, 1992. of the 212 flight crew who worked with this flight attendant between august and october, 1992, 25.6% had a positive tuberculin skin test (tst) result. two of these contacts had documented conversion of tst status. tst positivity and conversion was associated with a cumulative flight-time exposure of 12 h or more. in the second investigation, a foreign-born passenger developed symptomatic pulmonary tuberculosis while visiting friends in the usa. she traveled from baltimore, maryland to chicago, illinois (2 h flight) and then from chicago to honolulu, hawaii (8 h and 38 min flight). three of the 113 passengers on the baltimore to chicago flight had a positive tst, two were foreign-born. fifteen of the 257 passengers on the flight from chicago to honolulu had a positive tst. four of these passengers converted their tst. in both investigations, all of the new infections were latent tb infection; none developed active tuberculosis.the hepa filters used in newer commercial aircraft are able to filter out tb bacteria from the recycled air and are also used in hospital respiratory isolation rooms to prevent the spread of tb within the hospital setting. the number of air exchanges per hour in aircraft exceeds the number recommended for hospital isolation rooms. furthermore, the prevalence of transmissible tuberculosis among air travelers is estimated to be 5–100/100 000 passengers, depending on the route of the plane.23 the risk of tb transmission on a commercial aircraft, therefore, remains low. mathematical models estimate that the chance of acquiring tb during air travel while sitting near a highly infectious source is approximately 1 in 1000.24 human influenza virus is spread by droplet and air-borne transmission.25 one of the first well-documented outbreaks of influenza on a commercial airline was published by moser and colleagues in 1977.17 thirty-eight of 54 passengers and crew members became ill after exposure to a passenger with symptomatic influenza infection. another two passengers showed serological evidence of infection without becoming ill. the outbreak was attributed to an engine malfunction, which required the aircraft to remain on the runway for approximately 4.5 h without adequate ventilation. most of the passengers remained on the plane during the delay, and the clinical attack rate varied with the amount of time spent aboard the aircraft.another outbreak of presumed influenza that was associated with air travel occurred among workers traveling from a remote mine in northwestern australia.26 one worker became symptomatic with an influenza-like illness prior to the flight, which lasted 3 h and 20 min. over the 3–4 days that followed the flight, 15 workers presented with similar complaints and were unable to work. an additional five workers reported upper respiratory tract symptoms when questioned but were able to continue working. there was no ventilation system malfunction reported for the aircraft associated with this outbreak. a significant limitation of this report is the lack of etiologic confirmation.since 1997, a new strain of avian influenza virus (h5n1) has been responsible for a number of outbreaks involving a large number of birds, and rarely, humans. from december 2003–february 2007, 237 laboratory-confirmed human infections were identified in asia and se asia, and have primarily been due to direct contact with poultry.25., 27. limited, non-sustained person-to-person spread has also been described in a few cases. as with sars, the airline industry will look to public health authorities for guidance in the event that an (avian) influenza pandemic should occur.the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) was first identified in southern china in november, 2002, and recognized as a global threat by march, 2003.28 it was caused by a novel coronavirus, the sars-associated coronavirus, and was spread primarily via droplet transmission, although spread by air-borne and contact transmission could not be ruled out. despite the clear role of international travel in the spread of sars during the 2003 outbreak,28., 29. there had been only one case of likely in-flight transmission.30 limited transmission probably occurred aboard aircraft, but the risk was felt to be low. fortunately, no suspected cases of sars have been reported since may, 2004.31  neisseria meningitidis is a leading cause of meningitis and sepsis in children and young adults and is spread by droplet transmission. meningococcal disease has been documented in travelers, particularly those traveling for the hajj; however, transmission due to exposure while aboard an aircraft has not been definitively documented.20 guidelines for the management of airline passengers who have been exposed to meningococcal disease are based on information available from investigations of tb transmission aboard aircraft. us guidelines are online and available at: http://www.cdc.gov/travel/menin-guidelines.htm measles is a highly contagious viral disease that is spread by air-borne transmission. a person infected with measles is contagious from the first onset of vague symptoms (up to 4 days before rash appears) to approximately 4 days after the development of rash; therefore the potential for disease transmission during air travel exists. from 1996 to 2000, 63 of the 207 cases of imported measles into the usa developed a rash directly before or on the day of air travel. from these imported cases, only one documented case of in-flight transmission was reported.32 despite the risk, few cases of measles occur as a direct result of in-flight exposure.32., 33. amornkul and colleagues investigated the extent of measles transmission aboard an international commercial flight after exposure to an infected passenger.32 of the 276 potentially exposed passengers, 82% completed a follow-up questionnaire, including 29 passengers who reported close contact with the ill passenger before, during, or after the flight. none of the contacted passengers reported symptoms consistent with measles.available data indicate that infectious agents can be transmitted from person-to-person aboard an aircraft on the ground and during flight, just as they can in any other situation where people find themselves in close proximity. from investigations of disease outbreaks associated with air travel, two main risk factors for the spread of communicable diseases have been identified: flight duration (>8 h, including ground time) and seating proximity to the source. there is no evidence that the pressurized cabin itself makes transmission of disease any more likely. once the aircraft doors are closed, air-conditioning is provided from the auxiliary power unit until it can be supplied from the aircraft engines, thus ensuring the filtration benefits of air recirculation. there does appear to be increased risk of disease spread when the aircraft ventilation system is inoperable.guidelines are in place to assist flight crew in the management of ill passengers and can be accessed from www.who.org, www.cdc.gov, or www.iata.org. in general, good respiratory and hand hygiene practices should always be encouraged, and people with febrile illnesses should postpone air travel whenever possible.aircrews, particularly of international fights, are at risk for the same illnesses to which other travelers are exposed. because of their very short-term stays, and stays that are generally in major cities, they may not be as intensely exposed to some illnesses as others. however, their lifestyle may predispose them to other risks. because of their frequent international travel, flight crews should receive health recommendations that are specifically geared to their travel patterns, itineraries, and lifestyles. for example, an international pilot flying frequently to sub-saharan africa would do well not to take routine anti-malarial medication, but should take precautions to avoid insect bites, may carry a self-treatment regimen if desired and if the layovers are extended, and should be instructed to seek medical attention immediately if a fever occurs. the medical department of international carriers should either be able to provide good information and appropriate immunizations to aircrew, or should have an arrangement with a travel clinic for appropriate education of flight crews.other than transmission of infectious agents, flight crews have other health concerns that though briefly mentioned here, are best reviewed in an occupational health setting. issues that have surfaced with regard to pilot health have included the safety of refractive surgery, the use of serotonin re-uptake inhibitors, safety of pilots to fly with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus or even with the human immunodeficiency virus, as well as issues related to pilot fatigue. flight attendants' concerns have ranged from reproductive health problems, menstrual disorders, chronic back pain, to fears of an increased risk of breast cancer.epidemiological studies have shown an increased prevalence of malignant melanoma among flight crew members. this is thought to be a result of a lifestyle, allowing exposure to sunlight that is perhaps increased during layover periods.34 flying as a passenger should be no problem for the fit, healthy, and mobile individual. but for the passenger with certain pre-existing conditions, the cabin environment may exacerbate their underlying problems.although many problems relate to the physiological effects of hypoxia and expansion of trapped gases, it should be remembered that the complex airport environment can be stressful and challenging to the passenger, leading to problems before even becoming air-borne.although passengers with medical needs require medical clearance from the airline, passengers with disabilities do not. disabled passengers do need to notify the requirement for special needs, such as wheelchair assistance or assignment of seats with lifting armrests, and this should be done at the time of booking.an area of little exploration has been air travel stress and anxiety.35 whereas typical issues such as fear of flying have been addressed by the airlines in the past, problems that have surfaced related to terrorism and airline security have increased. passenger lines, terminal crowding, lesser personal services due to cost-cutting, etc. have taken a toll on the ease in which air travel is currently perceived. addressing these potential problems with the air traveler, particularly with those who have any underlying illness or general anxiety, is helpful.the objectives of medical clearance are to provide advice to passengers and their medical attendants on fitness to fly, and to prevent delays and diversions of the flight as a result of deterioration in the passenger's well-being. it depends upon self-declaration by the passenger, and upon the attending physician having an awareness of the flight environment and how this may affect the patient's condition.most major airlines provide services for those passengers who require extra help, and most have a medical advisor to assess the fitness for travel of those with medical needs. individual airlines work with their own guidelines, but these are generally based on those published by the aerospace medical association on fitness for travel.36 (copies of the asma guidelines may be obtained from the association online at: www.asma.org or tel: 703 739 2240.)the international air transport association (iata) publishes a recommended medical information form (medif) for use by member airlines (fig. 46.5 ). the medif should be completed by the passenger's medical attendant and passed to the airline, or travel agent, at the time of booking to ensure timely medical clearance.medical clearance is required when:▪fitness to travel is in doubt as a result of recent illness, hospitalization, injury, surgery or instability of an acute or chronic medical condition▪special services are required (e.g. oxygen, stretcher or authority to carry or use accompanying medical equipment such as a ventilator or a nebulizer). medical clearance is not required for carriage of an invalid passenger outside these categories, although special needs (such as a wheelchair) must be reported to the airline at the time of booking. cabin crew members are unable to provide individual special assistance to invalid passengers beyond the provision of normal in-flight service. passengers who are unable to look after their own personal needs during flight (such as toileting or feeding) will be asked to travel with an accompanying adult who can assist with these needs.it is vital that passengers remember to carry with them any essential medication, and not pack it in their checked baggage.deterioration on holiday or on a business trip of a previously stable condition – such as asthma, diabetes, or seizure disorder – can often give rise to the need for medical clearance for the return journey. a stretcher may be required, together with medical support, and this can incur considerable cost. it is important for all travelers to consider supplemental travel insurance, which includes provision for the use of a specialist repatriation company to provide the necessary medical support. in determining the passenger's fitness to fly, a basic knowledge of aviation physiology and physics can be applied. any trapped gas will expand in volume by up to 30% during flight, and consideration must be given to the effects of the relative hypoxia encountered at a cabin altitude of up to 8000 ft above mean sea level. the altitude of the destination airport may also need to be taken into account in deciding the fitness of an individual to undertake a particular journey.the passenger's exercise tolerance can provide a useful guide on fitness to fly; if unable to walk a distance >50 m without developing dyspnea, there is a risk that the passenger will be unable to tolerate the relative hypoxia of the pressurized cabin. more specific guidance can be gained from knowledge of the passenger's baseline sea level blood gas levels and hemoglobin value. a good source of guidance is provided by the british thoracic society website.37  table 46.1 shows the guidelines recommended by one international carrier. this list is not exhaustive, and it should be remembered that individual cases might require individual assessment by the attending physician.the prolonged period of immobility associated with long-haul flying can be a risk for those individuals predisposed to develop deep venous thrombosis (dvt). pre-existing risk factors include:▪blood disorders and clotting factor abnormalities▪cardiovascular disease▪malignancy▪major surgery▪lower limb/abdominal trauma▪dvt history▪pregnancy▪estrogen therapy (including oral contraception and hormone replacement therapy)▪>40 years of age▪immobilization▪pathological body fluid depletion▪smoking▪obesity▪varicose veins. although many airlines promote lower limb exercise via the in-flight magazine or videos, and encourage mobility within the cabin, those passengers known to be vulnerable to dvt should seek guidance from their attending physician on the use of compression stockings and/or anti-coagulants. there is currently no evidence that flying, per se, is a risk factor for the development of dvt, but those at high risk should avoid any form of prolonged immobilization such as is associated with travel.38 in addition to the reduction in ambient pressure and the relative hypoxia, it is important to consider the physical constraints of the passenger cabin. a passenger with a disability must not impede the free egress of the cabin occupants in case of emergency evacuation.there is limited leg space in an economy class seat and a passenger with an above-knee leg plaster or an ankylosed knee or hip may simply not fit in the available space. the long period of immobility in an uncomfortable position must be taken into account, and it is imperative to ensure adequate pain control for the duration of the journey, particularly following surgery or trauma.even in the premier class cabins with more available legroom, there are limits to space. to avoid impeding emergency egress, immobilized or disabled passengers cannot be seated adjacent to emergency exits, despite the availability of increased leg room at many of these positions. similarly, a plastered leg cannot be stretched into the aisle because of the conflict with safety regulations.there is limited space in aircraft toilet compartments and if assistance is necessary, a traveling companion is required.the complexities of the airport environment should not be underestimated, and must be considered during the assessment of fitness to fly. the formalities of check-in and departure procedures are demanding and can be stressful, and this can be compounded by illness and disability, as well as by language difficulties or jet lag.the operational effect of the use of equipment such as wheelchairs, ambulances, and stretchers must be taken into account, and the possibility of aircraft delays or diversion to another airport must be considered. it may be necessary to change aircraft and transit between terminals during the course of a long journey, and landside medical facilities will not be available to a transiting passenger.there is often a long distance between the check-in desk and the boarding gate. not all flights depart from or arrive to jetties, and it may be necessary to climb up or down stairs and board transfer coaches. passengers should specify the level of assistance required when booking facilities such as wheelchairs.in addition to the main gaseous system, all commercial aircraft carry an emergency oxygen supply for use in the event of failure of the pressurization system or during emergencies such as fire or smoke in the cabin. the passenger supply is delivered through drop-down masks from chemical generators or an emergency reservoir, and the crew supply is from oxygen bottles strategically located within the cabin. the drop-down masks are automatically released en masse (the so-called ‘rubber jungle’) in the event of the cabin altitude exceeding a pre-determined level of between 10 000 and 14 000 ft. this passenger emergency supply has a limited duration if provided by chemical generators, usually in the region of 10 min. the flow rate is between 4 and 8 l (ntp)/min, and is continuous once the supply is triggered by the passenger pulling on the connecting tube. oxygen supplied from an emergency reservoir is delivered to the cabin via a ‘ring main’, and in some aircraft it is possible to plug a mask into this ring main to provide supplementary oxygen for a passenger.sufficient first-aid oxygen bottles are carried to allow the delivery of oxygen to a passenger in case of a medical emergency in-flight, at a rate of 2 or 4 l (ntp)/min. this cannot be used to provide a pre-meditated supply for a passenger requiring it continuously throughout a journey, however, since it would then not be available for emergency use.if a passenger has a condition requiring continuous (‘scheduled’) oxygen for a journey, this needs pre-notification to the airline at the time of booking the ticket. most airlines charge a fee: one major british international airline charges gb£100 (us$170, euro€146) per sector, whether the supply is derived from gaseous bottles or via a mask plugged into the ring main. for us carriers, a fee of approximately us$100 (€85) is charged for providing oxygen during flight. some airlines also allow passengers to use their own portable oxygen concentrators, provided the unit meets certain specifications. an additional fee may be charged for medical clearance by an airline representative. passengers who require continuous oxygen during travel should be made aware that airlines provide oxygen service only during the flight, and not during the time spent in the airport terminal. passengers need to make arrangements for oxygen to be supplied at their destination upon arrival.oxygen bottles, regulators and masks must meet minimum safety standards set by the regulatory authorities, and the oxygen must be of ‘aviation’ quality, which is a higher specification than ‘medical’ quality. regulations regarding in-flight oxygen use are in flux. for further information regarding therapeutic oxygen for airline passengers, see websites: www.medaire.com and www.airsep.com an in-flight medical emergency is defined as a medical occurrence requiring the assistance of the cabin crew. it may or may not involve the use of medical equipment or drugs, and may or may not involve a request for assistance from a medical professional traveling as a passenger on the flight. it can be something as simple as a headache, or a vaso-vagal episode, or something major, such as a myocardial infarction or impending childbirth.the incidence is comparatively low, although the media impact of an event can be significant. one major international airline recently reported 3022 incidents occurring in something over 34 million passengers carried in 1 year. the breakdown of these incidents into generalized causes is shown in table 46.2 .39., 40. the top six in-flight emergency medical conditions reported by the same airline are shown in table 46.3 .39., 40. any acute medical condition occurring during the course of a flight can be alarming for the passenger and crew because of the remoteness of the environment. cabin crew members receive training in advanced first aid and basic life support and the use of the emergency medical equipment carried on board the aircraft. many airlines give training in excess of the regulatory requirement, particularly when an extended range of medical equipment is carried.although the crew are trained to handle common medical emergencies, in serious cases they may request assistance from a medical professional traveling as a passenger. such assisting professionals are referred to as ‘good samaritans’. cabin crew members attempt to establish the bona fide of medical professionals offering to assist, but much has to be taken on trust.the international nature of air travel can lead to complications in terms of professional qualification and certification, specialist knowledge, and professional liability. an aircraft in flight is subject to the laws of the state in which it is registered, although when not moving under its own power (i.e. stationary at the airport) it is subject to the local law. in some countries, it is a statutory requirement for a medical professional to offer assistance to a sick or injured person (e.g. france), whereas in other states no such law exists (e.g. uk or usa).some countries (e.g. usa) have enacted a good samaritan law, whereby an assisting professional delivering emergency medical care within the bounds of his or her competence, is not liable for prosecution for negligence. in the uk, the major medical defense insurance companies provide indemnity for their members acting as good samaritans.some airlines provide full indemnity for medical professionals assisting in response to a request from the crew, whereas other airlines take the view that a professional relationship is established between the sick passenger and the good samaritan and any liability lies within that relationship. at the time of writing, there has been no case of successful action against a good samaritan providing assistance on board an aircraft.recognition by the airline of the assistance given by the good samaritan is complicated by the special nature of the relationship between the professional, the patient, and the airline. indemnity, whether provided by the airline or the professional's defense organization, depends upon the fact that a good samaritan act is performed.if a professional fee is claimed or offered, the relationship moves away from being that of a good samaritan act to one of a professional interaction with an acceptance of clinical responsibility. this implies that the professional is suitably trained, qualified, and experienced to diagnose, treat and follow-up the particular case, and the good samaritan indemnity provision no longer applies.follow-up of the outcome for the passenger after disembarkation is frequently difficult, because the sick passenger is no longer in the care of the airline and becomes the responsibility of the receiving hospital or medical practitioner.responsibility for the conduct of the flight rests with the aircraft captain who makes the final decision as to whether or not an immediate unscheduled landing or diversion is required for the well-being of a sick passenger. the captain has to take into account operational factors as well as the medical condition of the sick passenger.in practice, it is rarely possible to land immediately, even if a suitable airport is in the immediate vicinity. the aircraft has to descend from cruising altitude, possibly jettison fuel to reduce to landing weight, and then fly the approach procedure to land.consideration has to be given to the availability of appropriate medical facilities, and in many cases, it is of greater benefit for the sick passenger to continue to the scheduled destination where the advantage of appropriate facilities will outweigh the risks of continuing the flight.operational factors to be considered include the suitability of an airport to receive the particular aircraft type. the runway must be of sufficient length and load-bearing capacity, the terminal must be able to accommodate the number of passengers on the flight, and if the crew go out of duty time, there must be sufficient hotel accommodation to allow an overnight stay of crew and passengers.the cost to the airline may be substantial, including the effects of aircraft and crew unavailability for the next scheduled sector, as well as the direct airport and fuel costs of the diversion. in making the decision whether or not to divert, the captain will take advice from all sources. if a good samaritan is assisting, he or she has an important role to play, perhaps in radio consultation with the airline medical advisor.many airlines use an air-to-ground link, which allows the captain and/or the good samaritan to confer with the airline medical adviser regarding the diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of the sick passenger. the airline operations department is also involved in the decision-making process. some airlines maintain a worldwide database of medical facilities available at or near the major airports; others subscribe to a third party provider giving access to immediate medical advice and assistance with arranging emergency medical care for the sick passenger at the diversion airport.the link from the aircraft is made using either radio-telephone voice or datalink (vhf or acars), high-frequency radio communication (hf) or a satellite communication system (satcom). satcom is installed in newer, long-range aircraft, and is gradually replacing hf as the industry norm for long-range communication. the advantage is that satcom is unaffected by terrain, topography or atmospheric conditions, and allows good transmission of voice and data from over any point on the globe. digitization and telephone transmission of physiological parameters is a well established practice, particularly in remote areas of the world. an aircraft cabin at 37 000 ft (11 500 m) can be considered a remote location in terms of availability of medical support, and the digital technology used in satcom is similar to that used in modern ground-to-ground communication. the advent of satcom has enabled the development of air-to-ground transmission to assist in diagnosis. pulse oximetry and ecg are examples of data that can assist the medical advisor to give appropriate advice to the aircraft captain, although the cost/benefit analysis has to be weighed very carefully.40 national regulatory authorities stipulate the minimum scale and standard of all equipment to be carried on aircraft operating under their jurisdiction, which includes emergency medical equipment. these standards stipulate the minimum requirement, although in practice many airlines carry considerably more equipment. tables 46.4 and 46.5 give the minimum standard of equipment mandated by the federal aviation administration (faa) to be carried by aircraft registered in the usa, while table 46.6 gives the standard determined by the joint aviation authorities (jaa) for aircraft registered in european states.in determining the type and quantity of equipment and drugs to include in the medical kits, the airline must fulfill the statutory requirements laid down by the regulatory authority. other factors to be considered are:▪the route structure and stage lengths flown. different countries of the world vary in their regulations on what might be imported and exported, particularly in terms of drugs. for example, it is illegal to import morphine derivatives into the usa, even if securely locked in a medical kit ▪passenger expectations. premier class business passengers from the developed world expect a higher standard of care and medical provision than passengers traveling on a relatively inexpensive package holiday flight▪training of cabin crew. the crew must have a knowledge and understanding of the kit contents, for use by themselves or in assisting a good samaritan. they must be proficient in first aid, resuscitation and basic life support▪differences in medical cultures. ideally, the kit contents should be familiar to any good samaritan, irrespective of nationality or training. some authorities require information and drug names to be given in more than one language▪equipment and drugs appropriate for likely medical emergencies. it is important to audit the incidence and outcome of in-flight medical emergencies and maintain a review of the kit content. this review should also take into account changes in medical practice▪space and weight. the medical equipment must be accessible, but securely stowed. some airlines divide the equipment and drugs between basic first-aid kits, which are readily accessible on the catering trolleys, and a more comprehensive emergency medical kit that is sealed and stowed with other emergency equipment. space and weight are always at a premium within the cabin, and the medical kits must be as light and compact as possible▪shelf life and replenishment. a tracking system for each kit must be in place to ensure that contents have not exceeded their designated shelf life. similarly, after use of a kit, there has to be a procedure for replenishment. in practice, the aircraft can depart if the kit contents meet the statutory minimum, even though drugs or equipment have been used from the non-statutory part of the kit. many airlines subcontract the tracking and replenishment to a specialist medical supply company. although basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr) techniques are an essential part of cabin crew training, the outcome of an in-flight cardiac event may be improved if appropriate resuscitation equipment is available. this can range from a simple mouth-to-mouth faceguard, to a resuscitation bag and mask and airway, to an endotracheal tube and laryngoscope, to an automatic external defibrillator (aed).the decision on the scale of equipment to be carried has to take account of the same parameters used in determining the content of the emergency medical kits (table 46.5).in addition, a cost/benefit analysis has to balance the cost of acquisition, maintenance and training against the probability of need and the expectation of the traveling public.the european resuscitation committee and the american heart association endorse the concept of early defibrillation as the standard of care for a cardiac event both in and out of the hospital setting. however, the protocol includes early transfer to an intensive care facility for continuing monitoring and treatment, which is not always possible in the flight environment.despite this inability to complete the resuscitation chain, it is becoming increasingly common for commercial aircraft to be equipped with aeds and for the cabin crew to be trained in their use. this has been mandated in the usa by the faa (table 46.5). experience of those airlines which carry aeds indicates that there may be benefits to the airline operation as well as to the passenger. some types of aed have a cardiac monitoring facility, and this can be of benefit in reaching the decision on whether or not to divert. for example, there is no point in initiating a diversion if the monitor shows asystole, or if it suggests that the chest pain is unlikely to be cardiac in origin.lives have been saved by the use of aeds on aircraft and diversions have been avoided, so it could be argued that the cost/benefit analysis is weighted in favor of carrying aeds as part of the aircraft medical equipment. nonetheless, it is important that unrealistic expectations are not raised. an aircraft cabin is not an intensive care unit and the aed forms only a part of the first aid and resuscitation equipment.many airlines have in place a procedure for the follow-up of crew members involved in a distressing event, such as a serious medical emergency. this can be valuable in avoiding long-term post-traumatic stress disorder, and also in reinforcing the training that the crew member has already undergone.the pressurized aircraft cabin provides protection against the hostile environment encountered at cruising altitudes.▪although the partial pressure of oxygen is less than at sea level, it is more than adequate in a pressurized aircraft cabin for normal healthy individuals▪the cabin air, although dry, does not cause systemic dehydration and harm to health. dry skin and eyes can lead to discomfort, which can be alleviated by the use of moisturizing creams and eye drops▪although up to half of the air in modern pressurized aircraft is recirculated, the amount of fresh air available to each occupant exceeds that available in air-conditioned buildings. recirculating the air has the advantage of reducing cold draughts and increasing the humidity▪in modern aircraft, all the recirculated air is passed through high-efficiency particulate filters which remove >99% of particles, including bacteria and viruses▪there is an extremely low probability of airline passengers or crew suffering any abnormality or disease as a result of exposure to cosmic radiation. the passenger cabin of a commercial airliner is designed to carry the maximum number of passengers in safety and comfort, within the constraints of cost-effectiveness. it is incompatible with providing the facilities of an ambulance, an emergency room, an intensive care unit, a delivery suite, or a mortuary.the ease and accessibility of air travel to a population of changing demographics inevitably means that there are those who wish to fly, who may not cope with the hostile physical environment of the airport, or the hostile physiological environment of the pressurized passenger cabin. it is important for medical professionals to be aware of the relevant factors, and for unrealistic public expectations to be avoided.transmission aboard aircraft of illnesses, such as tuberculosis, sars and other respiratory diseases, has been reported, but is infrequently documented and probably rare. there is no evidence that a properly functioning environmental control system contributes to increased disease transmission aboard an aircraft.most airlines have a medical advisor who may be consulted before flight to discuss the implications for a particular passenger. such pre-flight notification can prevent the development of an in-flight medical emergency that is hazardous to the passenger concerned, inconvenient to fellow passengers, and expensive for the airline.for those with disability, but not an acute medical problem, pre-flight notification of special needs and assistance will reduce the stress of the journey and enhance the standard of service delivered by the airline.the importance of adequate medical insurance coverage for all travelers cannot be over-emphasized. finally, as is the case in commercial aviation, there is a continuing audit of activity and an ongoing risk/benefit analysis. the industry is under constant evolution, and is now truly global in its activity. application of basic physics and physiology, and an understanding of how this may affect underlying pathology, will minimize the medical risks to the traveling public.18 since the first case of covid-19 reported at the end of january, india has reported more than 250,000 covid-19 infections. more than 7,000 people have died due to the virus. as of 31 may, the testing positivity rate in the country was near 4%, the death rate from the pandemic was around 3% and the doubling rate of disease -or the amount of time it takes to double the covid-19 infections was 12 days. 40% recovery rate of infected patients was reported in this period (1). same as other countries, there are hotspots and clusters of infection in india. nearly 80% of the active cases are in five major states -maharashtra, tamil nadu, delhi, gujarat and madhya pradesh, and importantly more than 60% of the cases in five cities, including mumbai, delhi, chennai and ahmedabad, according to government reports (2) . india, with a draconian nature of nationwide lockdown appears to be done relatively worse in preventing the number of confirmed cases compared to other countries with less restrictive regimes (3).nearly more than half of patients who have died of the infection have been aged 60 and above, and many have underlying conditions, hewing to the international data about older people being more vulnerable to the disease (4). at the same time, nearly, 13 percent of the kerala population are aged over 60 (5). as per economic review by state planning board, around 27 percent men and 19 percent women are diabetic, 41 percent men and 39 percent women are hypertensive, more than one lakh people are being treated for cancer, 5.3 lakh people have chronic pulmonary disease and 4.8 lakh have asthma (6). this paper compares the situation of covid-19 pandemic in above mentioned major states and kerala by the different phase of lockdown and also highlights kerala's fight against the pandemic.kerala a small state in india, the land that proclaims itself as "god's own country" is a heaven for tourists who make a beeline to the backwaters, palm-fringed sunset beaches, lush hills of the western ghats, and the spice plantations on the mountain slopes. kerala has been known around the globe as a model for preventing the spread of covid-19. global media have been pouring praise on the state's success (7, 8) . kerala reported the first three cases of coronavirus in india in late january, all three victims being indians who had studied in wuhan. later own kerala received people from italy too with positive cases including a whole family tested positive. the state soon began implementing mandatory quarantines for visitors arriving from abroad and from outside of the state, weeks before the centre instituted similar measures across the country. a detailed guideline to deal with a new coronavirus was issued by the department of health and family welfare of kerala on 5th january 2020, much earlier than the first case detection in india. importation and transmission-based approach for testing strategy on january 26th 2020, even before the first case of covid-19 was reported in the state (9).the critical situation is that kerala is a small state (38,863 sq.km), but it homes for 35 million people makes it 819 people per square kilometer, eight most densely state in india. other than people living in closely kerala has 25 lakh migrants, who frequently travel to their native land. in addition to that, international travelling is a part of kerala culture, which is connected to the rest of the world through four airports serve around 17 million passengers annually. finally, kerala has 2.5 million migrant laborers from other states. simply population density, affluent non-resident keralites and thriving tourism all raise the risk for an outbreak in kerala. however, the containment strategies adopted by kerala have helped in slowing the spread of infection into the community by the end of may (10). study also suggests that the head start that kerala had in preventing the spread of the disease in the initial phase may help the state in dealing with the next wave of the disease (11).kerala opted for a combination of massive testing, quarantine and support of the poor with positive short-term effects (12). by january itself, the government started promoting using the face masks. on february 3, the state government declared covid-19 as state calamity and drafted measures to be followed. by the beginning of march, government introduced more precautionary measures by shutting down the schools and colleges and asking all religious and other groups cancel all gatherings, including marriages, to encourage social distancing (13). on the nutritional point of view, free meals delivered for school children at their home. the government also instructed internet service providers to improve the bandwidth to encourage work from home (14). the use of traditional medicines for immune-boosting was encouraged, as kerala is the land of ayurveda.we used publicly available data from https://www.covid19india.org/ and covid-19 daily bulletin (jan 31-may 31), directorate of health services, kerala (https://dashboard.kerala.gov.in/). data compiled in this web portal is based on state bulletins and official handles. the details of the data are available on the website. this portal data matches with the data provided by the ministry of health and family welfare, government of india (https://www.mohfw.gov.in/). for the analysis purpose, the number of covid-19 cases categorized into 5 phases i.e., pre-lockdown (before 24 th march 2020), 1 st phase of lockdown (25 th march to 14 th april 2020), 2 nd phase of lockdown (15 th april to 3 rd may 2020,) 3 rd phase of lockdown (4 th may to 17 th may 2020), and 4 th phase of lockdown (18 th may to 31 st may 2020).we calculate the phase-wise period prevalence rate (ppr) and the case fatality rate (cfr) of the last phase. the measures are, = * 100000 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.20132308 doi: medrxiv preprint = * 100where the total covid-19 is confirmed cases in the i th lockdown phase; pi is the total population of the state and di is the number of deaths i th lockdown phase. it must be noted that a robust estimate of cfr is possible only at the end of the pandemic. however, the dynamics of fatality and recovery rates across affected countries and states would enhance the knowledge base and provide useful information in the ongoing outbreak of covid-19. the pandemic is among the worst to have happened in the history of mankind. the disease a little later started sweeping across all the indian states adding up to a dreadful toll. change in cumulative caseload over time in india ( figure 1 ) shows that the infections increased rapidly since march and there was a sharp rise of cases in may 2020. on the other hand, for a population of over a billion, india has approximately 1.9 million hospital beds, 95 thousand icu beds, and 48 thousand ventilators as estimated by a research team (15). the study reveals that most of the beds and ventilators in india are concentrated in seven states; uttar pradesh (14.8%), karnataka (13.8%), maharashtra (12.2%), tamil nadu (8.1%), west bengal (5.9%), telangana (5.2%) and kerala (5.2%). deaths . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . period. the total number of new cases has increased consistently nearly in all states over the lockdown period. however, kerala is the only state experiencing a decline in new cases per day till the third lockdown. then, kerala also experienced a spike in the fourth lockdown in the month of may. results also show that among the most affected states, maharashtra and west bengal stand at the top with higher levels of cfr as against kerala. it is also found that kerala recorded negative percentage change in the new covid-19 cases between lockdown-1.0 and lockdown-2.0 and between lockdown-2.0 and lockdown-3.0 (16). the state of kerala, where the epidemic started early in the country, has only less than one percent of case fatality rate. while among other most affected states, fatality rate is 6.2 percent in gujarat and 6 percent in west bengal.kerala has been known around the globe as a model for preventing the spread of covid-19. global media have been pouring praise on the state's success. the state reported the first case of the country in january. the state moved fast because of that by mid-january it had already put in place a strategy to isolate people who showed symptoms in hospitals, to trace their contacts and put them in-home quarantine. kerala has done remarkably well in controlling the virus transmission, even compared with countries with similar populations ( . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. four months on, kerala is being praised for not just flattening the curve of the deadly infection even as it shoots up in many parts of the country but for having an extremely low mortality rate and high recovery rate. what is the strategy behind the success story?identifying the case from the beginning got special attention; intensive training provided to health workers varies from doctors to asha workers to identify the covid-19 symptoms. health check-up booths established in all railway stations, state borders and airport the check and guide the people coming from outside. for speedier testing, the government set up a facility at virology institute alappuzha with the help of national institute of virology, pune. soon after 12 more testing labs were launched in different parts of the state. in addition to using the centrally procured real-time polymerase chain reaction (pcr) testing kits, kerala was the first state to acquire rapid test kits from the pune-based mylab.the state used testing optimally, figure 5 shows the number of covid-19 tests and active cases in a different phase of lockdown in kerala, the number of tests and active cases are showing non-linear trend throughout the period but in phase 4 of lockdown both showing an increasing trend. the number samples tested per day never crossed 1000 till the beginning of the may only four times more than 1000 tests conducted, the average number of tests per day after 100 active cases were 687 till the end of phase 2 (fig 5) . one active case per 84 tests was also reported till may 31. in phase 3 number, tests increased to more than 1000 per day due to the return of the people from different part of the country and the world. the average number of tests increased from 721 in the first two phases to 1214 in the last periods of the lockdown. till the end of the lockdown, the average number of tests per day stood below 600. with the rise of active cases, number of tests per day also increased.tests are conducted optimally with prioritizing the groups to be tested rather than the whole population. this selective approach was taken due to the limiting factors include availability, reagents, pcr equipment, trained staffs, protective gear for each collection and cost (rs 4,500 per test). the indian council of medical research (icmr) handed out 100,000 rdks to kerala in the beginning; instead of testing the general population, the kerala government identified four priority groups. 1) healthcare workers who had served patients with covid-19 and other . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . patients (25,000 kits). 2. government staff with public contact, like police personnel, ashas, anganwadi workers and local government staff (20,000 kits), and essential service providers (5,000kits), e.g., -workers of community kitchens, food and grocery deliverers, and ration shop vendors, etc. 3) people quarantined at home (25,000 kits). 4) all senior citizens (20,000 kits). at the beginning (first phase lockdown) one active case per 34 tests reported (fig 5) due to the formidable step was taken by the government. contact tracing was conducted effectively by devolved power and funding to grass root-level bodies, and established a social system that promotes community participation and public cooperation. other than that, 2.5 lakh volunteers (age group 22-40) were raised through government registration and trained with local government bodies and deployed to deliver the food, contact tracing and checking those under in quarantine. people who had returned from infected countries after january 14 were tracked and scanned by the help of local government bodies. by the beginning of the march introduced the mandatory quarantine for 28 days for everyone who enters the state and more helplines were created at local levels including a separate helpline for mental health. high risk people who were in contact with the positive cases were tracked, and kept in quarantine helped in optimal utilization of the covid-19 treatment kits. for the 300 positive cases reported in kerala in april, close to 1.75 lakh people were traced and quarantined. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . figure 6 shows the number of people isolated per one active covid-19 case in a different phase of lockdown in kerala. dynamic tracing will help the government to utilize the available recourse to fight the pandemic. throughout the time, an average number of 581 people kept in isolation per active case. it varied in a different phase of the lockdown, it was high in the beginning, to avoid the risk of community spread. then it reduced to fewer numbers in first two phases of lockdown due to the uncompromising regulations to prevent the social contact while in third phase isolation per active case got increased due to lower number of active cases in that state (fig 6) . in the fourth phase as the number of active cases increased the isolation per active case was also reduced, the compulsory isolation for whoever entering the state in this period reduced the risk social contact and the high number of isolation.government set up isolation wards in all medical colleges, district and general hospitals besides around 650 corona care centers were created in hostels, educational institutions and unoccupied buildings. around 1lakh room were kept aside to face emergencies. the district kasaragod was the highest number of covid-19 cases registered in kerala, the government opened medical college hospital in two days with more than 250 beds, well-equipped machinery and staffs. by joining with tata group, the government of kerala is developing a 500-bed intensive covid-19 treatment center at the same district. may 31pre-lockdown phase 1 phase 2 phase 4 phase 3 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.20132308 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 7 shows the percentage of people in home isolation in different phases of lockdown in kerala. it points that 9 out of ten people were isolated in their own home with necessary support including food, medical check-up and counselling and the government was ready with enough number of isolation beds to accommodate a large number of people. the people who were not able to self-quarantine themselves their own house, the government didn't directly admit them in the hospital facilities; they have been admitted in the isolation facilities created in hostels, educational institutions and unoccupied buildings. those who showed symptoms were admitted to hospital facilities and got tested. figure 8 shows the number of hospitalization related covid-19 in different phases of lockdown in kerala. this intensive approach (systematic contact tracing and isolating) help the health system from being overburdened by people, in average 76 people hospitalized per-day because of that at its peak, only 816 people (in april-phase 1) and 1241 people in the fourth phase were admitted. average of 96 people per day hospitalized in all phases, but in the last phase, it got increased to 181 people per day due to the return of the people from outside of the state (fig 8) . even at the end of may per day, hospitalization never crossed 250 marks and had less than 1500 people admitted to health facilities all the time. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . march 23, kerala announced complete lockdown before the announcement of national lockdown. the most crucial step was taken on march 15 by announcing an awareness campaign named 'break the chain' to create awareness and promote social distancing. the government was holding a press conference every evening to answer all the queries related to the outbreak and to reduce the spread of rumors. local bodies mandate that everyone hold an umbrella when they go out, and distributed umbrellas produced by kudumbashree to promote involuntary social distancing. in high-risk areas, the police force created an online delivery system of essential food items. innovative products have been developed as part of beating the covid-19 in the state. a smart bin called 'bin-19' has been launched for the collection and disinfection of used face-mask which is based on internet of things (iot) (17).kerala became the first state that does away with 'zonal classification of districts on the basis of covid-19 spread where more police would be deployed to ensure the strict adherence of quarantine and lockdown norms (18). meanwhile, kudumbashree, a keralan grassroots network of local organization and women's self-help groups, has helped the state's containment strategy by producing masks and hand sanitizer. some 1,200 community kitchens were established to . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.20132308 doi: medrxiv preprint feed the indigent and unemployed, and kudumbashree has already served 300,000 meals a day. kerala's educated population has behaved responsibly, limiting community transmission, and cooperating with authorities.one of the two major challenges that kerala faced in this period was the security of the migrant workers from other states, just after the announcement of the national lockdown, the state set up nearly 20000 camps for migrant laborers, by calling them, 'guest workers'. 3 lakh workers were hosted in these places and urged to wait in place till the special trains will be arranged to take them home. the second challenge was the returning migration from abroad; they were tested before taking the flight and rechecked after landing in kerala. once they reach kerala, they will be taken to government facility for quarantine in respected districts and requested to stay there until the time of quarantine is over. same time government set up isolation wards in all medical colleges, district and general hospitals besides around 650 corona care centers were created in hostels, educational institutions and unoccupied buildings.the state got into the action by january and rolled out measures that reduced the spread of the covid-19. the first coronavirus case in india was confirmed in kerala's trissur district on january 30, 2020. ever since, the state has been fighting the pandemic in an exemplary manner. the steps were simple but proactive. the equation for kerala's success has been simple, prioritized testing, widespread contact tracing, and promoting social distance. besides that two factors fuelled this success, the 'formidable' grass root level primary health care system and the experience it gleaned in the last two years when it handled another deadly virus outbreak (2018 nipah virus outbreak in kerala).state announces its strategy is trace, quarantine, test, isolate and treat in the beginning only. the state soon began implementing mandatory quarantines for visitors arriving from abroad and from outside of the state, weeks before the centre instituted similar measures across the country. they also imposed uncompromising controls, were supported by an excellent healthcare system, government accountability, transparency, public trust, civil rights and importantly the decentralized governance and strong grass-root level institutions. this much decentralized system has hold out the test of two severe floods and another viral outbreak in past years, ordinarily making good use of the active and voluntary engagement of the public.while the rest of india worries about the rate at which new cases are doubling, that question has become almost irrelevant in kerala, the curve has been flattened for now and transmission limited. currently, how it manages to ease the lockdown safely will depend on a large number of factors. the summer monsoon rains, the floods that will follow, as well as returning migrants will add layers of complexity. but one thing is clear: when the next wave of novel coronavirus hits, which it will, the state will be ready. the "proactive" measures taken by kerala such as . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . early detection of cases and extensive social support measures can be a "model for india and the world"an emergent pneumonia outbreak originated in wuhan city, in the late december 20191. the pneumonia infection has rapidly spread from wuhan to most other provinces and other 24 countries2,3. world health organization declared a public health emergency of international concern over this global pneumonia outbreak on 30th january 2020.the typical clinical symptoms of the patients who suffered from the novel viral pneumonia were fever, cough, and myalgia or fatigue with abnormal chest ct, and the less common symptoms were sputum production, headache, hemoptysis, and diarrhea4–6. this new infectious agent is more likely to affect older males to cause severe respiratory diseases7,8. some of the clinical symptoms were different from the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) caused by sars coronavirus (sars-cov) that happened in 2002–2003, indicating that a new person-to-person transmission infectious agent has caused this emergent viral pneumonia outbreak8,9. chinese researchers have quickly isolated a new virus from the patient and sequenced its genome (29,903 nucleotides)10. the infectious agent of this viral pneumonia happenening in wuhan was finally identified as a novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), the seventh member of the family of coronaviruses that infect humans11. on 11th february 2020, who named the novel viral pneumonia as “corona virus disease (covid19)”, while the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) suggested this novel coronavirus name as “sars-cov-2” due to the phylogenetic and taxonomic analysis of this novel coronavirus12.coronaviruses belong to the family of coronaviridae, of the order nidovirales, comprising large, single, plus-stranded rna as their genome13,14. currently, there are four genera of coronaviruses: α-cov, β-cov, γ-cov, and δ-cov15,16. most of the coronavirus can cause the infectious diseases in human and vertebrates. the α-cov and β-cov mainly infect the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and central nervous system of humans and mammals, while γ-cov and δ-cov mainly infect the birds13,17–19.usually, several members of the coronavirus cause mild respiratory disease in humans; however, sars-cov and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) explored in 2002–2003 and in 2012, respectively, caused fatal severe respiratory diseases20–22. the sars-cov and mers-cov belong to the β-cov23,24. 2019-ncov explored in wuhan also belongs to the β-cov according to the phylogenetic analysis based on the viral genome10,11. although the nucleotide sequence similarity is less than 80% between 2019-ncov and sars-cov (about 79%) or mers-cov (about 50%), 2019-ncov can also cause the fetal infection and spread more faster than the two other coronaviruses7,9,11,25–27. the genome nucleotide sequence identity between a coronavirus (batcov ratg13) detected in the bat rhinolophus affinis from yunnan province, china, and 2019-ncov, was 96.2%, indicating that the natural host of 2019-ncov may also be the rhinolophus affinis bat11. however, the differences may also suggest that there is an or more intermediate hosts between the bat and human. a research team from the south china agricultural university has invested more than 1 000 metagenomic samples from pangolins, and found that 70% pangolins contained β-cov28. one of the coronaviruses they isolated from the pangolins comprised a genome that was very similar with that from 2019-ncov, and the genome sequence similarity was 99%, indicating that the pangolin may be the intermediate host of 2019-ncov29.2019-ncov possessed the typical coronavirus structure with the “spike protein” in the membrane envelope30, and also expressed other polyproteins, nucleoproteins, and membrane proteins, such as rna polymerase, 3-chymotrypsin-like protease, papain-like protease, helicase, glycoprotein, and accessory proteins10,11,30. the s protein from coronavirus can bind to the receptors of the host to facilitate viral entry into target cells31,32. although there are four amino acid variations of s protein between 2019-ncov and sars-cov, 2019-ncov can also bind to the human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), the same host receptor for sars-cov, as 2019-ncov can bind to the ace2 receptor from the cells from human, bat, civet cat, and pig, but it cannot bind to the cells without ace211,33–35. a recombinant ace2-ig antibody, a sars-cov-specific human monoclonal antibody, and the serum from a convalescent sars-cov-infected patient, which can neutralize 2019-ncov, confirmed ace2 as the host receptor for 2019-ncov36–39. the high affinity between ace2 and 2019-ncov s protein also suggested that the population with higher expression of ace2 might be more susceptible to 2019-ncov40,41. the cellular serine protease tmprss2 also contributed to the s-protein priming of 2019-ncov, indicating that the tmprss2 inhibitor might constitute a treatment option36.the common transmission routes of novel coronavirus include direct transmission (cough, sneeze, and droplet inhalation transmission) and contact transmission (contact with oral, nasal, and eye mucous membranes)42. although common clinical manifestations of novel coronavirus infection do not include eye symptoms, the analysis of conjunctival samples from confirmed and suspected cases of 2019-ncov suggests that the transmission of 2019-ncov is not limited to the respiratory tract4, and that eye exposure may provide an effective way for the virus to enter the body43.in addition, studies have shown that respiratory viruses can be transmitted from person to person through direct or indirect contact, or through coarse or small droplets, and 2019-ncov can also be transmitted directly or indirectly through saliva44. notably, a report of one case of 2019-ncov infection in germany indicates that transmission of the virus may also occur through contact with asymptomatic patients45.studies have suggested that 2019-ncov may be airborne through aerosols formed during medical procedures46. it is notable that 2019-ncov rna could also be detected by rrt-pcr testing in a stool specimen collected on day 7 of the patient’s illness47. however, the aerosol transmission route and the fecal–oral transmission route concerned by the public still need to be further studied and confirmed.the airborne spread of sars-cov (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus) is well-reported in many literatures. the dental papers show that many dental procedures produce aerosols and droplets that are contaminated with virus55. thus, droplet and aerosol transmission of 2019-ncov are the most important concerns in dental clinics and hospitals, because it is hard to avoid the generation of large amounts of aerosol and droplet mixed with patient’s saliva and even blood during dental practice53. in addition to the infected patient’s cough and breathing, dental devices such as high-speed dental handpiece uses high-speed gas to drive the turbine to rotate at high speed and work with running water. when dental devices work in the patient’s oral cavity, a large amount of aerosol and droplets mixed with the patient’s saliva or even blood will be generated. particles of droplets and aerosols are small enough to stay airborne for an extended period before they settle on environmental surfaces or enter the respiratory tract. thus, the 2019-ncov has the potential to spread through droplets and aerosols from infected individuals in dental clinics and hospitals.a dental professional’s frequent direct or indirect contact with human fluids, patient materials, and contaminated dental instruments or environmental surfaces makes a possible route to the spread of viruses53. in addition, dental professionals and other patients have likely contact of conjunctival, nasal, or oral mucosa with droplets and aerosols containing microorganisms generated from an infected individual and propelled a short distance by coughing and talking without a mask. effective infection control strategies are needed to prevent the spread of 2019-ncov through these contact routines.human coronaviruses such as sars-cov, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), or endemic human coronaviruses (hcov) can persist on surfaces like metal, glass, or plastic for up to a couple of days51,56. therefore, contaminated surfaces that are frequently contacted in healthcare settings are a potential source of coronavirus transmission. dental practices derived droplets and aerosols from infected patients, which likely contaminate the whole surface in dental offices. in addition, it was shown at room temperature that hcov remains infectious from 2 h up to 9 days, and persists better at 50% compared with 30% relative humidity. thus, keeping a clean and dry environment in the dental office would help decrease the persistence of 2019-ncov.first of all, dental professionals should be able to identify a suspected case of covid-19. to date that this paper was drafted, the national health commission of the people’s republic of china has released the 5th edition of the guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia. in general, a patient with covid-19 who is in the acute febrile phase of the disease is not recommended to visit the dental clinic. if this does occur, the dental professional should be able to identify the patient with suspected 2019-ncov infection, and should not treat the patient in the dental clinic, but immediately quarantine the patient and report to the infection control department as soon as possible, particularly in the epidemic period of 2019-ncov.the body temperature of the patient should be measured in the first place. a contact-free forehead thermometer is strongly recommended for the screening. a questionnaire should be used to screen patients with potential infection of 2019-ncov before they could be led to the dental chair-side. these questions should include the following: (1) do you have fever or experience fever within the past 14 days? (2) have you experienced a recent onset of respiratory problems, such as a cough or difficulty in breathing within the past 14 days? (3) have you, within the past 14 days, traveled to wuhan city and its surrounding areas, or visited the neighborhood with documented 2019-ncov transmission? (4) have you come into contact with a patient with confirmed 2019-ncov infection within the past 14 days? (5) have you come into contact with people who come from wuhan city and its surrounding areas, or people from the neighborhood with recent documented fever or respiratory problems within the past 14 days? (6) are there at least two people with documented experience of fever or respiratory problems within the last 14 days having close contact with you? (7) have you recently participated in any gathering, meetings, or had close contact with many unacquainted people?if a patient replies “yes” to any of the screening questions, and his/her body temperature is below 37.3 °c, the dentist can defer the treatment until 14 days after the exposure event. the patient should be instructed to self-quarantine at home and report any fever experience or flu-like syndrome to the local health department. if a patient replies “yes” to any of the screening questions, and his/her body temperature is no less than 37.3 °c, the patient should be immediately quarantined, and the dental professionals should report to the infection control department of the hospital or the local health department. if a patient replies “no” to all the screening questions, and his/her body temperature is below 37.3 °c, the dentist can treat the patient with extra- protection measures, and avoids spatter or aerosol-generating procedures to the best. if a patient replies “no” to all the screening questions, but his/her body temperature is no less than 37.3 °c, the patient should be instructed to the fever clinics or special clinics for covid-19 for further medical care.fecal–oral transmission has been reported for 2019-ncov, which underlines the importance of hand hygiene for dental practice. although appropriate hand hygiene is the routine prerequisite for dental practice, hand-washing compliance is relatively low, which imposes a great challenge to the infection control during the epidemic period of 2019-ncov transmission. reinforcement for good hand hygiene is of the utmost importance. a two-before-and-three-after hand hygiene guideline is proposed by the infection control department of the west china hospital of stomatology, sichuan university, to reinforce the compliance of hand washing. specifically, the oral professionals should wash their hands before patient examination, before dental procedures, after touching the patient, after touching the surroundings and equipment without disinfection, and after touching the oral mucosa, damaged skin or wound, blood, body fluid, secretion, and excreta. more caution should be taken for the dental professionals to avoid touching their own eyes, mouth, and nose.at present, there is no specific guideline for the protection of dental professionals from 2019-ncov infection in the dental clinics and hospitals. although no dental professional has been reported to acquire 2019-ncov infection to the date the paper was drafted, the last experience with the sars coronavirus has shown vast numbers of acquired infection of medical professionals in hospital settings57. since airborne droplet transmission of infection is considered as the main route of spread, particularly in dental clinics and hospitals, barrier-protection equipment, including protective eyewear, masks, gloves, caps, face shields, and protective outwear, is strongly recommended for all healthcare givers in the clinic/hospital settings during the epidemic period of 2019-ncov.based on the possibility of the spread of 2019-ncov infection, three-level protective measures of the dental professionals are recommended for specific situations. (1) primary protection (standard protection for staff in clinical settings). wearing disposable working cap, disposable surgical mask, and working clothes (white coat), using protective goggles or face shield, and disposable latex gloves or nitrile gloves if necessary. (2) secondary protection (advanced protection for dental professionals). wearing disposable doctor cap, disposable surgical mask, protective goggles, face shield, and working clothes (white coat) with disposable isolation clothing or surgical clothes outside, and disposable latex gloves. (3) tertiary protection (strengthened protection when contact patient with suspected or confirmed 2019-ncov infection). although a patient with 2019-ncov infection is not expected to be treated in the dental clinic, in the unlikely event that this does occur, and the dental professional cannot avoid close contact, special protective outwear is needed. if protective outwear is not available, working clothes (white coat) with extra disposable protective clothing outside should be worn. in addition, disposable doctor cap, protective goggles, face shield, disposable surgical mask, disposable latex gloves, and impermeable shoe cover should be worn.a preoperational antimicrobial mouthrinse is generally believed to reduce the number of oral microbes. however, as instructed by the guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia (the 5th edition) released by the national health commission of the people’s republic of china, chlorhexidine, which is commonly used as mouthrinse in dental practice, may not be effective to kill 2019-ncov. since 2019-ncov is vulnerable to oxidation, preprocedural mouthrinse containing oxidative agents such as 1% hydrogen peroxide or 0.2% povidone is recommended, for the purpose of reducing the salivary load of oral microbes, including potential 2019-ncov carriage. a preprocedural mouthrinse would be most useful in cases when rubber dam cannot be used.the use of rubber dams can significantly minimize the production of saliva- and blood-contaminated aerosol or spatter, particularly in cases when high-speed handpieces and dental ultrasonic devices are used. it has been reported that the use of rubber dam could significantly reduce airborne particles in ~3-foot diameter of the operational field by 70%58. when rubber dam is applied, extra high-volume suction for aerosol and spatter should be used during the procedures along with regular suction59. in this case, the implementation of a complete four-hand operation is also necessary. if rubber dam isolation is not possible in some cases, manual devices, such as carisolv and hand scaler, are recommended for caries removal and periodontal scaling, in order to minimize the generation of aerosol as much as possible.the high-speed dental handpiece without anti-retraction valves may aspirate and expel the debris and fluids during the dental procedures. more importantly, the microbes, including bacteria and virus, may further contaminate the air and water tubes within the dental unit, and thus can potentially cause cross-infection. our study has shown that the anti-retraction high-speed dental handpiece can significantly reduce the backflow of oral bacteria and hbv into the tubes of the handpiece and dental unit as compared with the handpiece without anti-retraction function60. therefore, the use of dental handpieces without anti-retraction function should be prohibited during the epidemic period of covid-19. anti-retraction dental handpiece with specially designed anti-retractive valves or other anti-reflux designs are strongly recommended as an extra preventive measure for cross-infection59. therefore, the use of dental handpieces without anti-retraction function should be prohibited during the epidemic period of covid-19. anti-retraction dental handpiece with specially designed anti-retractive valves or other anti-reflux designs are strongly recommended as an extra preventive measure for cross-infection.medical institutions should take effective and strict disinfection measures in both clinic settings and public area. the clinic settings should be cleaned and disinfected in accordance with the protocol for the management of surface cleaning and disinfection of medical environment (ws/t 512-2016) released by the national health commission of the people’s republic of china. public areas and appliances should also be frequently cleaned and disinfected, including door handles, chairs, and desks. the elevator should be disinfected regularly. people taking elevators should wear masks correctly and avoid direct contact with buttons and other objects.the medical waste (including disposable protective equipment after use) should be transported to the temporary storage area of the medical institute timely. the reusable instrument and items should be pretreated, cleaned, sterilized, and properly stored in accordance with the protocol for the disinfection and sterilization of dental instrument (ws 506-2016) released by the national health commission of the people’s republic of china. the medical and domestic waste generated by the treatment of patients with suspected or confirmed 2019-ncov infection are regarded as infectious medical waste. double-layer yellow color medical waste package bags and “gooseneck” ligation should be used. the surface of the package bags should be marked and disposed according to the requirement for the management of medical waste.since december 2019, the newly discovered coronavirus (2019-ncov) has caused the outbreak of pneumonia in wuhan and throughout china. 2019-ncov enters host cells through human cell receptor ace2, the same with sars-cov, but with higher binding affinity61. the rapidly increasing number of cases and evidence of human-to-human transmission suggested that the virus was more contagious than sars-cov and mers-cov9,25,27,61. by mid-february 2020, a large number of infections of medical staff have been reported62, and the specific reasons for the failure of protection need to be further investigated. although clinics such as stomatology have been closed during the epidemic, a large number of emergency patients still go to the dental clinics and hospitals for treatment. we have summarized the possible transmission routes of 2019-ncov in stomatology, such as the airborne spread, contact spread, and contaminated surface spread. we also reviewed several detailed practical strategies to block virus transmission to provide a reference for preventing the transmission of 2019-ncov during dental diagnosis and treatment, including patient evaluation, hand hygiene, personal protective measures for the dental professionals, mouthrinse before dental procedures, rubber dam isolation, anti-retraction handpiece, disinfection of the clinic settings, and management of medical waste.mental health problems constitute a high proportion (16%) of global disease and injury burden among adolescents [1] . in south korea, such problems are projected to become the third leading disease group of disability-adjusted life years among adolescents by 2030 [2] . psychological problems in this country tend to begin during adolescence (≥14 years) [1] and are diagnosed at a young age (≤25 years) [3] . in 2016, 42.4% of adolescents experienced high stress, with suicide being the greatest cause of mortality [4] . given that suicidal ideation could be an early contributing factor of suicide attempts [5] , an urgent investigation is needed to cope with the spread of suicidal ideation and stress.factors linked to suicidal ideation and stress in adolescents are well established at the intrapersonal, interpersonal, and community levels. for example, being male, having good physical health [6] , social support [7] , low body mass index [8] , and living in rural areas [9] are associated with decreased suicidal ideation. social support from family and high academic achievement are associated with less stress [10] , while subjective health [11] and high body weight [12] are linked to high stress. importantly, increased physical activity is correlated with low suicidal ideation [13] and stress [14, 15] . despite the possible benefits, many high school students are less likely to participate in physical activity outside of school (vigorous physical activity = 27.26 min/week, moderate physical activity = 36.99 min/week) [16] . however, when adolescents participated in high levels of physical education at school, they also exhibited elevated physical activity outside of school [17] . this link implies the need to verify the potential role of physical education on adolescent mental health.a number of beneficial associations between physical education and mental health have been reported [18] . for example, students who engaged in frequent physical education also had high academic achievement [19] . in addition, increased participation in physical education is associated with a lower likelihood of obesity and cardiovascular risk among adolescents [20] . likewise, when adolescents have good experiences with their physical education, they may accumulate a positive attitude towards physical activity generally [21] . positive interactions with teachers could also affect health-related quality of life [22] . therefore, these classes are potentially an important setting to promote values (e.g., active lifestyles) that discourage suicidal ideation and stress. however, as far as we are aware, little is known regarding the role of physical education in influencing suicidal ideation and stress among adolescents.available research on physical education has largely focused on improvements to leisure-time physical activity and physical health [23] [24] [25] . although a study found no associations between physical education and suicidal behaviors in middle school students [26] , high educational pressure forces adolescents to spend about 15 h a day on studying, including school, homework, and private tutoring (cram schools) [27] . this heavy workload may lead to elevated stress levels. despite the compulsory nature of physical education in south korea [28] , approximately 75% of high schools failed to implement national curriculum guidelines for physical education (150 min/week) [29] , instead replacing that time with self-guided study to prepare for university admission exams [28] . promoting awareness of physical activity's potential ameliorating effects is one strategy to proactively cope with mental health problems in adolescents. the aim of this research was to verify whether participating in physical education influences suicidal ideation and stress in high school students from south korea. because physical activity participation has a clear gender difference [16] , we examined male and female students separately.in total, 65,528 participants were included in the twelfth korea youth risk behaviour web-based survey 2016 (kyrbs; figure 1 ). only high school students were included in the current analysis. participants with missing data on body mass index (bmi), academic achievement, and school type were excluded to yield a final sample size of 28,451.the current cross-sectional study was conducted from october 2019 to february 2020 using the secondary data obtained from kyrbs [30] after ethics approval by the university's institutional review board (irb no. khsirb-19-354 (ea)). kyrbs, which is an internet-based and self-administered national survey, was set up to monitor school health and has been managed by south korea's centers for disease and prevention (cdc) since 2005. kyrbs uses a multi-stage cluster sampling design to collect data on health-risk behaviors in south korean adolescents, including smoking status, alcohol, obesity, diet, and physical activity [31] . during the data collection of kyrbs, students did not provide any personal identifiers such as names, phone numbers, or living address. participating students were all volunteers across 400 middle and high schools, representing 17 administrative areas. students took the survey in their school's computer room under teacher supervision and their anonymity was ensured. they provided consent before the survey was initiated [32] . detailed procedures are published elsewhere [31] . subjective health is an individual's own perception of overall or physical health status [33] . subjective health was assessed with a one-item scale ("how would you rate your health in general?") on a five-point likert scale ("very unhealthy" = 1 to "very healthy" = 5) [34] . high scores indicate high subjective health.social support is the emotional or tangible support from interpersonal relationships; evidence suggests it modulates physical and mental health [35] . social support was assessed with a one-item scale ("can you talk about your concerns with people (i.e., father, mother, brothers, sisters, friends, teachers, and others)?"). answers were dichotomized (no = 0 and yes = 1) [36] .to calculate bmi (kg/m 2 ), weight (kg) is divided by the square of height (m). this index is a rough measure of body fat and is widely used to categorize individuals as normal weight, overweight, or obese [37] . bmi was estimated via self-reported height and weight.academic achievement, or how well a student performs in school, affects socio-economic status, accessibility of medical care, and occupational choices [38] . as students are aware of these long-term outcomes, scholastic performance may influence their mental health. academic achievement was assessed with one item ("how was your grade point average in the last 12 months?") and recorded on a five-point likert scale (low = 1, mid-low = 2, mid = 3, mid-high = 4, high = 5) [39] . the scale was converted into a three-level variable (low/mid-low = 1, mid = 2, mid-high, high = 3) [40] . high scores indicate high academic achievement.physical education is the planned instruction of exercises and other physical activity during school hours [41] . physical education participation was measured using one item ("in an average week when you are in school, on how many days do you exercise in physical education classes?") on a four-point likert scale (0, 1, 2, ≥3 times/week) [23] . the scale was converted into a three-level variable (0, 1, ≥2 times/week). subjective health is an individual's own perception of overall or physical health status [33] . subjective health was assessed with a one-item scale ("how would you rate your health in general?") on a five-point likert scale ("very unhealthy" = 1 to "very healthy" = 5) [34] . high scores indicate high subjective health.social support is the emotional or tangible support from interpersonal relationships; evidence suggests it modulates physical and mental health [35] . social support was assessed with a one-item scale ("can you talk about your concerns with people (i.e., father, mother, brothers, sisters, friends, teachers, and others)?"). answers were dichotomized (no = 0 and yes = 1) [36] .to calculate bmi (kg/m 2 ), weight (kg) is divided by the square of height (m). this index is a rough measure of body fat and is widely used to categorize individuals as normal weight, overweight, or obese [37] . bmi was estimated via self-reported height and weight.academic achievement, or how well a student performs in school, affects socio-economic status, accessibility of medical care, and occupational choices [38] . as students are aware of these long-term outcomes, scholastic performance may influence their mental health. academic achievement was assessed with one item ("how was your grade point average in the last 12 months?") and recorded on a five-point likert scale (low = 1, mid-low = 2, mid = 3, mid-high = 4, high = 5) [39] . the scale was converted into a three-level variable (low/mid-low = 1, mid = 2, mid-high, high = 3) [40] . high scores indicate high academic achievement.physical education is the planned instruction of exercises and other physical activity during school hours [41] . physical education participation was measured using one item ("in an average week when you are in school, on how many days do you exercise in physical education classes?") on a four-point likert scale (0, 1, 2, ≥3 times/week) [23] . the scale was converted into a three-level variable (0, 1, ≥2 times/week).participant living environment was categorized into rural = 0 and urban = 1. rural areas included countries and urban areas included metropolitan cities.suicidal ideation is "thinking about, considering, or planning suicide" [42] and was assessed using one item ("during the past 12 months, did you ever seriously think about committing suicide?") [27] . the answer was recorded as "no" = 0 or "yes" = 1.stress is the anxiety, discomfort, and emotional tension that occurs after perceiving a threat or other difficult situation [43] . stress was measured with one item ("how often do you feel stress in your typical daily life?") on a five-point likert scale ("not at all" = 1, "not so much" = 2, "a little bit" = 3, "frequently" = 4," very frequently" = 5) [39] . the answer was categorized as "not stressed = 0 (1, 2, 3)" or "stressed = 1 (4, 5)" [43] .a range of demographic information was collected, including age and perceived household economic status. the latter was assessed using one item ("how do you perceive your household economic status?") on a five-point likert scale (low = 1 to high = 5) [43] . the answer was transformed into three categories (low = 1, medium = 2, high = 3). higher scores indicate better economic status. in kyrbs, high schools were categorized into academic and vocational [44] ; this was coded in the current analysis as ("general high school" = 0 vs. "vocational high school" = 1. the former's primary purpose is to improve academic performance; these include general, autonomous, science, foreign language, art, sport, and international high schools. the latter aims to provide field experience and includes agriculture/life industry, engineering, commercial information, fishery, and business high schools. school year (years 1, 2, and 3) were also measured.descriptive statistics were performed to examine participant characteristics. multiple logistic regressions were performed to investigate the associations of predictors with suicidal ideation, happiness, and stress. regression models were conducted in two steps: (1) with no adjustment and (2) adjusting for school type and school year. analyses were conducted in spss version 23 (spss inc., armonk, ny, usa) and statistical significance was set at p = 0.05.the final analysis included 28,451 students (male = 14,263, mean age = 16.41; female = 14,188, mean age = 16.42) ( table 1) . on average, male students had slightly higher subjective health and bmi than female students. female students reported a higher proportion of social support than male students. overall, more students had social support than not. most students resided in urban settings and attended general high schools instead of vocational high schools. most also perceived their household economic status to be in the middle. logistic regression model 1 ( table 2) indicated that subjective health, academic achievement, and perceived household economic status were significantly associated with a decreased likelihood of suicidal ideation in both genders. social support was significantly associated with a lower likelihood of suicidal ideation for all students. among girls, bmi was significantly associated with a greater likelihood of suicidal ideation. these associations persisted even after adjusting for school type and school year (model 2). physical education at least twice a week was significantly associated with a lower likelihood of suicidal ideation, but only among boys. when examining covariates, school type was associated with suicidal ideation, also only in boys.in logistic regression model 1 (table 3) , subjective health, academic achievement, perceived household economic status, and bmi were significantly associated with a decreased likelihood of stress in both genders. similarly, social support and physical education for more than twice a week were significantly associated with a lower likelihood of stress for all students. these associations (except bmi) persisted even after adjusting for school type and school year. school type was associated with a greater likelihood of stress for male students, while school year and increased stress were linked for both genders. we aimed to investigate intrapersonal, interpersonal, school, and community-level factors that predict suicidal ideation and stress using nationally representative data from south korean adolescents. physical education was associated with a decreased likelihood of suicidal ideation and stress, although this effect was dependent on gender and participation frequency.previous studies have identified effects of intrapersonal, interpersonal, and environmental factors on suicidal ideation [6] [7] [8] [9] . here, we add to that existing body of knowledge by demonstrating that physical education (≥2 times/weekly) may reduce suicidal ideation in male high school students. our findings partially corroborate earlier research showing that physical activity outside of school is linked to lower suicidal ideation [13] . however, our data contradicted a previous study showing that physical education was not associated with suicidal ideation among middle school students [26] . interestingly, that same study showed that sports team engagement inside or outside school is linked to a decreased likelihood of suicidal ideation [26] . the apparent benefit of sports teams may be due to increased freedom (choice to attend), given that these sports are outside regular school curricula. another possible reason for the difference between that study and ours is the participant pool; middle school students may experience less academic pressure than high school students. finally, the previous study did not investigate gender differences, and so the lack of an effect among girls may have obscured an effect among boys. following the national curriculum on physical education and providing suitable prevention programs therein could alleviate suicidal ideation and potentially reduce suicide attempts among male students [5] .the lack of association between physical education and suicidal ideation in female students may be partly attributable to lower interest among girls in physical education due to self-consciousness, low motivation [45] , and competence [46, 47] . however, suicidal ideation rates are higher in female than in male adolescents [48] , so further research is urgently warranted to determine how educators can encourage more participation in physical education among young women.our results suggest that physical education is potentially an effective method to alleviate stress among high school students, in line with previous qualitative research conducted in the united states [49] . stress levels among south korean high school students are very high because of increased academic pressure [50] and greater emphasis on education [39] compared with other cultures. indeed, two thirds of adolescents suffer from stress in south korea [4] . therefore, when attempting to implement curriculum guidelines for physical education, schools should exercise caution to avoid performance stress in the event of that students do poorly in physical education classes [51] . importantly, physical education should not be added on top of existing academic classes; instead, high schools could instead reallocate self-guided study time to physical education [28] .developing the interpersonal skills of physical education teachers may be necessary to incorporate a variety of programs that could encourage participation from male students [52] . for example, programs could provide a wider range of physical activities that interest students and increase their sense of accomplishment. in addition to lowering stress, physical education can also increase peer inclusion [51] .other barriers to physical education that should be addressed include insufficient quantity and quality of facilities [28] and the recent coronavirus disease-19 pandemic. adolescents may be reluctant to participate because of outbreak-induced anxiety and perceived difficulties in social distancing during physical activity [53] . thus, educational professionals are encouraged to expand infrastructure related to physical activity (e.g., gymnasiums), as well as to develop teaching programs that stimulate participation while attending to student mental health.the cross-sectional nature of our study means we could not infer any causation for suicidal ideation and stress, a limitation that future longitudinal or experimental designs should address. second, although physical education predicted suicidal ideation (in boys only) and stress (both genders), there is no data on whether the association extends to suicidal attempts [5] . further studies could address this question via mediation or structural analyses. finally, the results of the current study are not fully generalizable because we used self-reports to measure participation in physical education. to lessen measurement bias, accelerometers are recommended as an objective method to assess the duration and intensity of physical activity [54] . we do note the value of using a database such as kyrbs for a nationally representative assessment; moreover, the results of the current study can be easily compared with previous adolescent research that also employed kyrbs data [16] .this study used nationally representative data on south korean high school students to demonstrate that physical education predicts lower suicidal ideation and stress, even after accounting for well-known covariates. currently, only a quarter of high schools successfully implement national curriculum guidelines for physical education [29] , which is approximately 170 h/year [55] . we therefore conclude that there is a clear need to increase participation in physical education. in addition, we recommend more research on interventions to promote such participation in south korean high school students to improve their overall psychological health.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was declared as a pandemic by the world health organization 1 . unfortunately, no vaccine is available at this time. therefore, mitigation actions are being taken to minimize both the adverse effects of the pandemic on the economy and the spread of the virus. currently taken measures are mostly social distancing, isolation of cases and suspected cases, contact tracing, higher levels of hygiene, facial masks wearing, and mass population quarantines which cause vast socio-economical damage 2-6 . going forward there's a need to easen some of the measures to allow economic activity, while minimizing viral health damage.one extreme approach is a stratified release of population, lower risk first. the idea is that lower risk individuals would contract the virus, recover and gain immunity, thus slowing the epidemic rate for future uninfected individuals. the hope is that by the time higher risk individuals are released, the infection probability is greatly reduced and thus infection of the higher risk group is largely reduced. hence the term " herd immunity ". care is taken to release at a rate that would not overload the healthcare system.in the other extreme there are mitigation building blocks based on "social distancing". these are deliberate measures taken to restrict, slow and limit the spread of the virus such that only a very small number of individuals will end up infected until the disease is eradicated or a vaccination is available. social distancing measures could reduce the probability of contracting the virus given a contact, for example using facial masks, or reducing the rate of contacts of infected and susceptible individuals -thus reducing the spread of the virus [4] [5] [6] [7] . these measures typically include keeping a large portion of the population at home either constantly or intermittently. the challenge is how to reduce the economic and social cost of such measures to an acceptable level while controlling for viral spread.the mid-term goal is keeping r t <1 through social distancing measures, where r t indicates at every time (t) how many secondary infections are caused on average by a single infected case. r t >1 means the disease is spreading at an exponential growth rate as each case causes more than a new single case, and r t <1 means the disease is diminishing as each case causes less than a new single case. the special case of r t =1 or very close to one is not so theoretic, and suggests the disease continues at a fixed rate of new daily cases. in such a case, a short intervention can reduce the number of daily cases and then we can continue with the same measures, but in a lower rate of new daily cases. reduction of new daily cases could also assist in contact tracing, if done manually -which further slows the epidemic. r t at time zero is called the basic reproduction number r 0 . for sars-cov-2 the exact number is under active research and it could change from one country to another or given different environmental conditions 8-10 , with many estimated values in the range of 2.2-3.2 which means each case causes 2.2-3.2 new cases, unless people have already been infected and cannot get infected twice. when social distancing measures are taken, the reproduction rate changes, and it is then denoted by r instead of r 0 .social distancing measures have a potentially high price tag attached to them, both economically and socially. therefore, once the rate of new infections is low enough, we want to keep r t <1 but close to 1 with measures that cost the least. the situation is constantly changing and keeping r t <1 but close to 1 is a moving target -for example there are constant changes in human behaviour, public attention and public resilience, weather 11,12 changes, local outbreaks and so on and all could affect r t . we need to dynamically try different measures so we keep r t <1 but close to 1 while probing and estimating the current situation. therefore, we could occasionally cross the line to r t >1, which means growing infection rates until we take actions to reduce r t . the price paid for social distancing interventions is also in the difficulty of implementing them. complex measures could mean less compliance and less success in implementation and eventual effectiveness.as the current goal is to keep r t around 1 and the situation is constantly changing, information and response speed are the key. the consequences of quick feedback are priceless compared with alternatives. if the feedback loop for an action taken is 14-21 days, and during this time the virus could be back propagating at doubling the number of cases every 3-4 days. we could be expecting 3-7 sequential multiplications, i.e., 8-128 fold increase (2 3 to 2 7 ) in the number of new infections, and following a similar increase in icu beds. therefore, lack of prompt feedback, typically through mass-testing leads to a need to maintain a large spare capacity. maintaining spare capacity has a large cost associated with it, both monetary and possibly in human life. we propose how to promptly estimate the number of new infections and thus gain a short response time to actions taken.in the first part of the paper, key mitigation measures are suggested. the second part of the paper focuses on comparison between building blocks in terms of their effectiveness in controlling r t <1, and effectiveness in terms of percent of population business-day that is released. surprisingly, there is a large difference in epidemic-control effectiveness of strategies, while having similar economic costs by releasing the population to a similar extent. the key is not just the portion of the population that is released, but also the release pattern. this finding suggests that exit strategies could be optimized for both viral spread and economic value. the more successful strategies were the more complex ones, integrating several ideas. gaining understanding of the tradeoff is important as it could assist in building an exit strategy suited for a specific area, in a way that is cost effective and communicable to the public so compliance would be high. for each building block, we give the resulting reduction in r as indicated by our simulation.for example, dividing the population into two groups which take turns on a long weekend (fri-tue) self-isolation once every two weeks, while protecting the 5% most sensitive population would reduce r below 1 even if ten percent of the population does not follow it. the division to groups can be made on a personal rather than on a household basis.we give special consideration to the herd immunity approach. given the knowledge that has already accumulated, our results indicate that for now social distancing is expected to be a significantly more effective approach than herd immunity, with significantly less casualties across all age groups.a word of caution. our results are based on a seir agent-based simulator, which we built based on israeli population structure of nine million people, and based on existing knowledge on sars-cov-2 epidemiological behavior. the simulations are performed in a 1-day iteration cycle simulating a period of one year. we distinguish between infection within a household and outside, as existing literature shows the virus spreads significantly in familial infection clusters 13 . various exit-strategy building blocks are fed into the simulator so their outcome can be assessed given the existing knowledge. the simulation is executed 10 times over each set of parameters, but with different random choices. standard deviation of the results in these runs are given in time-based figures, when a point value is given it corresponds to the mean result. the exact structure and full list of assumptions is given in the supplementary at the end of this paper.we propose that the single most cost-effective epidemic control is immediate self-isolation of the entire household upon the first symptom 14 suspected as related to coronavirus of someone in the household. release from isolation is only after a negative laboratory result of the first person in the household to have shown a symptom, and provided that the other members of the household do not show any symptoms related to coronavirus.in our simulations, after this measure is taken, r dropped from r 0 =3.03 to r=1.54. this is a dramatic drop by a factor of 1.54/3.03 = 0.508. this drop is compared to the second-best epidemic control measure: immediate self-isolation on the first symptom of a person (without other household members), which results in r=2.2, a 2.2/3.03=0.726 factor drop. if the symptomatic person self-isolates on symptoms but we wait with household isolation until the virus test for the symptomatic person returns positive, and assuming a 5-day delay we get a much inferior situation with r=1.65. the effect size in this case between an immediate household isolation to a delayed one 1.54/1.65 = 0.93 is comparable to the effect of facial masks with protection factor of 10% 2.83/3.03=0.93, see figure 2 . these few days post symptoms and before diagnosis could be critical for reducing further infections directly or through other household members 15 . see figure  1 . if vast and prompt tests are in place, the difference between household isolation and personal isolation upon symptoms diminishes, as household members are assumed to enter isolation upon a positive test for one household member, and get checked themselves.immediate self-isolation of the entire household achieves an immediate stop to further spreading of the virus of both possibly affected but asymptomatic members and possibly other affected but presymptomatic household members. without fast and prompt testing it would probably not be enough to isolate just the symptomatic person, as research based on experience in china shows that a large proportion of the infections occur within households 13, 16 , see particular example 17 . patients are pre-symptomatic in the first few days after infection while still being possibly infecting. furthermore, it's estimated that a vast portion of the infections are made by pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic 18-23 . social distancing measures taken outside the household, reduces non-household infections. the declining infection rate between households means that relatively, more infection occurs within a household. it is also interesting to notice that areas with larger households are likely to suffer from a higher r even if all other parameters are the same. our simulations show that a self household isolation, even on the basis of fever alone of one of the members, has a dramatic effect in preventing the spread of the epidemic, and should be used together with any other measures taken 24 . four options: no isolation, self-isolation of a person upon the first symptom, self isolation of a person upon the first symptom together -household members join after a test returns positive 5 days later, self-isolation of the entire household upon the first symptom.self-isolation upon symptoms dramatically shortens the spreading period. a study on chinese experience in shenzhen shows it took an average of 4.6 days after symptoms onset to isolate an infected person, which was reduced to 2.7 days if the person was isolated due to contact tracing and not symptoms 13 .one implementation option is that every person of a household shall self-test for fever every day, with possible daily online compulsory reporting of body temperature as well as onset of other symptoms. body temperature could also be checked in key public locations or entry points. we estimate the daily number of new people with fever by assuming 0.3 percent of the adult population shows fever signs of above 38 celsius at any given day 25 , and dividing by an average conservative duration of a non-covid-19 fever disease of 1-4 days 26-28 . therefore, an order of 7,500 to 30,000 isolations shall occur daily and thus this number of daily tests for this purpose would be needed for a country the size of israel about 9 million people. only if the first symptomatic household member is found to be infected, a test would be carried out to the other family members -so the extra tests due to infected household members is expected to be insignificant compared to the background symptomatic non-sars-cov-2 cases.an improvement to reduce the amount of tests would be using machine learning algorithms utilizing additional external data to release a household from self-isolation without the need for a laboratory test for the virus. such external data can include the prevalence of coronavirus in the surrounding area, prevalence of other infectious diseases in the area, workplace, or by information on personal location voluntarily collected and stored on household members' mobile phones 29 etc.proposal 2: focus testing capacity on self-isolated households focus testing capacity on quickly testing self-isolated households. this approach simultaneously serves three important purposes in parallel:1. quick and accurate measure of actual coronavirus spread -as on average symptoms onset about 5.2 days after infection 30 , and households enter immediate self-isolation, immediate testing gives an accurate and near real-time measure of virus spread in the community, and could prevent the need for population survey-testing for the virus. 2. effective contact tracing -given self-isolated households contain the population with the highest risk of being infected that could have already continued unidentified infection chains, there's importance in locating those that are really infected and trace their contacts to isolate them. when testing is done quickly enough, we have better chances of isolating the non-household individuals that got infected by the detected cases, before they infect others. we note that we did not include contact tracing effects in our simulations, so the total combined effect of isolation and quick testing could be even stronger than we report. 3. public compliance and fast reporting -when the logic behind self-household isolation is shared with the public, and the public knows that they would be released in a short time from self-isolation if they didn't contract coronavirus, the public is more likely to comply with the instructions, and with compliance the virus spread would reduce. as symptoms might be mild to begin with, people might delay the request for a test. in the simulations we assume this delay would be half a day on average as we conservatively assumed people would only comply when having fever symptoms, and fever can be tested when entering the workplace, schools, and in a variety of other public places. if testing is fast enough, it suffices to isolate only the symptomatic person until results arrive.in the unfortunate scenario that there is not enough testing capacity to cover all the new symptomatic candidates, the importance of the proposed self-household isolation is even greater, as effective contact tracing would not be possible and infection has a significant familial base 13 . in such a case, sample testing of the isolated households might still provide a good proxy for the spread of the infection.it should be noted that not testing all the isolated population could lead to increasing public in-acceptance. perhaps when the number of new infections is high and it's likely the symptoms are due to sars-cov-2 infection, people would accept a delay in testing.probably less when the number of new infections shall drop to a few a day, and the chances of justified isolation shall be minimal yet crucial in preventing relapse.many countries regularly recommend the entire population (unless contraindicated) to vaccinate against seasonal influenza towards the winter 31 . we suggest strengthening this recommendation towards the winter this year. seasonal influenza could cause coronavirus-like initial symptoms 32 , and vaccination shall reduce the background noise of seasonal influenza symptoms, which could reduce the number of needed tests. in addition, reduction in influenza reduces pressure on the healthcare system and keeps the population in a healthier starting point. in short, reduction in influenza allows to focus scarce resources on the coronavirus front. likewise, the standard vaccination schedule should be kept and its importance communicated to the public.as the cost of facial masks is low, and absent information, counties are tempted to instruct the population to wear facial masks in addition to increased hygiene 4-6 . the hope is that these measures could reduce random infection by sars-cov-2 2,3 . whether these alone could stop the epidemic and what their contribution would be, if any, is unknown at this time. nevertheless, in figure 2 , we provide three simulations, assuming facial masks and hygiene measures reduce infection outside home by 10%, 30%, and 50% respectively. note we assume the measures are taken only while outside home, so household infection remains the same. see further analysis in the supplementary. we compare the efficiency of several key exit strategies building blocks, comparing how much they are efficient in stopping the epidemic in terms of r, while in relation to how effective they are the amount of average released business days they allow for the population. we summarize results of the partial release options in figure 3 .exit strategies building blocks we considered : (discussed above) 1. do nothing -let the virus swipe the population (dn) 2. immediate self-isolation upon symptoms (isi) 3. immediate self-household-isolation upon symptoms (ishi) 4. dn + wearing facial masks when outside home (dn+masks) 5. ishi + wearing facial masks when outside home (ishi+masks) 6. intermittent release. intermittent release of population, see 33 7. release certain percent of the population, quarantine the rest. the released group does not change across days. 8. release 95% of the population with 1-week quarantines as needed:release 95% healthiest by households, then a week quarantine is entered if virus spread causes above 2e -5 (2 in 100,000) true positive new household isolations daily averaged for a week. 9. improved two-group intermittent release. suggested below. 10. improved two-group intermittent with fixed 10% release. suggested below. a special category of its own of deliberate exposure while controlling exposure order:11. herd immunity -described below.in all strategies except dn, isi, and herd immunity, we isolated households upon the first symptom. for all simulations, we assumed leakage of infection from the released population to the quarantined population, such that being quarantined reduces the probability of infection from outside sources by a factor of 100 compared to the released population. while we cannot justify the exact factor, the need to model leakage is undoubted as there's always some level of incompliance, special needs that require going outside, need to buy supplies, human mistakes etc.personal risk prediction was based on a mocked personal coronavirus mortality prediction -see supplementary, and for a household as the average risk for the household members. alternatively, risk can be evaluated by age based on sars-cov-2 estimated infection fatality rate. in all simulations except dn, isi, ishi,dn+masks and ishi+masks, we kept the top 5% highest-risk household in isolation to protect them. in practice, other protection measures for sensitive populations are required, together with sensitive locations -these are outside the scope of the current paper.10 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. . in this family of strategies we greatly improve an earlier proposed family of strategy 33 . in these strategies, we release the population based on 14-day cycles, for a varying number of consecutive days depending on the particular variant. in the remainder of the days in the cycle, the previously released population is set on quarantine which we refer to as washout period . during the washout period, some of those who contracted the virus in the preceding release days would become symptomatic. hence, they will be "washed out" from further infecting others before the next cycle begins. another advantage of this family of strategies is that during the washout days r t is smaller due to the reduction in interactions.we suggest three improvements that together with ishi make a big difference:1. dynamic and gradual number of release days , vs. quarantine days.the object is to add as many release days while keeping r t below 1. based on measured near real-time r t (discussed above), if r t is below 1, and the load on the healthcare system is reasonable and the number of new true-positive daily household isolations is below desired threshold, we add a release day on expense of a quarantine day in a cycle. if r is growing above 1, we deduct a release day on the expense of a quarantine day in each 14-days cycle. we manage to significantly increase the number of release days in a cycle from 4 suggested in the original idea 33 to 9, thanks to our ishi isolation procedure, and despite that we assumed r 0 =3.03. additional measures could further increase the number of release days while keeping r t < 1.we suggest to divide the population into two groups a and b, whose quarantine days are disjoint but their release days can be joined. the population can be divided household-wise.the strength of this improvement is that while it keeps the washout periods in place, it further reduces infection on days that only one group is released. on each day that only one group is released, the number of interactions decrease and limit further infection in the group. thus, r is effectively reduced.of the possible day-divisions between the groups, we suggest divisions which maximizes the number of business days in an equal manner between the groups. we give several examples in the tables below, and note that with this adaptation, we can improve to 10 workdays out of a 14 days cycle, while keeping r below 1.12 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. .in other words a long weekend (fri-mon) once every two weeks suffices to reduce r below 1 under our model assumptions.one of the possible difficulties in implementing a two-group approach is dividing into two groups based on households rather than on a person by person basis. surprisingly, our simulations show that the difference in the basis of division is not significant in respect to r, while it could make a big difference in the ease of implementation. therefore, we suggest this improvement of dividing to groups based on a personal basis. this basis can also be set by the workplace, as long as it makes sure the division is such that it lowers in-workplace physical interaction.although effective, a two-group approach can be difficult to implement, mainly as some employees are essential and are needed at their workplace more than their group designates them or the group division is violated due to poor compliance. therefore, we present an option allowing a fixed release rate in parallel to the two groups. for example, a fixed 10% of the population could be released all the time, regardless of the group division. this improvement makes the scheme more real, at the cost of somewhat elevated r -see figure 4 for 80% business days. as we see, while the cost in terms of r is significant, rising from r=0.98 for two groups 10-4 days division on personal based group-division, to r=1.03 with additional 10% fixed population release -it's still very close to 1. even with just the addition of facial masks (or hygiene) at 10% protection it would bring us to r=0.93. this improvement allows for a long weekend (fri-mon) once every two weeks with division on a personal basis, with 10% of the people in complete noncompliance -a dramatic improvement in implementability while still keeping r below 1.13 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. 16 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. the higher-risk percentiles take an enormous amount of medical resources relative to their size, where the top 5% risk-group take a 544-fold more resources vs. the lower risk group (using the fitted predictor for risk assessment -see supplementary), or 178-fold more resources if we use age alone for risk assessment. the resources go hand in hand with their risk, which demonstrates why this population needs special protection also from the standpoint of resource usage, especially in the top 5%-10% percentiles.17 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.20072850 doi: medrxiv preprintwe discuss herd immunity separately from other strategy building blocks, as it is the only strategy that aims at increasing infection rates -even if only in certain age groups in an attempt to protect the rest and perhaps the economy. all other strategies are focused on preventing further infection. as such, herd immunity has one big advantage over all other strategies -immunity from relapse, under the assumption that a person cannot get infected twice. this advantage is believed to be only a temporary one, as the general belief is that if we wait long enough -there will be a vaccine that will provide immunity without the need to get large portions of the population sick, or that global efforts of social distancing and testing will eventually eradicate the disease.the logic behind the herd immunity approach is that the lowest risk households are released first, and as they are low-risk they shall have a reduced demand rate of healthcare resources and reduced casualties rate. the low-risk groups shall then be first to contract the virus, recover and gain immunity. thus, the virus transmission is reduced as those that recover do not infect others and cannot get sick again. further groups of increasing risk are then released too, in a measured rate as not to exceed healthcare capacity. the extremely high-risk groups shall be released last once the epidemic is over. therefore, we release the lowest-risk 25% immediately, and release further 5% of the population every two weeks until icu is at 1% capacity. as a result, icu utilization peaks and slightly overshoots, and we continue releasing higher risk groups every two weeks once icu capacity is back to at least 50% capacity again.the herd immunity approach tries to infect as many of the released population as fast as possible in the beginning, so we did not isolate symptomatic households at start. we employ the ishi procedure to slow virus transmission only after 60% of the population has been released.we depict simulation results for herd immunity in figure 5 vs. a two group 10-4 strategy with division into two groups on personal basis, allowing up to 10% complete noncompliance and using facial masks outside hume assuming 10% protection. the later strategy allows more release business days on average in a 1-year period -77.8% vs. 71% for herd immunity.1. too many need to get infected. herd immunity is by far an outlier strategy with the largest amount of infections. from what we currently know, we don't expect herd immunity to appear before over 60% of the population contracts the virus. while it's reasonable to assume that a person shall not contract the virus twice in a short period, it's still an unknown risk. even for a small country the size of israel of about 9 million people, it means about 5,400,000 million people need to get infected -and just for israel. infecting that many people could result in mistakes being multiplied in very large numbers, and almost definite leakage of infection to more sensitive populations that cannot be really protected in 100% of total isolation for months -resulting in many casualties. 2. closes the door to potential luck. we might get lucky and have the summer eliminate the epidemic, as happened with some other viral infections -or other measure being successful. we might have an effective medicine that will allow people to get infected without serious consequences. with herd immunity at this point -we won't enjoy this luck, or enjoy it in a limited way. 3. inefficient, costly for the economy and inhumane, as it will take too long to implement. we take for example israel which has a relatively young and healthy population structure. it is expected to take many months of quarantine given the limited capacity of the healthcare system, keeping a large portion of the population under quarantine for a prolonged period of time -which can be considered inhumane. we simulate a year ahead, and give the herd immunity approach the advantage that we ignore death after a 1-year period. as can be seen in figure 3 and figure 5 , we have other strategies that can, at least potentially, hold the situation with minimal number of infections and casualties for for a relatively low cost, until we have a vaccine for example. 4. too many will die and die young. while mortality rate is becoming clearer and much lower than initial estimates, it's still relatively high 34 . herd immunity approach could lead not only to higher mortality than alternatives, but out of the casualties a high proportion would be young. at this time, we don't have medical knowledge that hints that the young people who get to critical condition have some a priori hidden condition that is expected to shorten their life anyhow. so we have to assume at this point that we would be losing many life-years under this strategy. see figure 5 for distribution of mortality across age groups. 5. healthcare system strain will kill even more. a herd immunity approach will strain the healthcare systems to its limits for many months. healthcare personnel and resources will find themself recruited to care for the critical coronavirus patients, inevitably neglecting regular care. many health situations that would normally end in recovery will end in otherwise avoidable death due to lack of care.6. long term health damage. it could well be that some portion of surviving patients would suffer long-term or permanent health consequences post recovery, with mid-term damage almost certain for those mechanically ventilated. waiting for a vaccine could prevent it.in light of the above, and given there appear to be other effective and relatively low-economical-damage containment strategies, it appears that sticking to containment strategies is more efficient at this stage.our results show that seemingly similar strategies in terms of the amount of population-business-days they allow, can have a very different epidemic supression outcome, based on the pattern the population is released. the more effective building blocks are a combination of both partial planned intermittent quaranties and partial population release, such as a two-group intermittent release. as such, two-group intermittent approaches are better performing, and are reasonable to implement given they can be relaxed to allow some fixed population noncompliance -10 percent in our example -in parallel to the two groups and division into groups can be made on a personal rather than on a household basis. it should be noted, however, that partial release schemes are sensitive to a special division into two groups that does not reduce interaction. for example, the resulting r of dividing the population into two groups on a city basis would resemble the resulting r of a single-group and less the r of two groups. in other words, if the division is not made in a way that shall reduce interaction we will get an r closer to that of a single group.intermittent schemes without partial release of population seem less effective at reducing r compared to mixed schemes, though they are probably somewhat easier to enforce. constant release of a fixed certain percent of population while keeping the rest quarantined also seems less effective too compared to mixed schemes where the population that is being released changes. releasing the population, and then quarantining as the epidemic relapses seems less effective compared to planned intermittent release schemes that achieve better results.the decision on using one building-block or the other is not just a numerical one, but should take into consideration other measures and factors including population compliance, effectiveness of economy, etc. the factors and their weight could change by population and region. actual decisions are outside the scope of this paper. 20 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. .a large untreated question is reopening schools. unfortunately, there is just no data available 35 to make a truly informed decision, mostly because schools closed up very quickly globally with the appearance of the pandemic, with the exception of sweden for the lower age-groups 36 . children are less symptomatic than adults 37 . furthermore, there is conflicting information on whether asymptomatic are less infectious 38 than symptomatic. based on experience in china, korea and israel, it seems children contracted the virus less 39 . according to israeli ministry of health data 40 , the percent of positive tests for children aged 0-9 years old is lower compared to adults and in the range of adults for ages 10-19, suggesting this phenomena of lower contraction in children is not merely an ascertainment bias due to milder symptoms. it could be argued the latter phenomena can be attributed to the fact the main importers of the virus were travelling adults and schools closed up relatively fast. in sweden, the infection rates of children are also very low 41 -though testing was limited. in household secondary infection in china, children were less likely to get infected 16, 39 . in the municipality of vo', italy, almost the entire municipality was tested twice as part of a survey in the early outbreak in italy 42 . while the infection prevalence was about 2.6%, none of the 234 children aged 0-10 were infected, despite some of them sharing a household with a case. according to israeli ministry of health information, the education system accounted for only 3-11 percent of virus contraction. on top of things, and perhaps the bottom line -there is no real and reasonable solution for parents to go to work, if their children cannot go to their school -so opening of schools seems unavoidable. limited mitigation can be partially achieved by noticing symptoms at school, and bi-daily measurements of body temperature for early detection of symptoms, as children tend to be less symptomatic.we assume the epidemic shall last many months, and that schools will reopen before it's eradicated. therefore, we will have to accomodate for the school effect anyhow, whatever it is, so that r<1 despite schools being open. however, it could be that r would be very close to 1 after schools reopen, and so there could be benefits from reducing the number of new daily infections to a smaller level which would stay there after schools are reopened as r would be close to 1. we compare key mitigation measures of sars-cov-2 spread, and compare various exit strategies building blocks. our results stress the importance of not just the amount of population that is released, but also the pattern. our findings demonstrate the importance of mixed strategies, as each strategy is effective through somewhat other means. some of our mixed schemes can allow relatively convenient life while controlling for the epidemic spread. therefore, and given our results, we believe that pandemic can be controlled within a reasonable amount of time and at a reasonable socio-economic burden. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. . (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. 28 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.20072850 doi: medrxiv preprintour simulation is based on a seir (susceptible, exposed, infectious, recovered) agent-based model that we programmed in python and adapted to israeli population and parameters of sars-cov-2 epidemic. therefore, in our database, we hold about 9 million rows, one for each resident of israel, but for efficiency purposes we run the simulation on a subsampling of 1:10 on a reduced 900,000 representative lines. for each person, we hold an index, age, sex, and household identifier together with simulation data.we assumed each person is living with their children, unless they have children of their own. this construction resulted in a somewhat smaller household than real israeli data. from israeli bureau of statistics, the average israeli household is 3.3 people 43 , while in our simulation the average is 2.15, perhaps due to multi-generation households, or several families living together.to mock coronavirus outcomes of mortality and mechanical ventilation for subjects, we used a combination of 3-year all-cause mortality predictor trained on clalit healthcare data and have the results in cross-validation, and age-specific infection-fatality-rate (ifr) and ventilation estimates from the existing literature on sars-cov-2.we manually fitted the mortality predictor to coronavirus mortality and mechanical ventilation probabilities as follows, where missing values were imputed by the reference value per appropriate age group. 29 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.20072850 doi: medrxiv preprintthe simulation was based on the following temporal assumptions: incubation: time from infection to onset (of symptoms), given symptoms will occur. if symptoms do not occur we still simulate this time period for purposes of infectiousness which we assume is the same regardless. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. note that available literature of these parameters has a wide confidence interval, which could affect our results.the simulation is executed with a 1-day cycle simulating a year. totals are counted for mortality, infections, icu usage -all based on the above detailed assumptions. we did not take into account actual icu resources in the simulation, but counted the needed resources and assumed they are available. it is up to the strategy to avoid a situation of exhausting resources.at initialization, each subject receives concrete values of their personal disease course relative to infection, if they get infected. to that end we draw random variables of the relevant distribution detailed above. for each person we also hold a boolean flag indicating if they are infected, and a counter to count the relative number of days since each person's infection. we also keep a flag to note if a person is in quarantine (isolation) or released. we assumed isolation is at home and with household members. people in icu are considered removed and stop infecting others.there are three types of infections modelled: infection of family members, infection of released population, and leakage infection to those in quarantine. the infection of each group is performed in complete mix, i.e., the probabilities to get infected by an infector are identical within a group, and the population within a group is uniformly infected based on that probability.daily infection of the released population is based on r 0_released and the relative infectiousness for that day for an infector, whose product we denote as ɸ i d . thus, ɸ i d denotes the number of expected infectious interactions an infector i makes on day d , assuming no-one else is infected and all population is released. we define infectious interactions as the number of people that would be infected if no one else was infected 33 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. .where cdf' is the cumulative density function of the chosen gamma probability for infectiousness scaled for the length of the infection period for this person. i.e., cdf'(d)=cdf( 9.21(d/l)), where l is the personal length of infectiousness.the various strategies that are evaluated were fed separately into the simulator. a strategy can set for each person if they are quarantined or released, based on all prior information (age, sex, probabilities -but not actual random choices), and can measure actual icu usage, and perform viral tests, require to put masks when out of home, etc.. the strategy is invoked each day and has a chance to intervene prior to the infections taking course for that day.if two people are wearing masks, it reduces droplets and aerosol that contain the virus. averaging the numbers in 7 , we assume it reduces droplets and aerosol by about 29.1% to 18.2%, without change in the viral load, i.e., a mask on an affected individual reduces spread by a factor of 0.625 in a period of 30 minutes 7 . numbers are small so we assume about 30% spread both aerosols and droplets. we cannot make an accurate assumption on how much surgical masks shall reduce infection to a wearer of the mask, though based on 49 it would be about a six-fold protection factor. if we follow these numbers we expect infection to drop by a factor of 0.625/6 to 0.625, i.e., from 0.1 to 0.625. another cause of inclarity is the possibility that droplets or aerosol are infecting through unprotected eyes, or other transmission from hands to the eyes 50,51 , which are not protected by a surgical mask, and later accidental transfer from hands to mouth or eyes. the inclarity is further extended as good mask usage requires careful fitting of the masks, replacing them frequently enough, smart disposal together with additional protective measures 52 . it's difficult to model long-exposure of several 30 minutes units, as we cannot tell if the percent of droplets are per-person due to mask-face fitting for example (although participants were corrected if they mis-wore the mask), or due to properties of the mask itself. if it's mask properties then an hour worth exposure would still be infecting. e.g., even if we assume the extreme value for mask protection factor of 0.1, then for 5 hours the protection is only 1-(1-0.1) 2x5 =0.651, i.e., the protection is just 30% reduction in possibility of infection. so if surgical masks are useful, it's probably protective for short and random exposure patterns. to provide a conservative yet useful estimate, we gace simulation results for protection levels of 10%, 30% and 50%. 35 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.20072850 doi: medrxiv preprint estimation of impact on r 0 sir models typically state the s -susceptible, e -exposed, i -infecting, r -removed, and n -total number of people. then ds/dt = -si/n 2 de/dt = si/n 2 -e di/dt = e -i/n dr/dt = i/n r t is then (de/dt + di/dt + dr/dt)/(dr/dt), which is s/ n and r 0 is then / .we can estimate r 0 as if the s 0 of the population is susceptible at start then: r 0 = ln(s 0 /s ∞ ) / (1-s ∞ / n) , where we estimate s ∞ by taking the uninfected number of uninfected people after a year, and s 0 as the number of unaffected people at start of intervention. we do start intervening on day 14, but to allow washout of previous doing-nothing, we take s 0 as day 35 (21 days washout). taking s 0 at day 35 also accommodates our simulation deliberate infection by 10 people a day during the first month.36 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 28, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.23.20072850 doi: medrxiv preprintsince december 2019, an outbreak of infection with the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) in china has progressed to many countries worldwide, raising concerns regarding coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) endangering public health and life [1] . on 20 january 2020, covid-19 was listed as a category b infectious disease according to the law of the people's republic of china on prevention and control of infectious diseases by the general office of the national health commission of the people's republic of china, while the related prevention and control measures follow the standards of category a infectious disease. on 30 january 2020, the world health organization declared the outbreak of covid-19 a public health emergency of international concern.with high infectivity, the incubation period of covid-19 is approximately 14 days, and lasts for 24 days or more, in some patients [1] [2] [3] . one report [4] showed possible transmission between asymptomatic patients or between patients during the incubation period. a large amount of viruses may remain in deceased people infected with sars-cov-2, and the survival time of the viruses may be prolonged in refrigerated cadavers. during epidemic prevention and control, forensic pathologists may examine the body and tissues of the deceased infected with sars-cov-2 (including asymptomatic or suspicious infection). according to the law of the people's republic of china on prevention and control of infectious diseases [5] , regulations on biosafety management of pathogenic microorganism laboratories [6] , regulations on autopsy of patients with infectious diseases or suspected infectious diseases [7] , notice of guidelines for disposal of the remains of patients with pneumonia infected by novel coronavirus (trial version) [8] and diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus pneumonia (trial version sixth) [2] , the guidelines in this article provide recommendations for biosafety and infection control practices during specimen collection and handling, as well as autopsy procedures.general rules for forensic pathology examination when formulating work procedures and emergency plans for epidemic prevention and control. 2. to effectively confirm a sars-cov-2 infection or a suspected case, investigating the death process and medical history, and a case review are the first and most pivotal work in forensic autopsy regarding epidemic prevention. 3. knowledge of covid-19 should be updated timely, and the recommended practices and principles should be followed to avoid infection. autopsy sites should have safety and protection protocols in place to guarantee personal and public safety.investigation involves collecting the deceased's medical history and death process information obtained from clients (court or police), hospitals, family members, witnesses, funeral establishments, initial examiners and others. if necessary, clinicians are consulted to determine whether the deceased was a confirmed infection or a suspected case [2, 9] .suspected cases [2] epidemiological history. fourteen days prior to symptom onset: (1) travel history or residence history in wuhan or surrounding cities or communities reporting confirmed case(s); (2) close contacts of persons with covid-19 (with positive results after nucleic acid testing); (3) exposure history to patients with fever or respiratory symptoms who came from wuhan, surrounding cities or communities with confirmed case(s) and (4) evidence of clustering.clinical features. (1) fever and/or respiratory symptoms; (2) in early onset, the total number of white blood cells (wbc) was normal or decreased, or the lymphocyte count was decreased; and (3) imaging characteristics of covid-19 as small patchy shadows and interstitial changes appeared early, especially in the lateral lung. ground-glass opacities and infiltrates were seen subsequently in bilateral lungs. lung consolidation might occur in severe cases. a suspected covid-19 patient must have one of the epidemiological history features and meet any two of the clinical features, or meet three clinical features and none of the epidemiological features.a confirmed case must have one of the following two etiological evidences [2] : (1) nucleic acid-positive by real-time fluorescent quantitative polymerase chain reaction testing or (2) a high homology to sars-cov-2, as indicated by viral gene sequencing.asymptomatic infection and patients in the incubation period may become sources of infection; therefore, identifying latent cases is the most critical task for forensic pathologists.people who do not meet the diagnostic criteria for suspected cases, but possess any of the following features, are recommended to undergo screening as possible latent cases: (1) meet some of the items listed for "suspected covid-19" but have not reach the diagnostic thresholds for suspected cases yet; (2) have the following epidemiological history: travel history or residence history in wuhan or surrounding cities or communities reporting confirmed cases, close contacts of persons with covid-19 (with positive nucleic acid test results) and/or exposure history to patients coming from wuhan or surrounding cities or communities with confirmed cases; (3) have the following clinical features: fever and/or respiratory symptoms, abnormal peripheral blood wbc count (with normal or reduced total wbc count or reduced lymphocyte count); and (4) imaging characteristics of sars-cov-2 infection.before performing a postmortem examination, forensic examiners should consider the above criteria and determine whether a case is related to covid-19, and if yes, determine the category for the case: suspected, confirmed or latent. after categorisation, protection and testing are performed according to the following principles:confirmed and suspected cases. biosafety level 3 (bsl-3) protection should be provided during the scene investigation. the body, with clothes carefully removed, is gently moved to avoid blood and/or excrement contamination. disinfectant containing 1 000 mg/l of chlorine should be used for on-site disinfection. cadaver examination should be performed in the autopsy room with bsl-3 protection. the autopsy personnel's clothing should meet the bsl-3 protection standards, strengthening the antisplash protection for the face [6, 10, 11] .latent cases. the site should be ventilated for at least 10 min before the crime scene investigation. examiners should, with clothing following bsl-3 or bsl-2 protection standards, stand on the windward side and maintain a distance from the mouth and nose of the cadaver, and not press hard on the cadaver's chest and abdomen. cadavers can be examined in a conventional autopsy room, and examiners can dress according to bsl-3 protection standards. the disinfection is the same as that for confirmed cases.non-confirmed, non-suspected and non-latent cases. on-site and postmortem examination shall be performed under routine standards.unascertainable cases. during epidemic prevention, unknown corpses may be encountered in forensic examination, with no access to the deceased's medical history or epidemiological history. with care, crime scene investigation and cadaver examination should be performed with protection levels as for suspected or latent cases, if necessary.cadaver examiner a senior forensic pathologist must perform the examination. for safety reasons, at least two staff members should be present in the autopsy room at the same time. if possible, examiners should receive immunisation.an autopsy should be performed in an autopsy room with the following safe operating conditions [6] :requirements for an autopsy room. cadaver examination should be performed in an autopsy room (with bsl-3 protection or equivalent conditions), with sufficient and sustained negative pressure, air and sewage discharge equipped with filtration or disinfection devices, and plane layout and ventilation according to general laboratory biosafety standards [10].if an autopsy room with bsl-3 conditions is not available, cadavers can be examined in a disposable safety bag specially designed for postmortem examination of infectious diseases, which can completely isolate the infected body from examiners and surroundings. the examiner, from outside, performs the autopsy on the body in the transparent bag using safety sleeves and gloves.in special circumstances, autopsy can be performed in an operating room with adequate negative pressure and air and sewage discharge equipped with filtration or disinfection devices.area division and safety operation procedures. the examination area, isolated from the surroundings, should be divided into three parts: clean area, semi-contaminated area and contaminated area. using a single-channel closed-loop approach, examiners should move from the clean area to the semi-contaminated area and then to the contaminated area, and leave the contaminated area from another channel for the semi-contaminated area and then for the clean area. the semi-contaminated area, as a transition space, is the place for cleaning and disinfecting examiners, packaged materials and specimens.environmental disinfection. (1) workplace: contaminated and semi-contaminated areas should be isolated before examination. during the examination, a 500 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant can be sprayed on the floors, walls and frequently contacted objects. after the examination, the autopsy room should be thoroughly sprayed and disinfected with a 1 000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant. if the environmental surface is contaminated by secretions and excreta from the cadaver, the surface should be covered with hygroscopic materials and then disinfected with a 2 000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant; (2) apparatus and instrument: before the examination, a 500 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant should be used to wipe tools and instruments, for disinfection. after the examination, a 1 000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant is used for wiping and soaking for 30 min (or boiling in water for 30 min), and then clean water is used to rinse three times, followed by wiping clean for later use. telephones, computer mouse and keyboards, cameras and other objects can be wiped with 75% ethanol solution disinfectants; (3) air: ultraviolet ray disinfection lamps can be used for air irradiation disinfection for 1 h. alternatively, ultra-low capacity sprays can be used, namely, 3% hydrogen peroxide, 5 000 mg/l peroxyacetic acid and 500 mg/l chlorine dioxide disinfectant (20-30 ml/m 3 ) for 2 h. the doors and windows are closed during disinfecting, followed by full ventilation after disinfection.postmortem examination operators, including forensic pathologists, anatomical technicians, photographers, recording personnel and others should follow bsl-3 protection requirements; that is, wear a onepiece protective suit, grade ! n95 protective mask, goggles or protective eye mask, protective shoe covers and latex gloves (at least two layers). if liquid splash is possible, a respirator should be worn, and replaced immediately once contaminated.cadaver surface examination and autopsy before postmortem examination, according to relevant laws and regulations, the entrustment shall be ready, the deceased's family should be informed and examination and emergency plans should be carefully prepared.general protection. before the examination, examiners should wear protective devices in the clean area, organise instruments used for autopsy in the semi-contaminated area, and then perform the autopsy in the contaminated area. after the examination, protective clothing and gloves must be sterilised for the first time in the autopsy room (contaminated area), and the surfaces of the protective clothing, mask, shoe covers and gloves should be thoroughly sterilised in the semi-contaminated area.for objects, including cadavers, formalin-fixed specimens and frozen specimens that are taken from the autopsy room (contaminated area), the surfaces of the objects' packaging containers should be thoroughly disinfected followed by packaging and sterilising the object again in the semi-contaminated area. spray disinfection can be performed with 1 000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectants. the deceased's clothing and items, such as gauze and towels used for the autopsy examination, should be disinfected and incinerated together with the cadaver.operation protection. examiners should perform careful and gentle operations, with clear specialisation and close cooperation. anatomical instruments should be used and placed properly to avoid puncturing gloves or skin with knives, scissors, sewing needles, puncture needles, syringes or the ends of fractured bones, as well as to avoid spattering blood, urine, gastrointestinal contents and bone powder. if gloves are torn, they should be disinfected and replaced immediately. if blood, body fluids, urine and/or faeces are splashed onto the examiner's clothing or outside the autopsy table, strict disinfection should be performed. if the examiner's skin is contaminated by cadaver pollutants, the pollutants should be removed immediately, and then disposable absorbent material with 0.5% iodine used to wipe the examiner's skin for more than 3 min. contaminated mucous membranes should be rinsed with large amounts of normal saline or 0.05% iodine to disinfect [12] .autopsy and sample extraction. prior to anatomical examination, a sample extraction plan can be made by consulting clinical pathologists, laboratory staff, physicians and virologists. to reduce the infection risks, samples should be taken directly after the body cavity is opened, and organ and tissue cuttings should be minimised [13] .samples for etiological and electron microscopy testing and cryopreservation should be extracted first. second, samples (secretions and tissue blocks) for etiological gene testing should be stored in hanks' solution. third, tissues requiring freezing can be cut into blocks ($1.5 cm in length, width and height) and put into a plastic bottle with a screw top before freezing. fourth, tissues for electron microscopy examination can be cut into blocks ($0.3 cm in length, width and height) and fixed in 3% glutaraldehyde. finally, for specimens used for conventional paraffin embedding, entire diseased organs, tissues or tissue blocks with a length, width and height of 3-5 cm can be fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde solution for 48-72 h, and can then be examined, dehydrated, embedded and sectioned.formalin-fixed specimen preparation specimen collection. fixed specimens can be retrieved in a well-ventilated laboratory in which surfaces and floors are sterilised with 2 000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant and air is disinfected by ultraviolet radiation. after sampling, specimens are returned to the specimen bag with fixing solution and sealed. the material table is rinsed and then disinfected with 1 000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant.tissue dehydration. once dehydrated tissues are removed from the area, disinfect the surface of the dehydrator and surroundings with 1 000 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant for $30 min, and then wipe with clean water.tissue embedding. as for tissue dehydration, the embedding machine, surroundings and air are disinfected in two steps.tissue slicing. paraffin blocks are sterilised by immersion in 75% ethanol solution and dried before slicing [12] , and then sealed immediately and sterilised using 75% ethanol solution after slicing. the slicer is sprayed with 75% ethanol solution as well. other tools such as forceps and scalpel and knife blades can be disinfected in an oven at 80 c for 30 min.tissue staining: instruments should be sprayed for disinfection with 75% ethanol solution or a 500 mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant both before and after use.generation of effluent and waste should be avoided as much as possible. infectious effluent, the waste water produced during examination, should be treated by chemical or physical disinfection and discharged after complete inactivation [12] . solid wastes, including consumables, personal protective equipment and any remaining fixed specimens should be collected separately for processing. consumable and personal protective equipment should be sterilised using high-pressure steam or fumigated using ethylene oxide in a timely manner.in addition to pathomorphological observation of routine paraffin sections, hematoxylin-eosin staining, special staining, immunohistochemical staining and immunofluorescence staining, virus isolation and gene sequencing of secretions and tissue blocks, in situ detection of viral rna or viral protein antigens in tissue sections, ultrastructural examination of tissue sections and detection of virus particles can be performed, if necessary.forensic autopsy is currently the main way to identify and accumulate systematic pathological information for death cases. examination agencies should fully record and maintain the basic information for covid-19 patients (name, age, sex, place of origin, place of residence, place of onset and travel history), information from the anatomical examination and epidemiological and clinical data. feedback on pathology examination reports or the identification opinion of the cause of death should be timely sent to related medical institutes, disease prevention control agencies and health administration departments [7, 11] .during the epidemic outbreak, all operators should undergo medical observation after autopsy, and those with fever and respiratory symptoms should be isolated for observation or medical assistance. operators involved in the autopsy of confirmed or suspected cases should receive temperature monitoring and medical observation in isolation for 14 days.viruses have certain survivability in cadavers and in vitro (appendix a). it is not uncommon for examiners to be infected secondary to inadequate protection, careless operation or unknown causes (appendix b). therefore, during the epidemic prevention and control period, personal protection of examiners and disinfection of dissecting rooms, surroundings and instruments should be taken seriously.if a glove is torn and skin is damaged during autopsy, the operator should stop dissecting immediately, rinse the wound with large volumes of saline or a 0.05% iodophor for disinfection, and be isolated for treatment and observation.if new confirmed or suspected cases of covid-19 are found during examination, operators should report to the local disease prevention and control agencies or medical institutes in a timely manner.cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) emigrating from wuhan escalated the risk of spreading the disease in other cities. this report focused on outside-wuhan patients to assess the transmission and clinical characteristics of this illness. contact investigation was conducted on each patient who was admitted to the assigned hospitals in hunan province (geographically adjacent to wuhan) from 22 january to 23 february 2020. cases were confirmed by the polymerase chain reaction test. demographic, clinical, and outcomes were collected and analyzed. of the 104 patients, 48 (46.15%) were cases who immigrated from wuhan; 93 (89.42%) had a definite contact history with infection. family clusters were the major body of patients. transmission along the chain of three "generations" was observed. five asymptomatic infected cases were found and two of them infected their relatives. mean age was 43 (range, 8-84) years, and 49 (47.12%) were male. the median incubation period was 6 (range, 1-32) days, which of 8 patients ranged from 18 to 32 days, 96 (92.31%) were discharged, and 1 (0.96%) died. the average hospital stay was 10 (range, 8-14) days. family but not community transmission became the main body of infections in the two centers, suggesting the timely control measures after the wuhan shutdown worked well. asymptomatic transmission demonstrated here warned us that it may lead to the widespread of covid-19. a 14-day quarantine may need to be prolonged.transmission and clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in 104 outside-wuhan patients, chinain december 2019 a series of pneumonia cases emerged in china, later identified as the novel coronavirus named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (also known as the disease name covid-19) (tan et al., 2020) . since december 2019, the virus has spread worldwide and on march 11 th 2020 the world health organisation declared a state of a pandemic.as the pandemic spread, the research world was set in motion producing a substantial number of studies. according to the web of knowledge, at the beginning of april 2020 there were 7,496 publications when searching for "covid/coronavirus" in 2020, with all of them related to health (infectious diseases, respiratory system, public health, internal medicine, research medicine, health care, microbiology, virology, and molecular biology). when adding the term "food" to the search, 4,382 studies appeared related to the possible sources of the virus, its genotype, and molecular characterisation. to date, only two studies were not concerning virology, one proposed supplementation of vitamin d for covid-19 prevention (grant et al., 2020) and the other dealt with the loss of smell as a biomarker for covid-19 infection (moein et al., 2020) .the main research response for covid-19 has been related to the understanding of the virus, its spread, and health consequences; however, not only health is being affected. consumers' concerns regarding governmental mandated lockdowns, social distancing, displacement restrictions, and their uncertainty about this pandemic's extent are changing along with their lifestyle's.previous studies (outside pandemic times) have postulated that searches on google reflect the interest and concerns of populations towards different diets (kamiński, skonieczna-żydecka, nowak, & stachowska, 2020) . likewise, youtube videos are widely used for seeking advice and tips regarding different diets and health issues (aydin & aydin, 2020; basch, hillyer, garcia, & basch, 2019) . besides internet searches, people use social media (i.e. facebook, instagram, and twitter) to freely express and share the content of their lives (appel et al. 2020) . further, when aiming to answer specific questions about consumer's motivation and perception in exceptional circumstances, specific surveys are needed.this exploratory study focuses on the first impact of a health crisis on consumers' behaviour regarding food and shopping. worldwide information was gathered from different sources such as internet searches, most watched videos, and social media during the virus outbreak affecting european countries, turkey, russia, and north-america from mid-march to mid-april 2020.additionally, an online questionnaire was made (spanish population) to study consumers' motivations for changing (or not) their shopping habits and their perceived reliability of the information sources in relation to covid-19 under a strict lockdown period (30 th march-14 th april).this part of the study was conducted only in spain, where on march 14 th the state of emergency was declared. from march 30 th to april 14 th , the spanish government increased the severity of the state of alarm. during this period the circulation of people was limited, and citizens could only leave the house if they were working in essential services (health, security, social, and economic wellbeing of citizens) or if they needed to buy necessary products (groceries and medicines) within their town.the relative popularity data of searches on the internet from january 1 st to april 15 th were obtained through the google trends tool. this tool provides (for a term and day) the number of searches (expressed as percentage) in relation to the maximum number of searches of the term in each period. it allows a comparison of searches and, in this case, the values of the number of searches of each term (expressed as percentage) in relation to the maximum number of searches of any terms in the selected period.two sets of 25 terms (one set in spanish, other in english) related to food, virus, or lifestyle (food: food, shopping, shopping covid, food covid, on-line shop, recipes, cereals, flour, meals covid, stock up shopping, hoarding shopping, yeast, vegetables, toilet paper, fruit; virus: flu virus covid, flu symptoms, coronavirus symptoms, coronavirus transmission; lifestyle: sport videos, sport videos covid, fitness covid, yoga and covid, leaving home covid) were preliminary proposed to study the change in food habits, but also the concerns and activities that population was worldwide searching during this special period of time. from these initial searches, the most searched terms were further analysed.a first comparative analysis of searches for the term food and searches of terms (related to the coronavirus) symptoms, spread, and lockdown was obtained. a second comparative analysis of searches for the term food and other specific terms related to food (restaurant, recipe, and delivery) was also completed.finally, the popularity of searches of different individual food products was obtained, and those with relevant changes over the analysed period were retained. searches were conducted in english and spanish.using the youtube platform, the 100 most watched videos when searching for "coronavirus+food" and "coronavirus+shopping" in english and spanish (n = 400) were obtained between the 30 th march and 13 th april 2020. title, number of views, the upload date, and number of likes and dislikes were recorded for the 400 videos.the videos were watched independently by three researchers who decided, by consensus, to classify the information into three content categories: health advice (recommendations for prevention or treatment of covid-19), news (novel or actual information), and documentary (non-fiction film that captured in images or interviews of different facts of covid-19).following the same protocol, the informants were also classified into three categories: journalist (people working for newspapers, news websites, or information news), youtubers (people who provided videos but not under news or tv channels), health science experts (main or invited speakers who claimed to have health studies backgrounds such as physicians, virologists, and nutritionists).there were few mixed spontaneous videos not classified under any category. additionally, the frequency of the most mentioned words, in the 400 video titles, was obtained.tweets (the individual message posted on the twitter platform), containing the terms food and coronavirus, sent between march 19 th and april 13 th 2020 were retrieved in english (37, 200 tweets) and spanish (14,537 tweets) with the rtweet package (kearney, 2018) from r software (r core team, 2017) via twitter's application programming interface (api). re-tweets and repeated tweets were not considered. the text was cleaned and the document-term matrix was obtained using the package tm in r (feinerer, 2013) . the frequency of terms was calculated for the total time and dividing the total time in three periods (t1: 19/03/2020 to 26/03/2020, t2: 27/03/2020 to 03/04/2020 and t3: 04/04/2020 to 13/04/2020 which encompassed 8, 8 and 10 days, respectively) to analyse the evolution of the frequency of mention with time.an online questionnaire was sent to 800 consumers from a database that included spain main areas (madrid, catalonia and valencia) . at the end of the strict spanish lockdown (april 7 th -13 th ), it was completed by 362 consumers (30% men, 70% women from 20 to 76 years old, average age 38.8). this questionnaire was approved by csic ethics committee (046/2020).consumers were asked to indicate the food items, from a list, they perceived to buy more during the lockdown than in normal times; the product list was based on a spanish food frequency questionnaire (martin-moreno et al., 1993) . consumers were asked to do the same with the food they perceived to be purchasing less than in normal times. when a participant indicated purchasing a product more or less amount, he/she was asked to choose their reasons from a list of 17 motivations ( table 1 ). the two lists (motivations for purchasing more and less) were based on the eating motivation survey by phan and chambers iv (2016), adapted to the spanish language (laguna, fiszman, & tarrega, 2020) ; few motivations from a previous study on food insecurity (puddephatt et al., 2020) were also included. the motivations encompass several dimensions: limitations, acceptability, mood, price, health/weight control, information received, and shelf-life. consumers also had the opportunity to provide other motivations not listed.consumers were asked where their usual place of purchase was (small/local shop, supermarket, online, or other) and shopping frequency before and during the lockdown (every day, two/three times per week, once a week, and once a month).(provided by the who (2020) and non-scientific sources obtained from youtube videos analysis) on a five-point reliability scale from not reliable to very reliable. statements provided by who were:wash your hands with soap and water, do not go out except exceptions, avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth, to use a face mask, and disinfect all products from outside. the statements obtained from youtube videos were: take vitamin d supplements, eat more citric fruit, drink plenty of hot drinks, consume more garlic and ginger, gargling with warm water and lemon, and eat more bananas. consumers also indicated the reliability of different individuals/professionals giving messages of protective measures: health staff, researchers, family, politicians, friends, work colleague, and journalists.consumers were also asked for their source of information, using a multiple-choice question including terms: tv, whatsapp, radio, journals, social media, telephone lines for covid-19, and employees/unions.two correspondence analyses (ca), one for purchasing more food products and another for purchasing less, were performed using the food product purchasing data and its corresponding motivations.chi-squared test was used to analyse the influence of covid-19 lockdown in the shopping place and frequency before and after the lockdown, at the alpha level of p < 0.05. all the statistical analyses were performed with xlstat version 2019.1.3.the searches of health-related terms like symptoms and spread (figure 1a searches on specific terms related to food showed relevant variations in this period (figure 1c and   1d ). terms restaurant and recipe were relatively popular in january and february. after march 13 th the popularity of searches for restaurant decreased and after march 24 th remained three times lower than at the beginning of the year. in contrast, the popularity of searches for recipe continuously increased with fluctuations coinciding with weekends. the last weekend of the period, april 11-12 th , was three-four times higher than at the beginning of the year. the searches for delivery also increased starting on march 13 th , and from march 24 th to april 10 th the popularity was three-four times higher than at the beginning of the year.temporal-changes of popularity were investigated independently for several food items; figure 2 shows those more representative. searches for foods like bread, chicken, milk, flour, fruit, and banana increased starting around march 13 th . in english and spanish, the popularity of searches of recipe was four times greater and twice for banana. popularity of searches for bread increased three times in english and one third in spanish. searches of fruit, milk, and chicken in english showed only a slight increase but doubled their popularity in spanish. eggs showed an important increase in popularity occurred slightly later than march 13 th , with a narrower well-defined peak between april 7-14 th that would be probably related to regional, traditional easter egg.wine and beer showed fluctuations in popularity since the beginning of year (depending on weekdays and weekends) and the trend did not change. however, for wine (both languages) and beer (spanish) between march 13-25 th , popularity remained with minimum values recorded slightly lower than the peak values. the searches for diet decreased continuously since the beginning of the year, with a minimum seen on march 20 th but slightly increase after.the 400 videos analysed in english and spanish showed that the most watched videos were news (38.14%), followed by advice (33.83%), and documentary (28.03%) ( table 2 ). all videos had been uploaded between january 20-26 th 2020.for the search coronavirus+food (in english) most of the videos were of terms news or documentary and the informants were youtubers. the most frequent words in the video titles were related with terms for the virus acknowledgement (virus, outbreak, china, panic, and news), quarantine (fight, people, prepare, quarantine, and street), and supermarket/stocking-up food (costco, empty, fear, foods, home lockdown, shelves, and trade).for the search coronarivus+food (in spanish), the videos were mainly advice (50% of videos) with a higher number of (claimed) health science expert informants than with videos in english (36 vs. 4) .the most mentioned words in the video titles was panic, followed by china and peru, and then the words supermarket, pandemic, toilet paper, and fear.when searching coronavirus+shopping in english, the most viewed video was documentary with a journalist informant. the most watched video titles contained the words purchasing, panic (for the outbreak), fear (of running out of primary goods in the shops), and toilet paper (rise in demand), which was one of the most watched videos.in the search of coronavirus+shopping in spanish, advice videos were the most widely viewed having a journalist and youtubers as informants. the contents were related to the defence mechanism, fight, quarantine, immunity, china, disinfection, supermarket, and virus.the most frequent words (≥ 3.5%) used when tweeting about coronavirus and food are shown in table 3 . all words appeared along the whole analysis period with the maximum appearing at different periods.in english, the frequency of terms indicate three main aspects concerned people: getting and likewise, when tweeting about coronavirus+food in spanish (table 3) concern about health (people, quarantine, pandemic, and die) and a way to get food (buy, delivery, and going out) were mentioned more at the beginning (t1). social issues and polices followed (hunger and government) showing maximum number of mentions in t2, and finally in t3 the economic consequences (money and crisis).before the lockdown, consumers mainly purchased their food in supermarkets (≈ 96.6%), small shop (≈ 39.21%), and online (7.56%). after the lockdown, no significant changes (p = 0.095) of location were seen.the consumer's frequency of shopping was twice per week (50%) or weekly (35%) before the lockdown. after the lockdown was announced, a significant change in the frequency of shopping (p = 0.001) took place; weekly (76.5%) was the main frequency, whereas twice per week (13.65%) reduced, and daily (1.12%) almost disappeared.the analysis of the amount of food people purchased showed over 20% of participants perceived to change their shopping amount (figure 3 ). of the 36 products presented, 27 were perceived to be purchased more ( figure 3a) and others decreased it. this particular point is interesting because the amount of these food items were reduced to improve "physical" health (weight control/body shape) during lockdown by some consumers whereas were increased to improve "mental" health/ mood (cheers me up) by others.the motivations linked to the products purchased more and less than in normal times were studied using correspondence analysis (figure 4a and 4b, respectively).on the left part of the map, food products like pulses, pasta, vegetables, and citric fruit were associated with motivations of health/weight control (it is healthy; it helps me to keep in shape).moreover, pulses, pasta, and oil were related to shelf-life (long-lasting) and price (it is cheap). on the right side of the map, food products like chocolate, nuts, and cheese were related to emotional motivations and mood (it helps me to combat stress, it cheers me up, it helps me to feel better if i am frustrated). close to these food products also appeared the term feel for eating, where the participants associated snacks, and coffee and tea. few food items like flour, bread, and cold meat were related to changes in habit (to be eating it more). although it was not considered in the questionnaire, 35 participants spontaneously claimed they were purchasing more flour because they were cooking more to pass free time or keep their children entertained.the main motivations for purchasing less food products (figure 4b) like bakery goods was health/weight control, and reasons related to mood for products like desserts, alcohol, or snacks was not improving the mood. on the extreme right side of the map fish and seafood were purchased less, as they had a short shelf-life and high price (perishable, expensive, and not available).over 80% of the participants found advice from the who more reliable, however, non-scientific proven statements also reached quiet high reliability levels for some statements. the who's more reliable statements were wash hands, do not go out, avoid touching face, and disinfect all products from outside like parcels or shopping. whereas non-scientific advice like to have more vitamin d, drink plenty of water, consume water with ginger, gargling hot water, or eat more bananas, were shown variably reliable (25.4-53.3%).the reliable sources for most participants (95%) were researchers and scientists. sources of information showed tv was the most frequently used (72%) followed by journals (48%) and social media (37%). other sources like employers/unions and whatsapp were used around 27% and the least used source for gaining information was the information telephone lines for covid-19.this paper gave the first (preliminary) insight into the effect of the covid-19 pandemic alert on consumers in relation to food priorities. changes in popularity of searches related to food were observed during the lockdown period. people's interest in restaurants decreased and interest increased on recipes and delivery reaching huge popularity, comparable or higher than searches related to health (symptoms and spread). people's concerns about diet decreased, but the interest in food products like flour, bread, fruits, milk, and chicken (related to cooking, baking, and storage conditions) increased.youtube's most watched videos showed the concern of the population was to understand the origin of the pandemic and how it could be fought with "home" or food remedies. this result would indicate that people watched videos with motivations that were a little different from those of google searches; while videos pretended to satisfy the need for tutorial, didactic information, google searches offered more spontaneous and immediate information. unfortunately, most videos were shared and the beginning of the pandemic without update information and not made by experts and could put viewers at risk if they followed the inefficient advice. as the pandemic evolves quickly over time more updated educational materials shall be promoted on youtube. in a review made (madathil, rivera-rodriguez, greenstein, & gramopadhye 2014) tube, the authors found that some videos contained misleading information, primarily anecdotal, that contradicts the reference standards, but also it was found videos from government organizations and professional associations containing trustworthy and high-quality information.the data retrieved from twitter confirmed the concerns that people had regarding food shopping, health care, and economics. specifically, the temporal analysis of these results captured the evolution of population concerns, from shopping and carefulness (for most vulnerable people), to the uncertainty of what will happen at the end, and how the derived health and economic crisis will be solved. this constant evolution of the situation might be reflected in further changes in the consumers' behaviour and rationality, as there is a constant change in what governs their context and practices (de krom, 2009 ).from the spanish consumers' responses at the time of the online questionnaire, a change in shopping habits during the lockdown was observed. notably, these participants were already two weeks into a strict lockdown, and the initial stock-up and fear period had already passed. although spanish consumers have confronted food-related crises as with the h5n1 (avian) influenza (de krom & mol, 2010) , rapeseed oil in spain (díaz-méndez & gómez-benito, 2010) , and more recently the shredded meat listeriosis, spanish consumers of the 21 st century have never confronted a pandemic crisis and lockdown as presented by the coronavirus. the food-related changes observed, in relation to the mandatory change of their lifestyles, (staying at home or not allowed to exercise outside) have arisen concerns regarding their mood and body weight. in addition, lowering the frequency of shopping has decreased consumption of the most perishable food products like fish and seafood (heavily consumed in normal times). however, shopping for non-perishable ready meals decreased, likely because of unhealthy related opinions and more time for cooking and preparing. in fact, fresh vegetables were purchased more, for that reason and probably they have the perception of being healthier. these results are in line with the increase in popularity of google searches related to recipes and the decrease of those related to wine and beer. no relation was found between some hoaxes (certainly with relatively low reliability) related to food consumption (such as "eat more citric fruit", "eat more bananas", and "take vitamin d") and the perceived changes in quantity of shopping of some food items. regarding the perceived reliability of the sources, the statements made by experts or scientists were considered by consumers to be the most reliable. however, this is in contrast with the most watched youtube videos that were mostly from non-scientific sources.contribution of the present preliminary study provides initial insights into the behavioural changes in a pandemic situation, an event that has not occurred before in social media times. for the scientific community, it is beneficial to know that although people declare scientists and experts as one of the most reliable sources of information. however, when searching and watching videos, scientists are not the most popular source, and efforts should be made to design more effective information communication channels, avoiding that the population follow non-scientific (hoax/fake-news) advice.because of the mandatory change of lifestyle, consumers have changed their habits and the motivations behind them. further studies are needed to investigate the long-lasting effects and adaptation of food consumption behaviour to the "new normality". relative popularity of worldwide google searches including the term food compared to searches of terms related to the coronavirus situation: symptoms, spread, and lockdown in english (a) and in spanish (b); compared to searches of specific terms related to food: restaurant, home delivery, and recipe in english (c) and spanish (d) . values are the number of searches of each term in a day in relation to the maximum number of searches in a day found in the period for any of the included terms. . correspondence analysis of motivations cited by spanish consumers (from the online questionnaire) for changing their shopping; (a) for products that they were buying more; (b) for products they were buying less table 1 . list of motivations that participants received when selecting each food, perceived as buying more or less of.motivations for "buying more" motivations for "buying less" management practice of allergic rhinitis in china during the covid-19 pandemicup in our hospital to identify the cause of the fever and distinguish the actual covid-19 cases from patients with fever and/or respiratory symptoms similar to those found in covid-19 cases. during the covid-19 epidemic, the number of outpatient visits to allergy clinic of beijing tongren hospital decreased by 90% compared with the same period in the previous year; however, this has now gradually recovered to 50%, i.e., 100 patients per day. all 423 local ar outpatients are receiving immunotherapy continuously, and account for 75% of the total patients undergoing scit.the management of ar includes allergen avoidance, pharmacotherapy, ait and patient education. 3 a panel of allergy/immunology specialists from the us and canada has recently published an expert panel consensus document, which provides a prioritization rational to help guide decision-making for allergist/immunologist when they need to limit services to their patients during the covid-19 pandemic. 4 based on the experience of allergy clinic of beijing tongren hospital, one of the largest and best-known allergy clinics in china, we have developed an algorithm specifically for management of ar ( figure) during the covid-19 pandemic in china. this involves a strict screening protocol to ensure that the patients who are coming to the allergy clinic are not infected by covid-19; as initially indicated by a body temperature lower than 37.3°c 5 and a negative epidemiological history, which indicates that the patients had remained in beijing for over 14 days prior to the hospital visit. thus, for screening purpose the entrance to the hospital has been arranged with infrared human body temperature screening door that a patient's temperature is measured and a history of their movement over the last 14 days are recorded before the patient can enter the hospital. the epidemiological history is an important part of screening, and a record of the patient's movement within 2 weeks can be obtained by scanning a smartphone at the entrance of the hospital. only patients with both a normal temperature and a negative epidemiological history are allowed to proceed to the outpatient departments and a second body temperature measurement with contactless forehead temperature grab will be performed before entering each targeted department; whereas patients with a body temperature higher than 37.3°c are guided to the fever clinic to have additional screening examinations; including routine blood tests and chest computed tomography scanning. throat swabs are also taken for sars-cov-2 rna testing if necessary to separate patients with fever and/or respiratory symptoms including cough, runny nose, sore throat along with nasal congestion and sneezing, similar to those found in covid-19. when a patient's viral nucleic acid test result is found to be positive, the patient is transferred to one of the covid-19 designated hospitals for further treatment.there is presently inconclusive evidence on the safe use of corticosteroids in asthmatic patients affected by covid-19. however, in the case of ar patients infected with covid-19, the aria-mask study group and the european academy of allergy and clinical immunology have recently developed an expert consensus statement, which recommends that use of intranasal corticosteroids (ins) in ar should be continued at the recommended dose, as stopping the ins would increase sneezing and lead to more spreading of the virus. 6 in regard to the influence of continuous use of ins in ar patients infected with covid-19 on the disease of covid-19 as well as immune defenses and health outcomes of affected patients, there is a paucity of real-world experience and thus the recommendation for ins should be adjusted accordingly based on the new data confirmed. in view of the fact that droplets caused by respiratory symptoms such as sneezing and coughing, and tears caused by conjunctivitis 7 may be an important source of viral transmission, the protection of hcws is particularly important, when close inspection or contact with allergic patients is necessary, for example when administering ait injections. besides taking the standardized basic https://e-aair. precautions; including wearing work clothes, disposable surgical masks and waterproof medical caps; all hcws in allergy clinics take extra precautions by wearing anti-fog protective goggles and protective face shields. during an outpatient visit, the patient is admitted to a single consulting room with good ventilation, and at most one doctor and one nurse in attendance in the room at the same time. patients are required to observe social distancing regulations with other patients when waiting for their consultation with the doctor or when under observation following the immunotherapy injection. during this consultation, all specialized examinations such as anterior rhinoscopy, endoscopy, rhinomanometry and acoustic rhinometry, pulmonary function and serum allergen tests are suspended. apart from the outpatient visit, the patient can obtain knowledge of prevention and control of ar via the general public media platform.currently, 564 patients are receiving scit in our clinic before covid-19 epidemic; of whom 75% of these patients are long-term residents in beijing and undergoing continuous scit following the screening process during the covid-19 epidemic. the remaining 25% of the patients, who live outside beijing, have each been contacted by telephone and been advised that in order to reduce the risk of infection in the process of transportation, their treatment should be suspended until the end of the epidemic. fortunately, to date all the local patients have successfully been treated by ait, with no case of infection with covid-19 being recorded among these patients. based on this experience, it is clear that there needs to be a high level of cooperation between doctors, nurses, technicians and the patients, for a successful outcome.at present, as beijing enters the peak of the spring pollen season, beijing tongren hospital is cooperating with the china meteorological administration (http://www.weather.com.cn/ forecast/hf_index.shtml?id=101010100&from=singlemessage&isappinstalled=0) and beijing meteorological bureau (http://bjweather.iyuebo.com/weather.php?a=chart2) to establish a pollen monitoring network for to predict pollen counts, providing useful information towards the patients with pollen allergy. this service is being popularized via the internet and mobile app technology (wechat), and also provides medical services such as online consultations and delivery of medications to patients. moreover, the specialists will also increase tv media publicity (https://item.btime.com/f2ig2sk409q9m5pasnv85tns89e) and provide more online lectures on diseases using zoom or tencent real time conferencing software during the outbreak. the doctors will also recommend to the patients the over-the-counter drugs, which can be bought from their local pharmacies, to control their allergic symptoms.we suggest that the experience and lessons learned from allergy clinics in various countries during the current covid-19 pandemic need to be summarized and shared in time, in the hope that this will help in the provision of better services and management of patients suffering from allergic diseases during this pandemic.although personal protective equipment (ppe) falls at the lowest level of the hierarchy of controls due to the dependence of ppe effectiveness on individual behavior, it is a primary strategy to prevent disease transmission in healthcare settings. specifically, the healthcare infection control practices advisory committee (hicpac), who provide advice and guidance regarding the practice of control of healthcareassociated infections to the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) and the secretary of the department of health and human services, recommends the use of ppe in standard and transmission-based infection control precautions. [1] standard precautions require the hcw to anticipate exposures and select appropriate ppe, while transmission-based precautions include a specific ppe ensemble for use by hcws providing care to patients with an infectious disease or disease syndrome classified as being transmitted through the airborne, contact, or droplet route.to prevent disease transmission in healthcare settings, ppe must be used consistently and correctly by hcws to prevent exposure and the transport of pathogens to their bodies. the infection of two nurses with ebola virus disease (evd) in dallas, texas has been attributed to ppe failure or incorrect ppe use. [2] simulation studies in which the ppe of hcws are contaminated with pathogen surrogates have shown that improper ppe doffing practices may result in contamination of hcws skin and clothing. [3, 4] in this study, we characterized the ppe use and ppe doffing practices of hcws providing care for patients with viral respiratory infections in an acute care hospital. our approach was direct observation performed inside of patient rooms. previous work has documented that hcws compliance with ppe use is relatively low and that doffing practices are inconsistent, but much of that work involved observations outside of patient rooms, or in the context of simulation. [5] [6] [7] the contribution of this work is the description of doffing practices following routine patient care among diverse worker types inside the rooms of patients with viral respiratory infections and labeled for transmission-based precautions.ppe doffing practices of hcws who cared for patients with viral respiratory infections were observed at a 465-bed acute care hospital from march 2017 to june 2017 and september 2017 to april 2018. hcw and patient participants provided written informed consent. hcws were eligible to participate if they were adults, able to communicate in english, and provided care to a patient with a viral infection that had consented to participate in the study. eligible hcw participants were recruited at staff meetings and at patient rooms before hcws entered the room. hcw participants could participate more than one time because hcws performed different types of care activities and/or on different patients during each observation. the doffing practice results were not reviewed with hcws following the observations. this study was approved by the university of illinois at chicago institutional review board, protocol number 2015-0990.patients having respiratory infections were identified through the hospital medmined surveillance system. patients were eligible to be recruited if they were adults, fluent in english or spanish, and had a positive respiratory pathogen panel test within three days prior to the day of observation. the patients had a variety of acute viral respiratory infections including: influenza a (n ¼ 23), influenza b (n ¼ 8), and rhinovirus (n ¼ 15); and respiratory syncytial virus (n ¼ 3), coronavirus (n ¼ 1), parainfluenza (n ¼ 1), and adenovirus (n ¼ 1).the study occurred in nine units in the hospital, which were classified into three groups: (1) intensive care units (icus), which included the neurological icu, the medical icu and the step down unit; (2) non-icus, which included the rehabilitation/ orthopedics unit, the clinical decision/observation unit, the general medical surgical unit and the liver/ gastroenterology unit; and (3) specialty units, which included the bone marrow transplant and hematology-oncology units. the unit groupings were based on unit workflow and patient medical conditions.researchers waited outside patient rooms and performed observations during a 3-hr period, typically from 8 a.m. to 12 p.m. one trained observer recorded the ppe use and doffing practices of hcws inside patient rooms using a pre-defined checklist based on the cdc guideline that included: ppe worn, sequence of doffing, carefulness of doffing, disposal location, doffing ppe inside out, removing ppe from the front, and performance of hand hygiene. [8] the check list is available in the supplementary materials. the correct ppe to be worn by hcws was based on the isolation signs mounted outside the patient room door. for patients on contact isolation, hcws were to wear gloves and a reusable isolation gown. for patients on droplet isolation, hcws were to wear a surgical mask with eye shield. for patients on droplet and contact isolation, hcws were to wear gloves, a reusable isolation gown, and a surgical mask with eye shield (visor). according to the cdc recommendations, the correct doffing sequence includes removing gloves first, followed by the gown, the mask, and then hand hygiene. in our study, hand hygiene was not included in the correct doffing sequence evaluation but reported separately. gloves should be removed by holding the outside palm area of one glove, pulling it off, and then holding it in the other gloved hand. the second glove should be peeled off inside-out using fingers of the ungloved hand. a washable, reusable fabric gown with ties at the neck should be taken off by unfastening gown ties, pulling away from the shoulder inside-out, and folding into a bundle. a surgical mask should be removed by taking off elastic ear bands of the mask without touching the front of the mask. all ppe must be removed before leaving the patient room at the doorway or in anteroom. [8] in addition, we evaluated the doffing carefulness, defined as a removal process not involving strong or vigorous movements, which may generate infectious aerosols from contaminated ppe.data were recorded on paper forms and entered into a database using double data entry (access, 2016; microsoft, redmond, wa). all data analysis was performed with the r project for statistical computing (the r foundation for statistical computing, vienna, austria). differences in proportions among hcw job role groups, hospital unit groups, and patient isolation categories were tested with the v 2 test where expected values were determined using the overall mean proportion. statistical significance was set at a ¼ 0.05 for all tests. although hcws could participate more than one time, observations were treated as independent in the statistical analyses because hcws performed different type of care activities and/or on different patients during each observation.in total, we observed the ppe doffing practices of 107 hcws, with 23 hcws participating more than once for a total of 166 observations during care of 52 patients. four observations were excluded from the analysis because the observer was not able to record the doffing activities of hcws, giving a final sample size of 162 observations. sample sizes vary slightly for some variables because not all variables were recorded in all observations. observations involved: nurses (n ¼ 63), nurse technicians (n ¼ 37), attending physicians (n ¼ 18), resident physicians (n ¼ 15), respiratory therapist (n ¼ 9), nurse practitioners (n ¼ 7), environmental service workers (esws, n ¼ 4), nursing students (n ¼ 3), physical therapists (n ¼ 3), medical students (n ¼ 2), and a dietician (n ¼ 1). we grouped observations of attending physicians, resident physicians, nurse practitioners, and medical students into the "provider" group; nurses and nursing students into the "nurse" group; and physical therapists, esws, and dieticians into the "others" group. the provider and nurse groupings were based on the observation that these hcws performed similar care activities. of the 52 patient participants, 30 were in droplet and contact isolation, 21 were in droplet isolation, and 1 was in contact isolation.hcws chose the correct pieces of ppe in 39 of 61 (64%) observations of care for patients in droplet isolation and in 55 of 97 (57%) observations of care for patients in for droplet and contact isolation. the overall adherence to wearing the ppe specified for each isolation categories was 60% (98 of 162). the droplet isolation signs showed that surgical mask with eye shield should be used, but in 36% of observations when this piece of equipment was used, the hcws took the eye shield off the mask (table 1) . table 2 summarizes observed doffing errors. in 32 of 153 (21%) of observations in which gloves were worn, hcws removed their gloves incorrectly. the most frequent glove doffing mistake, occurring in 9.8% of observations, was not removing gloves insideout. in 79 of 122 (65%) of observations in which gowns were worn, hcws failed to remove their gowns correctly. the most common gown doffing errors were removing gown from the front (58%), followed by not pulling away from shoulder inside-out (24%). in 35 of 136 (26%) of observations when masks were worn, hcws touched the front of the mask while removing the mask. in approximately half of the observations (78 of 160), hcws touched potentially contaminated surfaces or ppe with a bare hand during doffing. hand hygiene was not performed after leaving the patient room in 9 of 137 observations (6.6%). among these 9 observations, hcws touched potentially contaminated surfaces in 6 of them (67%).the overall incorrect doffing percentage was 90% (table 3) , based on the doffing sequence, doffing technique, and use of correct ppe. the percentage of observations in which hcws did not remove their ppe in the correct sequence was 52%, while 40% of observations involved hcws not wearing all the required ppe. the percentage of doffing errors did not differ significantly among hcws groups (v 2 ¼ 1.66 p ¼ 0.79, table 3 ), nor among the groups of hospital units (v 2 ¼ 1.10 p ¼ 0.57, table 3 ).when evaluated by patient isolation category, the percentage of observations involving incorrect doffing sequence and overall incorrect doffing differed (v 2 ¼ 12.8, p ¼ 0.002). errors were less common among hcws providing care to patients in droplet isolation compared to when providing care to patients in droplet and contact isolation. table 4 shows the types of to evaluate the assumption that observations could be treated independently, despite the repeated participation of 23 hcws, we repeated the analyses using only a single observation for each participating hcw and found the same results.proper use and doffing of ppe protects hcws and patients from infectious diseases. previous studies have evaluated doffing practices of hcws in hospital and laboratory settings using both direct observations and video recording methods, and our results are relatively consistent with that of others, given differences in study designs. katanami et al. [5] assessed ppe use by hcws using cameras outside of patient rooms identified for contact precautions and reported that adherence to wearing all required ppe was only 34%. we observed much higher compliance of ppe use during care for patients in contact isolation (100%, table 1 ), but the comparison is limited by our small numbers of observations (n ¼ 4). beam et al. [6] found <0.01 ã p-value comparison of ppe incorrectness between droplet and droplet/contact precautions that 91% of hcws in a simulated care study made contact between unprotected body areas and potentially contaminated surfaces, while our study found hcws touched potentially contaminated surfaces with bare hands in 50% of observations. part of the difference in these results may be due to the fact that we counted contact made by a bare hand only, while beam et al. considered contact made by any unprotected body part. we found that hcws removed ppe in the wrong sequence in 52% of observations, which was similar to percentage of hcws observed by zellmer et al. [9] zellmer et al., however, made direct observations outside the patient rooms, so several components of the doffing protocol, including removing glove inside-out and removing gown from the front, were not captured in that study.we found that gown doffing was the most common doffing problem among hcws, as hcws removed the gown by grasping the front of the gown in 58% of observations. this finding was consistent with the beam et al. [6] study, which found that 75% of hcws did not remove the gown as recommended. reusable fabric gowns tie in the back, and the cdc recommends that these gowns be removed from the back-taken off by unfastening gown ties, pulling away from the shoulder inside-out, and folding into a bundle. however, there are different recommendations for gown removal for different types of gowns. in particular, the cdc recommends removing disposable gowns by pulling the gown in the front, away from the body, until the ties break, and then rolling the gown inside out and removing the gloves with the gown. [8] this approach is not feasible with reusable fabric gowns that have woven textile ties, such as were worn by hcws observed in this study, as these ties are difficult to break. a possible reason that hcws may frequently doff gowns incorrectly is that they have been trained in both doffing approaches, but over time have forgotten that the best doffing strategy depends upon the type of gown. the impact of gown doffing method on self-contamination, however, is uncertain. osei-bonsu et al., [10] in a doffing simulation study involving disposable gowns, found that use of the cdc-recommended doffing sequence that includes removing the gown by pulling from the front was associated with fewer participants with any contamination by the surrogate microorganism staphylococcus dermidis than use of the doffing sequence that includes removing the gown from the back ( there is an uncertainty in the cdc recommendations regarding whether hcws should wear a mask with eye shield, or simply a mask, when in close contact with a patient in droplet isolation. [11] in our study, the hospital required hcws to wear a surgical mask with eye shield in patient rooms identified for droplet isolation, and this was indicated on the isolation sign mounted on the room door. however, we found that in more than one-third of observations when the mask was used, hcws took off the eye shield while providing care for patients. it may be that hcws remove the eye shield when wearing prescription eye glasses, but this aspect of the ppe use was not specifically recorded. removal of the eye shield can increase the risk of exposure to splashes of infectious material to the facial mucous membranes of hcws, but the eye shield offers much less protection than indirectly vented goggles with anti-fog coating or chin-length face shield in conjunction with a mask, as recommended by the national institute for occupational safety and health to protect the conjunctiva from infectious aerosols. [12] in our study, we had a very high incorrect overall doffing rate (90%) because we evaluated the doffing technique, doffing sequence and the use of correct ppe. however, all doffing errors are not likely to contribute equally to the risk of disease transmission to hcws or patients. it is plausible that touching contaminated surfaces with bare hand and not performing hand hygiene are the highest risk doffing errors because they increase the likelihood that a hcws leaves the patient room with pathogens on his or her hands. this issue will be explored in future work that integrates measures of virus presence and concentration on environmental surfaces, ppe, and hcws.many factors may contribute to lack of compliance with ppe use during care for patients in contact and/ or droplet isolation and with incorrect doffing, including: incorrect interpretation of the isolation signs, workload, under valuing the importance of ppe, under estimation of risk, or lack of knowledge of the correct ppe and correct doffing protocol. [13] although more complex than the ppe ensembles used in transmission-based precautions, human factors analyses of the doffing process for enhanced ppe ensembles used to care for patients with evd, have highlighted numerous opportunities for ppe failure and self-contamination. [3] gurses et al. [14] concluded that safe doffing of ppe requires knowledge, skills and attitudes, not just instructions for the sequence and technique for how to remove pieces of ppe. our observations suggest that hcws are not familiar with the sequence and technique for how to remove pieces of ppe, but training that builds knowledge and skills and changes attitudes may motivate hcws to utilize the correct sequence and technique. this requires a more comprehensive approach to training than is commonly employed today; one that includes knowledge and practical, hands-on experience. hands-on training in ppe was commonly used with enhanced ppe ensembles during the ebola virus disease outbreak of 2014-2015, and trainees identified hands-on training as has having the greatest influence on their confidence to care for ebola virus disease patients. [15] such training could be integrated into hcws' clinical competency skills tests. clearly, the evidence in this and other work demonstrate that the current approaches are inadequate to obtaining the desired ppe doffing behaviors from hcws.our study had more observations of nurses and nurse technicians than hcws with other roles (table  3) , which is consistent with the relative number of room entries that other studies have reported for hcws of different job titles. [16] although the ppe use and doffing practices of nurses and nurse technicians were not different from hcws with other job roles (table 3) , nurses and nurse technicians have frequent, intimate contacts with patients that may increase their exposure to pathogens, putting them at increased risk for occupationally acquired infectious disease and transferring pathogens outside of the patient room.our study is subject to several limitations. first, our study only observed hcws who provided care for patients with viral respiratory diseases, and it is possible that hcws behave differently when patients have different diseases, including those that result in contact and/or droplet isolation, due to the perception of risk. second, there is a concern that hcws may change their behaviors when being directly observed. in this study, however, the poor compliance with the recommended ppe doffing protocol suggests that hcws were unable to implement the correct practices, even when observed. finally, our study was conducted at a single acute care hospital, which may affect the generalizability of our findings to other healthcare settings, as work practices may vary between hospitals.we found that deviations from the recommended ppe doffing protocol by cdc were common, which could increase the risk of self-contamination on hcw's clothing and skin after providing care for patients having acute respiratory virus infections. in more than 90% of the observations, doffing practices involved errors with respect to the doffing sequence, doffing technique, and/or use of appropriate ppe. common errors were doffing gown from the front, removing the eye shield of the mask, and touching potentially contaminated surfaces and ppe during doffing. given the complexity of ppe doffing and deficiencies in hcws' doffing practices, a new approach to education and training is needed.on december 31, 2019, an unexplained pneumonia was reported in wuhan, china [1] . it was found that this pneumonia was caused by a 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) [2] , which was named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses. the disease caused by sars-cov-2 was called coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) [3] .some previous articles reported the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 in wuhan, and even throughout mainland china; however, from the geographical perspective, the data were mainly from the epidemic centers of hubei province, especially wuhan [4, 5] . however, the characteristics of patients treated in local hospitals in wuhan are not fully representative of patients outside wuhan. therefore, it is highly essential to analyze the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 in areas outside wuhan or hubei province. at the same time, there have been limited reports about the differences in the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients with different genders, clinical classification, and with or without basic diseases.since the first covid-19 patient was discovered on january 16, 2020, a total of 48 confirmed cases of covid-19 have been reported in hengyang (hunan province), a close neighbor city of hubei. until 18:00 on march 2, 2020, all the 48 confirmed cases were cured and discharged.at present, covid-19 is affecting many countries and territories worldwide [6] . the present study aimed to summarize the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients in hengyang (china) and provide a reliable reference for the prevention and control of covid-19.according to the arrangements by the hengyang municipal people's government, all the covid-19 patients were admitted centrally to the affiliated nanhua hospital of the university of south china and the first affiliated hospital of the university of south china without selectivity. from january 16 to march 2, 2020, all the 48 patients with covid-19 who were treated at these two hospitals were included in the current research.according to the diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia (trial version 7) released by national health commission and national administration of traditional chinese medicine [7] , the epidemiological history can be divided into the following five conditions: (1) history of travel to or residency in an epidemic area within 14 d prior to onset of illness; (2) history of contact with patients with covid-19 within 14 d before onset; (3) history of contact with patients with fever or respiratory symptoms from epidemic areas within 14 d prior to onset; (4) agglomeration; and (5) an unclear epidemic history.the diagnostic criteria, clinical classification, and discharge standard related to covid-19 were in line with the diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia (trial version 7) [7] .the presence of sars-cov-2 in pharyngeal swab specimens was detected by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (pcr). the sars-cov-2 nucleic acid diagnostic kit (pcr-fluorescence probing) was provided by hunan shengxiang biotechnology co., ltd. (changsha, china). this test utilizes the 2019-ncov orf 1ab and the specific conserved sequence of the gene coding for nucleocapsid protein n as the target regions, which were designed for the conserved sequence of the double-target genes, in order to detect sample rna through fluorescent signal changes. the sequences are: target 1 (orf1ab) [8] : forward primer, ccctgtgggttttacacttaa and reverse primer, acgattgtgcatcagctga, and the probe 5′-vic-ccgtctgcggtatgtggaaaggttatgbhqg-1-3′; target 2 (n) [8] : forward primer, ggggaacttctcctgctagaat and reverse primer, cagacattttgctctcaagctg, and the probe 5′-fam-ttgctgctgctt-gacagatt-tamra-3′. conditions for the amplifications were 50°c for 30 min, 95°c for 1 min, followed by 45 cycles of 95°c for 15 s and 60°c for 30 s. the patients diagnosed with covid-19 were positive for the sars-cov-2 nucleic acid test, and all the patients released from isolation and discharged from hospital were tested for sars-cov-2 nucleic acid at least twice.all the patients received antiviral, traditional chinese medicine (tcm), and symptomatic therapy according to the diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia (trial version 7) [7] .the patients' data were collected or supplemented by interviews with patients and relatives, and all the data (including epidemiological, demographic, clinical, laboratory, treatment, and outcome data) were imported into an excel worksheet and statistically analyzed by using spss 25.0 software (ibm, armonk, ny, united states). all the data were checked by two physicians (huang j and lin hl), and any difference in interpretation between the two physicians was adjudicated by a third researcher (yang xf).numerical variables are described using the mean ± sd, 95% confidence interval (95%ci), median, and interquartile range (iqr) values. categorical variables are described as percentages and were compared using the χ 2 test. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.a total of 48 cases of covid-19 were collected, of which 1 was mild, 38 were moderate, and 9 were severe. among 48 covid-19 patients, there was no history of wildlife exposure (including direct contact with animals and visits to the wildlife market) within 14 d, and 58.3% 10-19 4.2 (2) 6.4 (2) 0 (0) 0.1 (> 0.5) 0 (0) 5.9 (2) 0.018 (> 0.9) 5.3 (2) 0 (0) 0.000 (> 0.9) 1 indicates differences between male and female patients. 2 denotes differences between patients with and without basic diseases. 3 represents differences between moderate and severe patients. the first onset of covid-19 occurred on january 16, 2020. figure 1 shows the distribution of confirmed cases of covid-19 by date of onset. it was uncovered that there were no new confirmed cases in hengyang after february 14, 2020.the latent period was defined as the time from exposure to the onset of symptoms, which was estimated among patients who could provide the exact date of close contact with individuals from wuhan and other epidemic areas with confirmed or suspected sars-cov-2 infection. the longest latent period was 15 days and the shortest was 1 day. the mean latent period was 6.86 ± 3.57 d, and the median was 7 (iqr: 4.25-9.00) d.the mean time from onset of symptoms to the first physician visit was 3.38 ± 2.98 (95%ci: 2.58-9.18) d, with a median of 2 (iqr: 1-5) d, and the mean time from hospital admission to confirmed diagnosis was 2.29 ± 2.11 (95%ci: 1.18-6.42) d, with a median of 2 (iqr: 1-3) d.it was uncovered that 29.2% (14 of 48) of patients had basic diseases (also known as co-morbidities), including 2 cases of coronary disease, 1 case of hypertension, 1 case of coronary disease with hypertension, diabetes, and cerebral infarction, 2 cases of diabetes with hypertension and hyperlipidemia, 1 case of diabetes with hypertension and gout, and 7 cases of chronic hepatitis b. in the 7 cases of chronic hepatitis b, the serum markers of hepatitis b were positive for hepatitis b surface antigen, hepatitis b "e" antibody, and hepatitis b "c" antibody, 6 cases had hbv-dna titers < 500 iu/ml, and 1 case had an hbv-dna titer > 500 iu/ml. except for 1 case with elevated alanine aminotransferase (alt) and 1 case with elevated aspartate aminotransferase (ast), the remaining 5 patients had normal liver function, and 7 patients did not take antiviral drugs. in the first blood routine examination, the majority the liver function tests showed that serum levels of alt, ast, γ-gt, and alkaline phosphatase were increased in 22.9% (11 of 48), 20.8% (10 of 48), 21.6% (8 of 37), and 5.4% (2 of 37) of patients, respectively. the abnormal incidence of alt elevation in male patients was significantly higher than that in female patients (p < 0.01), while the abnormal incidence of ast elevation in severe patients was significantly increased compared with moderate patients (p < 0.05). after patients with liver disease were excluded, there were 17.07% (7 of 41) of patients with elevated levels of alt and ast, and 24.24% (8 of 33) with elevated level of γ-gt.the serum myocardial enzyme test revealed that the levels of lactate dehydrogenase (ld-l), myoglobin (mb), and creatine kinase (ck) were increased in 37.0% (17 of 46), 13.6% (6 of 44), and 12.8% (6 of 47) of patients, respectively. the incidence of abnormal ck elevation in severe patients was significantly higher than that in moderate patients (p < 0.05). for renal function test, some patients [10 (20.9%) of 48] were found to have increased levels of uric acid. in terms of fibrinolysis detection, the levels of fibrinogen and d-dimer were increased in 44.7% (21 of 47) and 29.5% (13 of 44) of patients, respectively. additionally, elevated serum levels of c-reactive protein and blood glucose were noted in 64.6% (31 of 48) and 43.2% (19 of 48) of patients, respectively. compared with moderate patients, the incidence of abnormal levels of blood glucose was remarkably increased in the severe patients (p < 0.05). the results of laboratory examination are shown in table 3 . all the patients received antiviral drugs, including alpha-interferon (5 million units, atomization; average, 11.2 d), lopinavir/ritonavir (500 mg bid; average, 9.9 d), arbidol (200 mg tid; average, 7.8 d), and chloroquine phosphate (500 mg bid; average, 7.0 d). moreover, 38 (79.2%) patients were given tcm based on the treatment protocol [7] . furthermore, 2 (4.2%) patients received treatment of human umbilical-cord mesenchymal stem cells. a number of patients, mainly those with co-infection, were treated with antibiotics including moxifloxacin, cefoperazone sodium, and sulbactam sodium. severe patients were given methylprednisolone (1-2 mg/kg per day) and immunoglobulin for 3-5 d. on march 2, 2020, all the 48 patients with confirmed covid-19 were cured and discharged.the outbreak of covid-19 in china is roughly divided into three phases [9, 10] . the first phase occurred before the end of december 2019. covid-19 mainly caused a local outbreak among people who had contact with seafood markets. in early january 2020, the second phase commenced, with clusters of disease in multiple communities or families in wuhan and human-to-human transmission among close contacts [10, 11] . in mid-to-late january 2020, with the approach of the spring festival, personnel mobility increased, and the third phase of outbreak appeared. at this time, the epidemic spread from hubei province to other provinces in mainland china [10] . hengyang (hunan province), a close neighbor of hubei province, began to have an outbreak in mid-january 2020, just before commencing the traditional chinese newyear. the first case of covid-19 onset was found on january 16, 2020, and the onset occurred 2 d after he contacted with people from wuhan. the distribution of confirmed cases of covid-19 by date of onset in hengyang was mainly concentrated from mid-january to late-january. no new cases were found in hengyang after among the 48 covid-19 patients, the mean time from onset of symptoms to the first physician visit was 3.78 ± 2.98 d, and the mean time from hospital admission to confirmed diagnosis was 2.29 ± 2.11 d, which was shorter than the time reported in the literature [9, 10] . these are closely related to the government and residents attaching great importance to the prevention and treatment of covid-19 and technological advancements in health care.totally, 48 patients with covid-19 were enrolled, of which 1 was mild, 38 were moderate, and 9 were severe. compared with patients who were initially infected with sars-cov-2 in wuhan [11] , the severity of illness of patients in hengyang was relatively mild.the common symptoms of patients with covid-19 in hengyang were fever, cough, fatigue, and chills. approximately 10.4% of patients did not have fever and were easily ignored in the daily temperature screening. symptoms of the upper respiratory tract were rare, with only 1 case of runny nose, which was favorable for distinguishing the disease from the upper respiratory tract. one patient had no symptoms, positive signs, or changes in chest ct before and after hospitalization, and only sars-cov-2 nucleic acid test was positive, which was called asymptomatic novel coronavirus infection. the literature has reported that asymptomatic patients with novel coronavirus infection are also highly infectious [6] . wong et al [12] found that sars-cov-2 can be prevented through basic infection control measures, including wearing of masks, washing hands, and environmental hygiene. a: on day 13 of disease onset, ground glass opacities could be observed in the lower lobe of the right middle lobe and left upper lobe, and consolidation was observed in the lower lobe of both lungs, as well as consolidation of the right lung; b: on day 18 of disease onset, the consolidation of the lower lobe of both lungs was significantly reduced, and the structure was distorted. the consolidation of the lobe and ground glass was mixed; c: an obvious reduction in consolidation of both lungs and increased ground glass opacities in the lower lobe of the left lung could be observed on day 23 of disease onset; d: an obvious absorption and decreased density of bilateral lung lesions, mainly ground glass opacities and fiber strand shadow distribution, as well as bronchiectasis of the lower lobe of both lungs could be observed on day 31 of disease onset.the laboratory tests showed the following findings: first, the numbers of peripheral blood leukocytes, lymphocytes, and eosinophils were significantly reduced, especially the number of eosinophils, which was remarkably decreased in all the patients. second, it was revealed that the levels of alt, ast, and γ-gt were increased in 22.9%, 20.8%, and 21.6% of patients, respectively. at present, it is believed that covid-19 patients suffer from dysfunction or injury in multiple organs of the body due to the following three reasons: first, the novel coronavirus directly damages the targeted organ [13] [14] [15] ; second, the novel coronavirus induces systemic inflammatory immune response in the human body [5] ; third, toxic and side effects of some drugs are important during the course of covid-19 treatment [16] . however, further research should be conducted to confirm the above-mentioned findings.except for one mild patient, the other 47 patients had morphological characteristic of pulmonary lesions on chest ct, which plays a pivotal role in diagnosing covid-19 [17] .the pandemic of covid-19 caused by sars-cov-2 presents an unprecedented challenge to identify effective drugs for prevention and treatment [18] . the patients in the present study were treated with a combination of western medicine and tcm. none of the 38 ordinary patients got worse and became severe, and all 48 patients were cured and discharged. in the absence of effective drugs for covid-19 [18] , tcm is a helpful treatment option.the current study was limited by a number of factors that require further attention. first, a small number of covid-19 cases were involved in this study. second, laboratory examination results of a number of patients were missed, resulting in incomplete data.in conclusion, compared with patients initially infected with sars-cov-2 in wuhan, the symptoms of patients with covid-19 in hengyang are relatively mild, and the mean time from onset of symptoms to the first physician visit and the mean time from hospital admission to confirmed diagnosis are shorter. covid-19 patients in the present research have the following characteristics: first, in addition to fever and respiratory symptoms, there are other systemic symptoms; second, the numbers of peripheral blood leukocytes, lymphocytes, and eosinophils are significantly reduced, especially the number of eosinophils, which is reduced in all the patients; third, some morphological characteristics of pulmonary lesions appeared in the chest ct scan; fourth, laboratory tests revealed multiple organ abnormality or damage. our outcomes may assist clinicians in diagnosis and treatment of covid-19.at present, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is influencing 210 countries and territories worldwide, which is becoming a severe public health concern.there have been rare reports about the differences in the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients with different genders, clinical classification, and with or without basic diseases.to study the differences in the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients with different genders, clinical classification, and with or without basic diseases, and provide a reliable reference for the prevention and control of covid-19.from january 16 to march 2, 2020, a total of 48 confirmed cases of covid-19 have been reported in hengyang and were included in this study. all the data were imported into the excel worksheet and statistically analyzed by using spss25.0 software.the main symptoms of covid-19 patients in hengyang were fever, cough and expectoration, fatigue, and chills, and there were multiple organ dysfunction or damage, such as reduced peripheral blood leukocytes, lymphocytes, and eosinophils, and increased c-reactive protein, fibrinogen, blood glucose, ld-l, d-dimer, alt, ast, γ-gt, mb, and ck. except for the mild patients, chest ct showed pulmonary lesions. on march 2, 2020, 48 patients with covid-19 were all cured and discharged.the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients with different genders, clinical classification, and with or without basic diseases are not very different in most cases, and slightly different in individual cases. clinical manifestations and laboratory tests reveal that patients with covid-19 have multiple organ dysfunction or damage.the mechanism of covid-19 combining multiple organ dysfunction or damage is worth further study.coronaviruses are enveloped single-stranded rna viruses belonging to the family of coronaviridae. while initial research focused on their ability to cause enzootic infections, infections that have emerged in the past two decades demonstrate their ability to cross the species barrier and infect humans [1, 2] . the ensuing epidemics have included severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2002 and the more recent middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in 2012 and have resulted in severe disease burden, mortality and economic disruption [3] . a novel flu-like coronavirus, emerging towards the end of 2019 and subsequently named sars-cov-2, has been associated with an epidemic initially focused in wuhan, china. sars-cov-2 belongs to the same group (b-coronavirus) of coronaviruses responsible of sars and mers [2] . over december 2019 and february, sars-cov-2 spread rapidly throughout china, infecting many thousands of people and causing more than 3000 deaths [4, 5] . as a consequence, on 30 january the world health organization (who) announced that the outbreak of sars-cov-2 in china was a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) [6] . the influence of globalization, particularly on travel, rapidly caused the infection to spread to countries outside china, initially to neighbouring asian countries and then to more than 120 countries around the world. as of the time of writing this commentary, more than 200 000 individuals have contracted sars-cov-2 (data updated on 20 march 2020) [7] . on 11 march, the who declared the rapidly spreading coronavirus outbreak to be a pandemic [6] . currently, italy is the country with the highest number of cases of sars-cov-2 infection after china, a situation which has precipitated a health and social emergency.focusing on our role within the italian blood system, we note that there has been no scientifically documented evidence of the transmission of coronavirus infection through the transfusion of blood components during previous epidemics. the current sars-cov-2 outbreak has stimulated further discussion on this issue, particularly on the safety of blood donations in endemic countries [8] . in italy, the transfusion network is overseen, through regional blood coordinating centres (rbccs), by the italian national blood centre (cns), which is the health ministry's technical and scientific advisory body on matters related to blood and blood products. the cns acts also as the national competent authority, as established by the european commission, on blood and related issues on behalf of the same ministry. to guarantee high standards of blood safety and sufficiency, blood donation is sourced both from public hospital-based blood establishments (bes) and licensed and accredited blood donor associations and federations' blood collection sites in a 2:1 split and is restricted to voluntary unpaid donors. the first sars-cov-2 local transmitted cases in italy were observed on 18 february 2020 and were initially clustered in a few cities in northern italy. the italian government, starting on 23 february and up to the date of writing this manuscript, has released eight decrees aimed at limiting the spread of sars-cov-2. the cns has already released since 22 january 2020 a recommendation outlining preventative measures for the transmission of sars-cov-2 by transfusion of labile blood components related to travels from the people's republic of china. on 24 february 2020, a new document was released with reference also to italian territories. this document included the following recommendations: • request all the personnel working at bes and collection sites to comply scrupulously with behavioural protocols designed to prevent the spread of respiratory infections, including sars-cov-2 infection.in addition, the cns advised the associations and federations of voluntary blood donors to inform adequately all their staff and donors about the epidemiology, symptoms and preventative measures of sars-cov-2 infection. the cns recommended that the rbccs further implement regional patient blood management programmes, in order to conserve the blood supply, and enhance and monitor closely strategic regional blood component stocks (using information systems), in order to ensure balance and adjustment, thus minimizing any intra-or inter-regional blood component shortages.several updates of this document were released by the cns as the epidemiology of sars-cov-2 infection rapidly evolved. on 2 march 2020, following the recommendations of the european centre for disease prevention and control (ecdc) [9] and reflecting the decrees of the italian government, the cns updated the prevention measures, reducing the period of temporary deferral of donors from the previous 28 to 14 days. along with appeals to donate in order to avoid shortages in the blood supply, the same document also included additional recommendations for the associations and federations of voluntary blood donors. these included the maintenance of safe inter-individual distance (a minimum of 1 m) in waiting rooms, a careful planning of the schedule for calling up donors in order to regulate the volume of human traffic within centres, a meticulous disinfection of hands of the be and collection sites' personnel, and similarly rigorous protocols for the sanitation and disinfection of the collection rooms. the use of masks for both be personnel and donors was not required following the recommendations of the who and national health authorities. these measures were progressively extended to most of the cities of northern italy (9 march 2020). following the declaration of the government of the widespread dissemination of the sars-cov-2 infection in italy, the last update of the cns on 10 march 2020 extended these measures to the whole national territory of italy. on 18 march, the cns defined specific criteria for collection of plasma from convalescent subjects.the cns continues to reinforce its appeal to donate blood components in both public hospital bes and associated collection sites. given the limitations on movement imposed by the government, the cns has been pivotal in communicating and managing the necessary deviations from these measures of donors and the healthcare personnel involved in blood donation, in order to maintain the smooth collection of blood.in the first week of march, a reduction of 10% whole blood donations per week was experienced by the italian blood system (from 48 000as a standard number of blood donations per week in this periodto 43 000 nationwide), but the inventory was maintained by a contemporary reduction of elective surgery using mediumhigh amounts of blood. the strategic reserve of blood kept for emergencies was not accessed. during the second week of march, after the campaign of the cns and italian government encouraging blood donation, we observed a 12% increase in the collection of whole blood (from 48 000 to 53 600 nationwide).in fig. 1 , the trend of positive cases for sars-cov-2 infection in italy, updated on 20 march 2020, is reported with a concise chronology of the main documents released and the trend of blood donations in the same period.these measures have been able to guarantee blood safety and supply in italy. we hope that our ongoing experience, as briefly reported in this commentary, will help transfusion medicine specialists from other countries, who are facing the effect of this epidemic on the blood supply. we propose that it is possible to manage a transfusion system during this critical period, using pragmatic, prudent and evidence-based measures. in our country, so far, blood donation, after an initial fall (-10%), has been maintained during sars-cov-2 emergency, having been recognized by the government as a priority in order to maintain basic healthcare services. with the sars-cov-2 outbreak spreading in all european countries, we recommend defining common european guidelines that establish screening criteria for blood donors. such criteria need to take into account the different epidemiological situations in different countries, while establishing common principles ensuring blood safety throughout europe.s of july 10, 2003, 438 cases (250 probable, 188 suspect) of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) were reported in canada, 375 (85.3%) of which occurred in ontario. 1 the majority of cases in ontario occurred in the greater toronto area (gta). sars has resulted in unprecedented apprehension in the local community and severe economic harm to local business and tourism. more importantly, it has challenged health care workers to use effective infection control measures. in the present article, we will discuss the infection control guidelines for the anesthesiologist that were adopted by our institution, the rationale behind them and the impact of the sars outbreak on anesthesiologists in toronto.illness was called severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) with a case definition (table i) from the world health organization (who). 3 on march 12, 2003 , who issued a global alert in relation to clusters of sars. 4 in toronto, the first documented case was a 78-yr-old woman who had travelled to hong kong on february 13 with her husband. 5 in hong kong, she and her husband stayed at a hotel at the same time and on the same floor as the guangdong physician from whom the outbreak in hong kong originated. on returning to toronto on february 23, she stayed in her apartment, which she shared with family members. two days later, she became ill and died at home on march 5, 2003 . several of the family subsequently developed respiratory symptoms. the 43-yr-old son was admitted to the emergency department of a community hospital in scarborough that became the epicentre of the toronto outbreak. by the end of april, 262 sars cases (143 probable, 119 suspected) and 21 deaths had been reported in ontario, the majority in the gta. 6 all these cases could be traced back to the original index patient. on april 23, who issued a travel advisory warning for toronto, which was removed one week later. on may 14, toronto was removed from the list of areas affected by sars as no new probable case had been reported since april 19. however, another cluster of sars patients was discovered on may 23, 2003. 7 the second cluster was traced to a 96-yr-old man who underwent surgery for a fractured pelvis in a hospital in north york on april 19. while in hospital he developed sars but it was managed as postoperative pneumonia. he infected several other patients in his ward, including a woman who was later transferred to a rehabilitation hospital. this resulted in a further 118 cases in the gta as of july 10, 2003. 1 eventually, on july 2, who removed toronto from the list of areas with recent local transmissions.r re e--e ex xa am mi in na at ti io on n o of f i in nf fe ec ct ti io on n c co on nt tr ro ol l m me ea as su ur re es s the sars outbreak is unique in recent history of public health because of its rapidity of transmission, its concentration in health care settings and the large number of health care workers who were infected. in an analysis of a cohort of 144 patients with sars in the gta, 73 (51%) were health care workers, 8 including 14 (19%) physicians and 29 (40%) nurses. anesthesiologists, as specialists in airway management, are at high risk because of frequent exposure to patients' respiratory secretions. three anesthesiologists in our area were infected. 9 they contracted the disease after tracheal intubation of patients with respi- -high fever (> 38°c) and -cough or breathing difficulty and one or more of the following exposures during the ten days prior to onset of symptoms:-close contact b with a person who is a suspect or probable case of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars); -history of travel to an area with recent local transmission of sars -residing in an area with recent local transmission of sars 2 a person with an unexplained acute respiratory illness resulting in death after 1 november 2002, a but on whom no autopsy has been performed and one or more of the following exposures during to ten days prior to onset of symptoms:-close contact, b with a person who is a suspect or probable case of sars; -history of travel to an area with recent local transmission of sars -residing in an area with recent local transmission of sars probable case 1 a suspect case with radiographic evidence of infiltrates consistent with pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome (rds) on chestx-ray (cxr). 2 a suspect case of sars that is positive for sars coronavirus by one or more assays. 3 a suspect case with autopsy findings consistent with the pathology of rds without an identifiable cause. ratory failure of unknown cause. these cases occurred in the early stage of the outbreak before sars was suspected. the anesthesiologists wore surgical facemasks, gowns and gloves but no goggles/visors.international investigations have revealed important information that prompted health care workers to reexamine the precautionary measures for infection control.the agent that causes sars is a new coronavirus (sars-cov), unlike any other human or animal virus in the coronavirus family. 10, 11 the virus can survive for up to 48 hr after drying on plastic surfaces. 12 in hong kong the virus survived in urine and feces for at least 24 and 48 hr respectively. in patients with diarrhea, the virus can survive up to four days in the stool sample which has a lower acidity than normal stools. 12 thus, once the body is exposed to this viral agent, the body surface can be contaminated for an extended time. similarly, exposed inanimate objects may act as carriers for up to 48 hr.the virus is spread predominately by infectious droplets and contact. because of early reports of clusters of cases in community settings such as apartment buildings and the high infection rates among health care workers in hong kong, taiwan, hanoi and toronto, the etiological agent of sars was thought to be highly contagious. 13, 14 however, with the exception of 'superspreaders', there is growing evidence that sars-cov is only moderately transmissible. 15, 16 the average number of secondary infections generated per case at the start of the epidemic was estimated as 2.7, which is much lower than that for influenza. 17 in some instances, however, a single individual ("superspreader") has directly infected a large number of other people. this is exemplified by the singapore outbreak in which half of the first reported 201 probable cases were infected by five source cases. 18 despite the discovery of the virus and its genome, it is still uncertain when patients are most infectious and how to identify 'superspreaders'. 19 in hong kong and toronto, most of the patients infected with sars had no co-morbid illnesses and half of them (44-51%) were fit health care workers. 8, 20 approximately one in five (20-23%) patients with sars required admission to intensive care units (icu) with or without ventilatory support.in a detailed analysis of cases identified in the initial outbreak associated with the nosocomial transmission of sars in the index hospital in toronto, the case fatality rates were 2.9% and 53.8% for those aged less than or over 60 yr respectively. 1 the case-fatality rate was calculated by dividing the cumulative number of deaths within 60 days after symptom onset by the total number of probable and suspect cases. data from the who 21 revealed that the overall case fatality ratio was 14 to 15% and was influenced by age (table ii) . this ratio was estimated by survival analysis based on the individual data from the onset of the illness until death or full recovery.early in the toronto sars outbreak, full protective gear (goggles, gowns, n95 masks and gloves) was considered to be sufficient to protect health care workers from sars. in april, a number of health care workers contracted the infection during their care of sars patients despite increased protective precautions. 22, 23 experience from hong kong suggested that the infection among 'protected' health care worker was related to how well the precautionary measures were used. in a case-control survey, 24 they found no infection in staff using complete precautionary measures, whereas infected staff had omitted at least one of the precautionary measures. this demonstrates how difficult it is to practice and perfect full infection control in view of the long survival ability of the virus outside the body. additional measures have been suggested. however, most important of all is the 'hypervigilance' of health care workers in practicing infection control measure.i in nf fe ec ct ti io on n c co on nt tr ro ol l g gu ui id de el li in ne es s f fo or r a an ne es st th he es si ia a exposure to oral and respiratory secretions at the time of tracheal intubation subjects the anesthesiologist to a serious risk of acquiring the infection. health organizations and agencies such as who, 25 this guideline applies to all surgical patients and is based on long-standing recommendations by health canada that masks and eye protection or face shields should be worn where appropriate to protect the mucous membranes of the eyes, nose and mouth during procedures and patient care activities likely to generate splashes or sprays of blood, body fluids, secretions or excretions. 29 for practical purposes, the anesthetic machine is considered 'dirty' and the anesthetic drug cart as 'clean'. the machine is usually the first area anesthesiologists touch after contact with the patient. a large container is positioned on the anesthesia machine in which all airway equipment (laryngoscope blade and handle, mask, suction catheter, etc.) is placed after use. the container and its contents are removed from the or as soon as possible following intubation. the contents are separated for cleaning, sterilization or disposal before they are returned to the or. a second set of equipment including clean masks, laryngoscope handles and blades is immediately available. all steps are taken to keep the anesthesia drug cart 'clean'. the cart is used only after hand-washing or removal of the outer pair of gloves. thus, the infection control team should be informed about the transfer route. the spread of respiratory droplets from the infected patient should be minimized by the patient wearing a n95 mask without an expiratory valve. staff involved in the transfer and the care of patients in the or should take full droplet/contact precautions. clean surgical scrub suits laundered by the hospital should be worn and personalized hats or hair covers are avoided. the rationale for using alcohol-based hand rub, n95 masks, gowns, gloves and powered respirators in the or has been reviewed recently. 9 because the sars-cov virus is spread by droplets and can survive on inanimate objects for 48 hr, extra precautions and vigilance are important to avoid contaminating anesthesia equipment or surfaces such as the telephone in the or. double gloves are recommended when handling sars patients. the outer pair is removed after direct patient contact and before touching equipment or furniture in other areas of the room.of the precautions recommended above, the use of personal protection systems (pps) may be the most unfamiliar for anesthesiologists. although it is not currently recommended by health canada, 27 hospitals in ontario are using pps according to the directive from the ministry of health and long-term care of ontario to all ontario acute care hospitals for high-risk procedures. 28 the pps adopted in our institution is the powered air-purifying respirator (papr 3m, berkshire, uk) system while other hospitals have purchased the stryker® t4 (stryker, kalamazoo, mi, usa) pps. no consensus has been reached regarding which has the better air filtration system. nonetheless, these systems are considered to be important barriers to protect health care workers during high-risk procedures such as intubation and extubation. the papr consists of a beltmounted powered air purifier with a high efficiency particulate air (hepa) filter, connected via a tube to a lightweight headpiece (figures 1 and 2) . the hepa filter removes particles of 0.3 to 15 µ with an efficiency of 98 to 100%. 30 the lightweight hood or headpiece provides excellent coverage of the head, face and neck. we have several years experience in using the papr system in the bronchoscopy suite without disease transmission to health-care workers. there are several important clinical points to remember. first, it takes time, training and assistance to put on the personal protective equipment and the papr system properly. advance warning of a patient in need of tracheal intubation is required in order to prepare properly. second, the personal protective equipment must be removed in proper sequence to avoid contamination of the users. third, it is difficult to communicate with each other due to the noise generat-ed by the high flow through the papr system. this noisy environment may cause errors due to its potential for miscommunication.contaminated protective gear must be removed before transferring the patient to the recovery room. time should be allowed for the anesthesiologist and assistant to remove contaminated gloves, gowns, face shields or masks and head cover and renew protective precautions at the end of the case.the anesthesia machine is protected with high efficiency, low volume filters placed in both the inspiratory and expiratory limbs of the circuit. hydrophobic filters are used in our institution as the filtering process is based on pore size and not on hydrostatic charge. the hygroscopic filter based on hydrostatic charge may become overwhelmed when wet and will allow passage of virus. with the filter placed in both limbs of the circuit, the soda lime does not need to be changed but the end-tidal co 2 sample line and trap must be changed after the case.most ors currently use positive pressure with up to 20 room air exchanges per hour. because of the high air exchanges in the or, aerosolized infectious particles will be cleared rapidly. however, those in close contact during a high-risk procedure such as tracheal intubation/extubation may still have a high exposure, and those outside the room may be exposed to infectious aerosols if the door to the or is left open. therefore, movement in and out of the or must be kept to a minimum during the procedure.local experience from personnel who contracted sars during airway instrumentation suggested that patient coughing should be kept at a minimum before, during and after intubation and/or induction of anesthesia. instrumentation of the airway with either a cuffed endotracheal tube or laryngeal mask airway is acceptable and should be performed by the most experienced staff available.despite the long list of precautions suggested by our institutional guidelines, it is difficult to list details of all the modifications to practice that have occurred. questions concerning best practice remain. for example: should the pager be clipped on the or uniform inside the or? should we use tape from the roll to secure the endotracheal tube or should the tape be precut? anesthesiologists are familiar with the importance of vigilance in maintaining patient safety. a similar high level of vigilance is necessary to prevent the spread of this serious infection.in the second month of the outbreak, a cluster of six health care workers contracted sars after participating in a difficult and prolonged tracheal intubation. 23 since then, most hospitals have included anesthesiologists, the specialists in airway management, to assist in the tracheal intubation of sars patients. to minimize aerosol spread by coughing, intubation is performed in sedated and paralyzed patients. personnel performing intubation, anesthesiologists and respiratory technicians, must take full precautions including the papr figure 2 the powered air-purifying respirator (papr) system consists of a belt-mounted powered air purifier with a high efficiency particulate air (hepa) filter. figure 1 a lightweight headpiece is connected to the powered air purifying respirator (papr) system via a tube hood, gown, gloves etc., as outlined in the previous section. there must be a well-rehearsed plan and protective clothing, intubating equipment and essential drugs must be provided. particular care is necessary for the removal of potentially contaminated clothing.in summary, it is extraordinary that the spread of the infection in the gta outbreak can be traced to one person with unrecognized sars. the outbreak disrupted the health care and living in a city the size of toronto. one hopes for greater vigilance in the future.anesthesiologists are unique in their frequent exposure to respiratory secretions and blood. we must pay greater heed of our environment to protect ourselves, our patients and our families from infectious disease. a ap pp pe en nd di ix x i i routine precautions for non-severe acute respiratory syndrome patients in the operating room (or) 1 1. . d dr re es ss s --r ro ou ut ti in ne e p pr re ec ca au ut ti io on ns s -for all patient contact in the or and postanesthesia care unit, anesthesia staff should wear gloves, and surgical facemasks.-for tracheal intubation, extubation and all other maneuvers involving the airway, goggles or a face shield should be worn. gloves should be removed after intubation and before touching anesthesia machines, charts, pens etc. 2 2. . d di is sp po os sa al l o of f e eq qu ui ip pm me en nt t -immediately after intubation has been completed all equipment used during intubation (laryngoscope -blade and handle; airway, lighted stylet, suction catheter, facemask, etc.) should be placed in a container or box.-in the or a large container will be placed on the anesthesia machine. the circulating nurse will remove the box and contents, for appropriate cleaning and/or sterilization after intubation is complete. a spare laryngoscope and mask are available in the anesthesia machine drawer. -the anesthesia machine (surface, adjustments knobs etc) will be cleaned between cases but it should be considered dirty. all equipment must be removed from the surfaces of the machine between cases.-do not place the anesthesia record, pens, patient charts on the anesthesia machine. if the anesthesia machine or the monitors become visibly contaminated, they should be wiped with a damp virucidal cloth. in our hospital, we use an accelerated hydrogen peroxide cleaner/disinfectant (virox-5, virox technology inc., mississauga, on, canada). 4 4. . t th he e a an ne es st th he es si ia a c ca ar rt t i is s " "c cl le ea an n" " -all steps should be taken to ensure that the anesthesia cart remains clean. (remove contaminated gloves before handling drugs etc., remove drugs required for the patient with clean hands and keep them on the anesthesia machine until the end of the case). -the transfer route should be discussed with 'infection control' team member.-patients should wear a facemask (n95 mask).-transporters should adopt full droplet /contact precautions (see below).-assistance (respiratory therapist) should be provided for the anesthesiologist.-staff should wear clean surgical scrub suits laundered by the hospital.-minimize the number of individual staff members present. there should be no exchange of staff for the duration of the case.-communicate with all level of staff involved in the care of the patient regarding the patient's sars status.-clear the room of unnecessary or over stocked equipment.-post "sars patient" signs on the or doors to minimize traffic. keep doors closed.-wash hands (before and after patient care).full droplet/contact precaution should be practiced and movement in and out of the or must be kept to a minimum during the procedure.-gown (double gown for high risk procedure).-double glove. remove and dispose of outer pair after direct patient contact and before touching other areas of the room/ anesthesia machine. subsequent intervention must be performed with double gloves.-use n95 mask or equivalent.-use a full-face disposable plastic shield for eye protection.-powered air purifying respirator (papr). required for staff member performing laryngoscopy or any other airway intervention (including extubation).-it is recommended that, where possible, staff stay a minimum of 2 metres from the patient to avoid droplet contamination.-remove gloves / gown and decontaminate hands with alcohol hand wash.-remove face shield / n95 mask / hair cover and wash hands again -re-gown, glove, hair cover and mask.-transfer directly to the postanesthesia care unit isolation room.-remove gown/gloves and mask prior to exiting the isolation room.-change surgical scrub suit immediately or as soon as practically possible. 2 2. . a an ne es st th he es si ia a m ma ac ch hi in ne e a. filters -correct use of a high efficiency, low volume hydrophobic filter provides bacterial/ viral removal greater than 99.999%.-use disposable circle circuit.-a high efficiency viral filter should be placed on the inspiratory and expiratory limbs of the circuit.-the soda lime does not need to be changed. the end-tidal co 2 sample line and trap must be changed after the case.-place the anesthesia machine as far from the patient as practically possible.-place contaminated airway equipment in the plastic box for removal from the or after intubation. discard needles and syringes immediately after use. 3 3. . a an ne es st th he et ti ic c t te ec ch hn ni iq qu ue e the general aim is to minimize patient coughing before, during and after anesthesia. a. choice of airway -endotracheal tube. proper sedation and paralysis prior to tracheal intubation -laryngeal mask airways are permitted (and preferred, to reduce airway irritation) if appropriate -discard after use, along with oral and nasal airways.tailor to the patient's needs. no special directives.-use axillary temperature probe. avoid nasal or esophageal probe. 4 4. . c cl le ea an ni in ng g a an ne es st th he es si ia a e eq qu ui ip pm me en nt t -touched parts of the anesthesia machine/monitors will be wiped from time to time with a damp virucidal wipe.-an attendant, at the conclusion of the proce-dure, will wipe down the anesthesia machine, other than the lcd screen.-the anesthesiologist, or respiratory technician, is asked to wipe the monitor screen surface if visibly or knowingly contaminated, with a damp virucidal wipe, taking care that the cleaning solution does not drip on the screen. 5 5. . l la ab bo or ra at to or ry y s sp pe ec ci im me en ns s -indicate the following on the laboratory requisition form: "sars special investigation", date of onset of illness, 'travel history' and/or 'contact of known case'.-communicate with laboratories first before sending samples.-do not send specimens in the pneumatic tube. send in biohazard bags, in biohazard screw top bottles and have hand delivered to the laboratory.a ap pp pe en nd di ix x i ii ii i emergency tracheal intubation of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) patients outside the operating room (or) when patients with suspected sars require tracheal intubation, staff physicians in the intensive care unit (icu), emergency room (er) sars unit may request the assistance of the on-call staff anesthesiologist. battery belt pack is charging on the unit -intubation equipment: laryngoscope, endotracheal tube 7.0, 8.0 mm, oral airway, yankauer sucker, stylette, ties/tape, co 2 detection device -anesthesia and resuscitation drugs: midazolam 5 mg, succinylcholine 200 mg, rocuronium 100 mg, ephedrine 50 mg, atropine 0.6 mg -syringes and needles: 1 x 20 ml, 3 x 10 ml, and 3 x 5 ml 3 3. . p pr ro oc ce ed du ur re e a. after hand-washing, both laryngoscopist and respiratory technician will put on double gloves, gowns, goggles, n95 masks and papr hoods in the anteroom, or outside the patient's room.b. intubation will be performed in patients who are sedated (midazolam) and paralyzed (succinylcholine or rocuronium). after intubation intermittent positive pressure ventilation will be facilitated with rocuronium.c. after intubation, the gowns, hoods, and outer gloves will be removed in the anteroom or inside the patient's room. first, the laryngoscopist will be assisted by the respiratory technician whose equipment will then be removed.d. the patient is returned to the on-going care of the referring physician.the world is currently facing a major pandemic of the coronavirus disease caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars cov-2). first reported in wuhan, china, in december 2019, the outbreak of covid-19 has since massively spread all over the globe, counting as of june 3, 2020, more than 6,348,900 confirmed cases and 380,800 deaths [1, 2] . considering the numerous unknowns surrounding the sars cov-2, the absence of treatment, and in order to stop a fast-growing transmission of the disease and the subsequent overwhelming of hospitals and health care systems, several countries have opted for strict lockdown measures.in france, with over 151,600 confirmed cases of covid-19 and 29,000 deaths reported as of june 3, 2020, such lockdown measures were declared by the government on march 17 th , requiring the closure of all but essential public places, businesses and services, including schools and universities, workplaces, non-food shops, open and green spaces, recreational spaces (including sports clubs) and local (outdoor) food markets (when physical distancing could not be applied). the population was required to stay home and only go outside in close proximity for essential needs (including grocery shopping, medical care, legal obligations or limited recreational physical activity within a 1km radius from home), under police control. only workers from essential sectors (e.g., healthcare, food and drug manufactures and supplies, garbage collection, city cleaning, vehicle and technology maintenance) were allowed to keep their usual activity, with protective equipment and physical distancing guidelines. as a result, a vast majority of the population either were asked to telework from home or became partially unemployed, and parents had to relay school teachers at home. on may 11 th and then june 2 nd the lockdown measures were partially lifted, but the situation has not returned to "normal" yet: e.g., most employees are encouraged to keep working from home; physical distancing is required in public transports, schools, companies, shops, bars and restaurants (when open), limiting their capacity; free movement across borders is still very limited.this unprecedented situation has left people with a sudden disruption of their daily routines, with nonetheless a variety of circumstances according to the sociodemographic and economic status and the residential area, accompanied by major uncertainties and worry/stress related to a pandemic with continuous media coverage, but also to the current (and future) professional and familial organization. the consequences of the lockdown measures for the physical and mental health of the population have therefore come into question.in particular, the lockdown has a strong potential for disrupting nutritional behaviours, notably due to modified access to food, stopping daily travels and mobility, sedentary lifestyle, food/meals contributing to give rhythm to the day, buying food and limited physical activity being the only authorized activities outside home for most people. nutrition (diet, physical activity, weight status) is one of the main modifiable factors for chronic disease risk, such as cardiovascular diseases, type 2 diabetes and some cancers [3, 4] . besides, mounting evidence shows the impact of nutritional factors on the functioning of the immune system through various mechanisms, including gut microbiota modulation [5, 6] . thus, nutrition may directly impact the risk of sars cov-2 infection and its prognosis [7] [8] [9] [10] . it is therefore important to inform what happened during the lockdown period in terms of nutritional behaviours, and assess the related potential consequences for public health, now and in the future. indeed, the duration of the initial lockdown period might have been sufficient for modified habits to settle in some individuals [11, 12] . moreover, the situation is not resolved yet (no vaccines or treatment to date) and new lockdown periods may occur in the future at the individual or population levels, regionally or nationally.the nutrinet-santé web platform offered the unique opportunity to collect a large amount of nutritional, behavioural and health data during the lockdown for >37,000 french adults using online questionnaires and validated dietary records. the aim of the present study was to characterise nutritional behaviours in this large population of volunteers during the lockdown period and how these differed from usual nutritional behaviours, in light of individual characteristics.the nutrinet-santé cohort started in france in 2009 with the objective to study the associations between nutrition and health, as well as the determinants of nutritional behaviours [13] . recruitment of participants (adults and, more recently, teenagers aged >15 years old) is still ongoing. the study uses a secured online platform to reach out to participants and collect data. this flexible platform allows for the rapid implementation of new research protocols as needed. the nutrinet-santé study is conducted in accordance with the declaration of helsinki, and all procedures were approved by the institutional review board of the french institute for health and medical research (irb inserm 0000388fwa00005831) and by the commission nationale de l'informatique et des libertés (cnil 908,450 and 909,216). all participants provided informed consent with an electronic signature; this study is registered in clinicaltrials.gov (nct03335644).upon inclusion, nutrinet-santé participants are asked to complete a set of five validated self-administered web-based questionnaires related to 1) sociodemographic and lifestyle characteristics [14] , 2) health status, 3) dietary intakes [15] [16] [17] , 4) physical activity (short form of the international physical activity questionnaire, ipaq [18] ), and 5) anthropometrics [19, 20] . these questionnaires are then repeated every 6 to 12 months during follow-up.in particular, dietary intakes are assessed every 6 months as part of the usual cohort follow-up using three non-consecutive 24h dietary records randomly assigned over two weeks and including two weekdays and one weekend day. these web-based 24h dietary records have been validated against dietary records filled during an interview with a dietitian and against biomarkers [15] [16] [17] . portion sizes are estimated using validated photographs, standard containers or directly in g/l. mean daily energy, alcohol and macro-and micro-nutrient intakes are estimated using a published french food composition database comprising >3,500 food items [21] . amounts consumed from composite dishes are estimated using french recipes validated by food and nutrition professionals. dietary under-reporters are detected on the basis of the method proposed by black [22] . in turn, the ipaq is sent each year to the participants, assessing their physical activity (vigorous intensity, moderate intensity or walking) and time spent seated on an average day (outside sleeping hours) during the past 7 days. physical activity levels for each participant are computed as metabolic equivalents (met) minutes per week.in april 2020, a set of questionnaires was sent to the nutrinet-santé participants to collect extensive data on nutritional behaviours during the lockdown: a specific questionnaire for participants to perform a qualitative assessment of changes in their dietary habits, consumption of major food groups, snacking, food supply, physical activity and sedentary lifestyle, as well as body weight (details in supplementary material 1); a series of three 24h dietary records randomly assigned over two weeks during the strict lockdown period (two weekdays and one weekend day); the ipaq (allowing the computation of met-min/week). the 24h dietary records and the ipaq were the same as those that are regularly sent to the participants as part of their followup (described above).body weights at the beginning and at the end of the strict lockdown period were collected from self-measures reported as integer values in questionnaires sent respectively in early april and early may 2020. in these questionnaires, participants were also asked about their weight just before the lockdown. participants were asked if they had been able to measure their weight with a scale during this period and provide measured data. the web-based self-reported body weight has been validated in the cohort by comparison with standardized clinical measurements [19] . body mass index (bmi) was computed as weight [kilograms] / height² [meters] . the following categories of body weight status were defined: obese (bmi ≥ 30 kg/m²), overweight (bmi ≥ 25 to < 30 kg/m²), normal-weight (bmi ≥ 18.5 to < 25 kg/m²), underweight (bmi < 18.5 kg/m²).finally, a questionnaire assessing participants' exposure to sars-cov-2, covid-19 infection and experience of the lockdown was simultaneously sent to participants in april 2020 as part of a national multi-cohort project (health, practices, relationships and social inequalities in the general population during the covid-. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint 19 crisis, sapris). this questionnaire was used to derive information regarding personal characteristics during the lockdown (professional status, presence of children or grandchildren aged < 18 years at home), including scores for depressive symptoms (patient health questionnaire (phq)-9 scale [23] ) and anxiety (general anxiety disorder (gad)-7 scale [24] ). details are provided in supplementary material 2.a total of 37,252 participants living in metropolitan france filled in the specific questionnaire related to nutrition during the lockdown, which served as the basis for the main analyses. among these, participants with available data on dietary intakes before and during lockdown from 24h dietary records, physical activity and sedentary lifestyle before and during lockdown, or weight status in may 2020 are detailed using a flowchart in supplementary figure 1 .indicators of diet quality were calculated based on the dietary intakes in food and nutrients reported by the participants in their 24h dietary records before and during the lockdown. the alternative healthy eating index (ahei)-2010 score [25] was calculated as a measure of overall diet quality based on the dietary intakes of vegetables, fruit, whole grains, sugar-sweetened beverages, nuts and legumes, red/processed meat, longchain (n-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids (pufa), total pufa, sodium and alcohol. details of its computation are available in supplementary material 3. the percentage (by relative weight) of ultra-processed foods in the diet was defined using the nova classification, as previously described [26] .self-reported data are summarised using numbers and percentages for categorical variables and mean and standard deviations for continuous variables. student paired t-tests were used to compare values before and during the lockdown (dietary intakes: food groups, macro-and micronutrients, ahei-2010 score and share of ultra-processed foods, physical activity in met-min/week and sedentary lifestyle in hours). variations of continuous variables during the lockdown compared to before the lockdown were computed as raw values and as percentage of variation ((value during lockdown -value before lockdown)/value before lockdown). increased or decreased intakes in macro-and micronutrient were defined as variations of at least 10% comparing dietary records of participants during the lockdown to dietary records before the lockdown.comparisons across individual characteristics were performed using multivariable-adjusted logistic regression models (binary or multinomial) for categorical variables or ancova models for variations of continuous variables. these models included the following characteristics (coding of the characteristics is detailed in table 1) : age, sex, current weight status (using weight reported for all in april 2020), smoking status, educational level, household monthly income, professional activity during the lockdown, marital status during the lockdown, presence of children or grandchildren aged < 18 years at home during the lockdown, regional residential area during the lockdown, urban or rural residential area during the lockdown, phq-9 score for depressive symptoms during the lockdown, gad-7 score for anxiety during the lockdown, self-reported chronic disease, qualitative assessment of change in sedentary lifestyle and physical activity during the lockdown. for participants for whom data on usual dietary intakes before the lockdown was available (n=27,658), the models additionally included the ahei-2010 score and the proportion of ultraprocessed foods in the diet.a multiple correspondence analysis (mca) was carried out to derive profiles of nutritional behaviours during the lockdown. the following aspects of nutritional behaviours during the lockdown were included: changes in weight and qualitative assessment of changes in both sedentary time and physical activity, main reasons for modifying eating habits, self-assessed diet quality, qualitative assessment of changes in consumption of fresh fruit, vegetables, fish and red meat and of potatoes, sandwiches/pizzas/savoury pies, cheese, sweets and chocolate, biscuits and cakes, alcohol, and tea, food-storing behaviour, snacking, and stress due to lacking some foods. two dimensions were kept based on inertia decomposition and relevance/interpretability of the obtained profiles [27] (explaining 10.6% and 6.4% of the variation respectively; coordinates of nutritional behaviours along these dimensions are shown in supplementary  table 1 ). an ascending hierarchical classification (ahc) was then applied on the scores of participants along these two dimensions to define clusters of participants displaying similar nutritional behaviours during the lockdown. characteristics of participants belonging to each cluster (as dummy variables) were obtained using multivariable logistic regression models including the same set of variables as described above (except changes in sedentary time and physical activity level during lockdown, active variables in the mca).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint to allow inferences for the general french adult population, a weighting was applied to all analyses to take into account differences in sociodemographic distribution (gender, age, area of residence, occupational category) in responders compared to the entire cohort and to the french population (sas macro %calmar and the 2016 national census insee data).all tests were two-sided and p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. analyses were computed using sas 9.3 (sas institute inc., usa).after weighting, our study population was composed of 37,252 participants (52.3% women) with a mean age of 52.1 y (sd: 16.6). further characteristics of the participants are shown in table 1 .physical activity, sedentary lifestyle, energy intake and weight change ( figure 1) a majority (52.8%) of participants reported that they decreased their level of physical activity during the lockdown (qualitative assessment). in these participants, a quantitative assessment using the ipaq (for a subsample) highlighted median physical activity levels of 1752 met-min/week (iqr: 742.5-3519), which is 38% less than before the lockdown (paired student t-test: p<.0001). in contrast, a lower proportion (18.7%) reported that they increased their level of physical activity during the lockdown (median: 2832 metmin/week, iqr: 1632-4944; +18% compared to before the lockdown; p<.0001). in addition, 63.2% of participants reported that they increased their sedentary time (qualitative assessment). in these participants, a quantitative assessment (for a subsample) highlighted an average 7.0 h/day spent seated during the lockdown (sd: 3.2), which is 21% more than before the lockdown (paired student t-test: p<.0001). in turn, 28.5% reported no change in sedentary time (mean: 5.8 h/day spent seated, sd: 3.3; +4%; p<.0001). participants reporting that they decreased their level of physical activity were also those reporting the longest time spent seated (mean: 6.9 h/day, sd: 3.3) and the largest increase (+18% compared to before the lockdown; p<.0001), and, similarly, participants reporting that they increased their sedentary time were also those reporting the lowest physical activity level (median: 1857 met-min/wk, iqr: 840-3570) and the largest decrease (-30%; p<.0001).during the lockdown, the energy intake was on average 1942 kcal/day, with 23% of participants increasing their energy intake by more than 10% (2399 kcal/day on average during lockdown, namely a 24% increase compared to before lockdown; paired student t-test: p<.0001) and 33% of participants decreasing their energy intake by more than 10% (1664 kcal/day on average during lockdown, namely a 23% decrease; paired student t-test: p<.0001).a weight gain between the weight just before the lockdown and the weight in may 2020 (after about 2 months of lockdown) was observed for 35% of participants, with an average gain of 1.8 kg (sd: 1.3), and into weight loss for 23%, with an average loss of 2.0 kg (sd: 1.4). meanwhile, the weight remained stable (no difference in reported values) for 42% of the participants. participants who gained weight were more likely to be women, younger (aged under 25), overweight or obese (in early april), smokers, single, to have children under 18 y at home, a higher phq-9 score for depressive symptoms, a lower gad-7 score for anxiety, to report having decreased their physical activity and increased their sedentary time during lockdown, and to have a usual diet before lockdown of lower nutritional quality (lower ahei-2010 score and higher proportion of ultra-processed foods). in turn, those who lost weight were more likely to be men, aged under 50, underweight, to have an intermediate educational level (high-school or undergraduate degree), to be students, to report having increased their physical activity and decreased their sedentary time during lockdown, and to have a higher phq-9 score for depressive symptoms and a higher gad-7 score for anxiety. they were also less likely to be short-time working or to work outside home during the lockdown, to have children under 18 y at home and to live in a rural area during the lockdown. details of individual characteristics associated with weight variations are shown in supplementary table 2 .modifications of eating practices overall and associated reasons (figure 2 ) overall, 56.2% participants reported that they modified their eating practices during lockdown compared to before. the main reasons selected to explain these modifications were related to inherent lifestyle changes . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint during the lockdown (change of routine: 47.6%, spending more time cooking "homemade" meals: 40.4%, no longer eating at the restaurant: 20.5%, trouble keeping regular mealtime schedule: 10.1%), to food supply (buying less fresh products: 27.4%, difficulty going to usual stores: 25.9%, difficulty finding usual products: 13.7%, difficulty buying organic food: 12.3%), to voluntary changes (trying to avoid weight gain: 21.1%, balancing the decrease in physical activity: 16.9%, opportunity to balance diet: 14.2%), and to emotional reasons (eating out of boredom: 18.2%, eating out of anxiety: 10.8%). characteristics of participants associated with the main reasons for modifying eating practices are shown in supplementary table 4 .overall, 27.9% participants reported snacking at least once a day, every day ( figure 3 ). snacking more than usual during the lockdown was reported by 21.1% of participants. among these, 62.3% snacked at least once a day, with 18.9% at least 3 times a day. in turn, snacking less than usual was reported for 9.4% while snacking neither more nor less was reported for 69.5%. participants who snacked more than usual were more likely to be aged under 50 y, overweight or obese, smokers, divorced or widowed, to have a higher level of education, to have children aged under 18 y at home during the lockdown, a professional activity before the lockdown (i.e. working outside home, being partially unemployed, teleworking or student during the lockdown), a higher phq-9 score for depressive symptoms, a lower gad-7 score for anxiety, to report modifications (increase or decrease) in their physical activity and sedentary time and to have a usual diet before the lockdown composed of more ultra-processed foods (supplementary table 5 ).when asked about their diet quality during lockdown compared to before, 14.1% reported that their diet was of better quality, 10.5% that their diet was of lower quality and 74.4% that their diet quality had not changed. characteristics of participants associated with the self-perceived diet quality during lockdown are shown in supplementary table 5 .participants were asked to qualitatively estimate how the lockdown affected their consumption of major food groups. results in figure 4 show an overall decrease in the consumption of fresh products: 17% of participants reported a decrease for fresh fruit and 18% for fresh vegetables, 22% for fresh red meat and 31% for fresh fish. in parallel, 14% of participants reported to have increased their consumption of frozen or canned vegetables but such proportion was much lower for frozen or canned fruit, fish or red meat. in addition, an increased consumption was reported for other products with large shelf-life, like potatoes (by 15% of the participants), legumes (15%) or nuts (12%). other noteworthy results include an increased consumption reported for sweets and chocolate (by 22% of the participants), biscuits and cakes (20%), and cheese (18%) and a decreased consumption reported for sandwiches, pizzas or savoury pies (17%). looking at drinks, an increased consumption of alcoholic drinks was reported by 15% of the participants (and a decrease by 12%), as well as an increase for tea (20%) and tap water (13%). these qualitative assessments were confirmed using quantitative data comparing dietary records of participants during the lockdown to dietary records before the lockdown (see supplementary table 6 for details).consistently, more than half of the participants decreased their intakes for macro-or micronutrients typically related to the intake of fish: n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (epa: for 59% participants, dpa: for 61%, dha: for 58%), iodine (for 52%), but also more generally of animal products: heme iron (for 57%), vitamin d (for 52%) and vitamin b12 (for 54%). in turn, alcohol intakes increased for 25% participants (+8g/day) and decreased for 53% (-7g/day). more details are available in supplementary table 7 .overall diet quality (supplementary table 6 ) as regards to the quality of diet on the whole, two opposite dietary trends were observed: 37% of the participants decreased their ahei-2010 score by at least 10% compared to before lockdown (-13 points on average), while an increase was observed for 27% (+12 points); symmetric changes were observed for the proportion of ultra-processed foods in the diet with an increase for 42% (+6% of ultra-processed foods) and a decrease for 42% (-6%).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprintstress of lacking some foods and food storing behaviour during lockdown overall, 27.1% of participants reported that they were somehow stressed from the idea of lacking some food during the lockdown. only 3.3% of participants reported that they stored more food than usual at home because they were afraid of food shortages, while 45% stored more food due to a reduced frequency of grocery shopping. characteristics of participants associated with these behaviours are shown in supplementary table 5 .sources of food supply ( figure 5 ) during the lockdown, individuals used on average 3.6 (sd: 1.7) different sources of food supply, which is 1.1 less than usual (paired student t-test: p<.0001). the top 3 sources of supply during the lockdown were the supermarket (66%), the bakery (60.3%) and the local grocery store (41.3%), the latter owing its third place from reduced visits (compared to usual) to local (outdoor) markets (which showed the sharpest reduction, especially in cities >20,000 inhabitants), hypermarkets, and local shops such as the butcher's, fishmonger's or greengrocer's. contrary to the reduction observed for all sources of supply, slight increases were observed for internet, phone or mail-order purchases and for purchase of food baskets from farmers or amap (associations supporting small farming), and only a small decrease was observed for organic food stores. overall, 6.3% participants declared that they were not living in their usual home during the lockdown, which may have impacted the sources of supply.two main synthetic factors of nutritional behaviours during the lockdown were identified using mca, and lead to identify three clusters of participants in the ahc. cluster 1 (42.9% of participants) corresponded to participants for whom nutritional behaviours were not much impacted by the lockdown period (e.g., stable weight, physical activity, food consumption; supplementary table 8 ). this cluster was composed of participants more likely to be older, men, normal-weight, current smokers, with a lower level of education, in a relationship (married or not), living in cities with < 100,000 inhabitants or rural areas, with lower scores on the gad-7 scale for anxiety and the phq-9 scale for depressive symptoms, and with a higher usual diet quality before the lockdown period (higher ahei-2010 score and lower proportion of ultra-processed foods). in this "no change" cluster, participants were more likely to have kept working outside home during the lockdown period or not to have a professional activity before the lockdown (i.e., unemployed, housemaker, retired). they were also less likely to live in the paris region or the east, i.e., regional areas where the epidemic was the most active (table 2 ). cluster 2 (37.4%) corresponded to participants who reported unfavourable nutritional changes or behaviours during the lockdown period: increased weight, decreased physical activity and increased sedentary time, trouble keeping a regular mealtime schedule, buying less fresh products, snacking more than once a day, eating more out of boredom and anxiety, increase in consumption of biscuits/cakes, sweets/chocolate, sandwiches/pizza/savoury pies, potatoes, cheese, and alcoholic drinks, and decrease for fresh products (fruit, vegetables, meat), difficulties to shop in usual stores, or for usual food products (including organic food supplies), stress due to lacking some foods and storage of food products. in this cluster, participants also reported spending more time cooking and that their diet quality did not change. this cluster was composed of participants more likely to be younger, women, non-smokers, with a higher level of education, lower incomes, with children aged under 18 y at home, with higher gad-7 score for anxiety and phq-9 score for depressive symptoms and with a higher proportion of ultra-processed foods in their usual diet. in this "unfavourable nutritional changes" cluster, participants were more likely to work from home during the lockdown period (table 2) . cluster 3 (19.8%) corresponded to participants who reported favourable nutritional changes or behaviours during the lockdown period: qualitative decrease in consumption reported for biscuits/cakes, sweets/chocolate, sandwiches/pizza/savoury pies and alcoholic drinks, and increase for fresh fruit and vegetables and fish, a diet quality judged better, avoiding some foods or drinks for weight management, willingness to balance the diet, spending more time cooking. this cluster was composed of participants more likely to be younger, overweight/obese, smokers, with a higher level of education and higher incomes, no children aged under 18 y at home, with a higher gad-7 score for anxiety and a lower phq-9 score for depressive symptoms, and with a lower usual diet quality (lower ahei-2010 score). in this "favourable nutritional changes" cluster, participants were more likely to be partially unemployed or students but also to telework from home during the lockdown period (table 2) .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. this study, conducted on >37,000 french adults provide an overview of the nutritional behaviours observed during the lockdown set in the midst of the covid-19 pandemic to control the spread of the disease.our results highlight several trends in nutritional behaviours during the lockdown. on one hand, there was a trend towards rather unfavourable nutritional behaviours, with increased energy intakes, decreased physical activity levels and increased sedentary time, and eventually weight gain (+1.8kg in two months). the weight gained in this short period of time may become permanent in some individuals and further lead to more weight gain in the future, all the more if the unfavourable nutritional behaviours observed during the lockdown are not reversed [29] . this is of concern, especially since individuals more likely to have gained weight were already overweight or obese at the beginning of the lockdown. beyond energy balance, we also observed trends towards increasing snacking behaviours (several times a day, every day, when the public health recommendation is to avoid snacking between main meals [28] ) and a consistent increase reported for the consumption of sweets, chocolate, biscuits or cakes. individuals also reported buying fewer fresh products, notably due to less frequent shopping or difficulties in accessing their usual food stores or finding their usual food products (especially for older individuals). decreasing the consumption of fresh vegetables likely led to increases in frozen or canned vegetables intake, yet a similar compensation did not appear for fruit or for fish, raising the question of substitution between these different types of products and their respective supply. in particular, the lower intake of fish may be of particular concern, since it consistently translated into a reduced intake of related nutrients such as long chain n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids or iodine. in line, lower intakes of vitamin d were also observed, in a context where vitamin d status is likely already strongly impacted by the lockdown, the majority of vitamin d being produced following sun exposure (which was often not compatible with the requirement to stay home). the lockdown also resulted in reported nutritional behaviours linked to the disruption of habits and notably the loss of activity (work or leisure-related), such as eating to compensate for boredom or anxiety or having trouble keeping regular mealtime schedules. for some individuals, an increase in alcohol intake was also reported. this overall unhealthy pattern of nutritional behaviours may have resulted from the deprivation of opportunities due to the lockdown: loss of options for exercise, food shopping or meals due to the closure of sport facilities, restaurants and workplaces, the restricted access to food supplies and the instructions for adults and children to stay at home. along with this pattern of unhealthy behaviours, participants also declared that they spent more time cooking, a rather favourable behaviour, but which may have contributed here to the increase consumption of biscuits or cakes. this overall pattern particularly clustered participants (cluster 2) who were women, with a higher level of education but lower income, teleworking from home (which was generalized as a result of the lockdown measures), with children aged under 18 y at home, higher scores for depressive symptoms, and already a higher proportion of ultra-processed foods in their diets before the lockdown. less healthy nutritional behaviours have also been underlined in studies involving children and students in italy [30, 31] where the lockdown had a negative impact on physical activity but also on the consumption of foods, which is in line with this first trend of behaviours.on the contrary, we also highlighted a second trend of more favourable nutritional behaviours, where individuals decreased their energy intake, increased or maintained their physical activity and eventually lost weight. such modifications being made knowingly to control weight or balance the ratio of energy intake/expenditure. indeed, some individuals also considered this lockdown period as an opportunity to spend more time cooking and to balance their overall diet. improvements in the nutritional quality of diets were observed: increased ahei-2010 score for diet quality, decreased proportion of ultra-processed foods, increased intakes of fruit and vegetables, legumes or nuts, decreased intakes of red meat or alcohol. these favourable behaviours mostly clustered participants (cluster 3) who were overweight/obese, smokers, with a higher level of education and income, who were short-time working, students (in this case, more likely students who returned to their parents' during the lockdown) or teleworking from home, with no children under 18 y at home, and exhibiting more anxiety but less depressive symptoms. looking at their usual diet before the lockdown, these individuals were those with a lower diet quality. overall, individuals adopting healthier nutritional behaviours during the lockdown were probably those already more likely to do so or with more potential for improvement. for these individuals, the lockdown, by disrupting habits, might have led to a favourable adaptation, considering and adopting newer options beyond established habits of what . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint they were used to do or buy, or where they usually shopped. it could also be that these individuals were more concerned about their health, notably as regards their risks for covid-19 infection or prognosis (e.g., overweight or obese individuals).finally, a third group reported stable nutritional behaviours during the lockdown period. these clustered participants (cluster 1) who were older, living in rural areas, with no professional activity before the lockdown period (i.e., unemployed, housemaker, retired) or those who kept working outside home. hence, corresponding to individuals with probably less disruption in their lifestyle or environment or with more settled habits.the experience of lockdown may have very different forms and related consequences when considering socioeconomic inequalities. our results suggested that higher incomes were associated with more favourable modifications of nutritional behaviours (individually and combined as cluster 3): spending more time cooking, intentional reduction of food intake to avoid weight gain or compensate for lower physical activity, healthy changes in food consumption. these individuals were most likely those with more means and options to undertake modifications. on the other hand, lower incomes associated with less favourable modifications of nutritional behaviours (individually and combined as cluster 2): eating in response to boredom or anxiety, trouble keeping regular mealtime schedules, stress of lacking some food during lockdown, buying fewer fresh products, unhealthy changes in food consumption. individuals with a higher level of education presented favourable nutritional behaviour changes as reflected in cluster 3 (especially spending more time cooking), but also less favourable changes reflected in cluster 2 (especially snacking). on the other hand, individuals with a lower educational level exhibited a mixed profile: more likely to belong to the "no change" cluster 1 but with trouble keeping regular mealtime schedule, buying fewer fresh products but also adjusting dietary intakes to their level of exercise. hence, the level of education and income did not necessarily correspond to nutritional behaviours and changes in the same way. this is likely related to the professional activity during lockdown, with most individuals forced to stay home (which induced lifestyle changes). individuals who kept working at home (teleworking, most often corresponding to more qualified jobs) were present in clusters 2 and 3, suggesting opposite directions for nutritional behaviours, which may be related to their experience during the lockdown (e.g., time spent working, living with others, presence of children at home). in particular, the presence of children at home which associated with cluster 2 may be linked to more snacking and to the subsequent consumption of sweets, biscuits and cakes. other individuals became partially unemployed, and were more likely to adopt favourable nutritional behaviours (cluster 3). finally, those who kept working outside of their home (essential activities; often less qualified jobs, except for those working in medical care) or those with no professional activity before the lockdown period (unemployed, retired, housewife or husband) generally exhibited few modifications in nutritional behaviours compared to others (cluster 1).strengths of our study pertained to its large sample size and the in-depth characterisation of participants, including nutritional behaviours throughout follow-up and more specifically during the lockdown period, with qualitative and also quantitative assessments. the flexibility of the web platform of the nutrinet-santé study allowed to quickly implement lockdown-related studies (development, assessment and treatment/analysis) to provide insights into multiple nutritional aspects of this singular situation at the large-scale level. however, some limitations should be acknowledged. indeed, the nutrinet-santé study is a long-term prospective study focusing on nutrition and health and based on continued voluntary recruitment since 2009. this implies that the nutrinet-santé population is composed of more women and individuals with overall higher socioeconomic position compared to the general french population [32, 33] . all the analyses were weighted to improve representativeness to overcome this bias. still, our study likely does not accurately capture the experience of more disadvantaged or older populations. besides, nutrinet-santé participants show an interest in nutrition and health and may therefore adopt healthier nutritional behaviours than the overall french population and to consciously rethink their nutritional behaviours to adapt to the new situation and make the most out of it. still, trends of unfavourable nutritional behaviours during lockdown were observed in this more "health-conscious" population, which raises even more concerns for the general population.to conclude, our results suggested that the lockdown led, in a substantial part of the population, to unhealthy nutritional behaviours that, if maintained in the long term, may increase the nutrition-related burden of disease [3] . a particular vigilance will therefore be needed to assess whether individuals return to healthier nutritional habits at the end of the covid-19 pandemic, especially considering that unfavourable nutritional . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint behaviours were more likely to be observed in individuals who worked from home during the period of strict lockdown (and are still encouraged to keep doing so afterwards). nonetheless, our study also revealed that the lockdown situation also created, at least in some (non-negligible) segments of the population, an opportunity to improve nutritional behaviours, such as cooking homemade meals, increasing consumption of fresh products and buying food products from local shop and/or farmers. understanding the leverages to put these healthier nutritional behaviours on a long-term footing (e.g., time, tools, food supply at work, local food supply) post-lockdown, and try to make the most out of this momentum, will be key to improving nutritional behaviours at a broader scale in the future. this first descriptive study gave us many clues of how the covid-19 crisis has affected nutritional behaviours. further studies are required to better understand the mechanisms behind these changes. beyond this report, the data collected in the framework of the sapris project, combined with the extensive nutritional characterization of participants in the nutrinet-santé study, will also allow to study how nutrition associates with the risk of developing covid-19 (symptoms and serology that will be soon available for tens of thousands of participants). . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint south-west 11.3 gad-7 (anxiety disorders) 3 3.2 (4.0) phq-9 (depressive symptoms) 4 3.8 (4.4) chronic disease 5 6 the ahei-2010 score ranges from 0 to 100 points and measures an increasing diet quality . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint table 2 . individual characteristics of participants belonging to each cluster of nutritional behaviours during the lockdown period, multivariable logistic regression models 1 (n=22,042) figure 1. physical activity, sedentary time, energy intake and weight variations during the lockdown.at the top: weight variations between the weight just before the lockdown and the weight in may 2020, after about 2 months of lockdown (n=22,042); values are the mean (sd) variations in participants who gained (respectively lost) weight during the lockdown. at the bottom right, variations in daily energy intake between the usual intakes observed at the same period of the year before the lockdown and the intakes observed during the lockdown (n=9,372); increase and decrease were defined as variations (respectively positive or negative) in energy intake of at least 10%; values are the mean (sd) variations in participants who increased (respectively decreased) their energy intake during the lockdown. at the bottom left, modifications in physical activity and sedentary time were assessed qualitatively (n=36,917) and are shown as a bar graph; quantitative assessments of variations in physical activity levels (in metmin/week) and sedentary time (time spent seated outside sleeping hours) between before and during the lockdown were available for subsamples (n=29,798 for physical activity, n=29,788 for sedentary time) and are shown next to each bar as median physical activity levels and mean sedentary time; corresponding interquartile range and standard deviation are detailed in supplementary table 3 . variations in quantitative values are also expressed as the % of variation compared to the value before the lockdown. pregnant women (n=335) were excluded from these analyses. pa, physical activity; st, sedentary time.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint bars indicate the % of participants who declared having increased or decreased the consumption of the food group of interest during lockdown (corresponding number on the respective bars); brighter colours represent % above 15% and/or a difference of % between those who increased and those who decreased of more than 10%. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 5 . sources of food supply usually and during lockdown, according to the urban level of the residential area during the lockdown. nutrinet-santé cohort study (n=37,252), march-may 2020. 1 amap: associations supporting small farming; 2 followed by delivery or drive-pick-up; 3 meals, packages, subsidized grocery stores . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 5, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121855 doi: medrxiv preprintin december 2019, unexplained pneumonia was found in wuhan, china, and the disease spread rapidly around the country. the virus responsible for this disease [1] has been identified as a novel coronavirus, named by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) on february 11, 2020, as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). as of march 9, 2020, there were 80,906 laboratory-confirmed cases in china, more than 10,000 of which are from outside of hubei. almost all confirmed cases had a clear epidemiological history. the purpose of this case report is to describe the radiographic and clinical features of a covid-19 pneumonia patient without clear epidemiological history outside wuhan, china.a 66-year-old woman was transferred to our hospital in lanzhou, china (1,005 miles from wuhan), for high resolution computed tomography (hrct).the image showed ground glass opacities (ggos) in both lungs. the patient's novel coronavirus nucleic acid test returned positive on january 30, 2020. the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f hydrochloride and sodium chloride injection) and gastric mucosa protectants (omeprazol). after 7 days of treatment (february 6, 2020), the patient's hrct showed that her bilateral pulmonary lesions had improved and a little fibrous stripe was evident ( figures 1e and 1f ). her novel coronavirus nucleic acid tests demonstrated 2 consecutive negative results (february 7, 2020 and february 9, 2020). medications were stopped and the patient was discharged on february 10, 2020. she was subsequently isolated at home for 14 days.hrct images obtained after discharge (february 18, 2020) showed that lesion absorption was more obvious (figures 1g and 1h ).the aim of this case report was to describe the radiographic and clinical the patient described in this case report had no clear epidemiological history and has likely been exposed to the virus without her knowledge, hence she can be referred to as " second-generation patients".the patient had similar radiographic and clinical findings to previously reported cases in the literature, but there were some differences. current research demonstrated that the most common hrct features of covid-19 pneumonia are patchy/punctate ground glass opacities (85.7%), patchy j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f consolidation (19.0%) that are mainly distributed in a sub-pleural area, and the presence of fibrous stripes after the patient's condition improves [2] . the hrct images of this patient demonstrated almost all of these features. a recent retrospective study found that radiographic findings from chest ct were most severe on day 10 of initial symptom onset and began to improve on day 14 of initial symptom onset [3] . the findings from this patient's chest ct were typical of those with covid-19. for this patient, recovery was earlier than usual. in contrast, most patients with covid-19 present with fever (98%), cough (76%), and myalgia or fatigue (44%). fever is the most common feature [4] . the patient described in this case report had no fever onset, which has not been reported previously in patients with respiratory symptoms and ct abnormalities.in conclusion, this case report aimed to communicate and educate radiologists and clinicians in the recognition of this new disease. clinicians need to be vigilant; even patients with respiratory symptoms, without a history of exposure or fever, should be examined radiographically using hrct.moreover, timely nucleic acid testing should be performed when radiographic findings present similarly to those of patients with covid-19.t he novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was first reported in the city of wuhan, china, in december 2019. despite strenuous efforts to contain the virus, it quickly turned into a pandemic that has swept through all continents except antarctica. with an exponentially increasing number of patients being diagnosed, covid-19 heavily strains our health care system and resources. in response to the escalating pandemic of the covid-19, the centers for medicare and medicaid services announced that all nonessential planned surgeries and procedures be postponed until further notice.as per the centers for medicare and medicaid services tiered framework, neurosurgery falls under the category of tier 3a (high acuity surgery), and it should not be postponed. 1 the centers for disease control and prevention informed that covid-19 could spread through close contact or respiratory droplets between persons and from contact with contaminated surfaces or objects. 2 however, whether covid-19 could be airborne is still in dispute. nonetheless, airborne precautions should be taken while performing neurosurgical procedures on all confirmed or suspected patients with covid-19.the first case with a wide nosocomial spread of covid-19 in wuhan was an endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal pituitary tumor resection. 3 all 14 people who spent time in the operating room (or) during the procedure became infected. the standard surgical gowns and masks worn by health care personnel do not protect them from contracting covid-19. with the intent to advise the neurosurgery team on how to adequately prepare and safely perform life-saving neurosurgical procedures amid the pandemic of covid-19, we discuss the following considerations and recommendations based on the lessons and experience shared by neurosurgeons in china. rather than serving as stand-alone guidance, these recommendations should be integrated into the systemic planning and preparation implemented by health care facilities and systems.except for emergent and urgent neurosurgical procedures that can save a life, preserve the brain, or restore spinal cord function, other nonurgent elective spine surgeries, peripheral nerve surgeries, pain procedures, and functional procedures should be postponed. when deemed emergent or urgent, airborne precautions must be taken before and during contact with confirmed or suspected covid-19 cases. inpatients with suspected covid-19 should be treated as a confirmed case for neurosurgical bedside procedures. each patient should be placed separately in a negative-pressure isolation room. only essential health care personnel should be allowed to treat patients with covid-19 to minimize medical trainees or students' exposure to the virus. a properly fitted n95 or higher respirator must be used. all health care personnel should undergo respirator fit testing before participating in the patient's care. it is recommended that men with beards shave their face to ensure a tight seal between their face and the mask. a gown spanning and covering the entire body (coverall gown), protective goggles, and shoe covers are recommended. avoid touching the eyes, nose, or mouth after taking off the face mask or goggles at the completion of the procedure.collaborate with the anesthesia team and hospitality team to secure a smooth transition between perioperative care and the neurosurgical procedure. a designated patient transport route should be established for patients with covid-19. the patient should wear an n95 respirator during transit. if the patient is already intubated, a mask should be placed over the mouth to avoid any respiratory secretions or droplets contamination due to cough reflex. the preoperative holding area and the postanesthesia care unit should be bypassed if an isolation room is not available in these areas to limit potential contamination of these units. when obtaining consent, telecommunication is strongly recommended. if the patient is to return to the designated intensive care unit or medical ward directly, extubation and postoperative recovery should be allowed in the or to further minimize the number of staff members directly exposed to the patient's airway. the patient care team should be prepared with enhanced personal protective equipment (ppe) for possible immediate medical intervention and avoid procedures performed with inadequate protection. wearing a minimum of 2 sets of gloves is recommended during perioperative care and patient transit.all health care personnel in the or should be prepared q2 both mentally and physically. the operation should be performed in a negative-pressure or paired with an anteroom implemented with airborne precautions. 4 in the case in which a negative-pressure or is not available, an hepa (i.e., high-efficiency particulate air) standard filtering system should be implemented. surgeons in the or must undergo a careful sequence for putting on proper ppe in addition to sterile surgical gown prior to performing the neurosurgical procedure. 5, 6 first, a visual inspection of ppe is performed to ensure that no gross defects are present. hand washing is performed with soap and water for a minimum of 20 seconds. shoe covers and nonsterile inner gloves are obtained. a gown is worn that covers the entirety of arms, legs, head, and trunk (coverall gown). then, a properly fitting n95 or higher respirator is used. next, a surgical hood, goggles, and face shield are put on. sterile gloves, sterile gown, and a second set of sterile gloves are fitted and worn outside of the sterile gown.wearing goggles will prevent the use of surgical loupes. goggles with an anti-fog coating are recommended, as they may block vision when covered in fog. furthermore, wearing goggles and face shield makes performing surgery under the neurosurgical microscope exceedingly difficult. three layers of gloves diminish tactile sensation and make it less reliable during neurosurgical procedures. wearing this extensive amount of ppe for a prolonged period during a neurosurgical operation may make the surgeon fatigued and dehydrated due to excessive sweating. communication among the health care providers may become difficult, given the muffled voices and hearing that results from multiple layers of ppe. additional measures, including the use of hand gestures, may be required for communication during the surgery. 7 an example of health care personnel wearing proper ppe is provided in figure 1 .other personnel, including anesthesiologists, surgical technologists, and circulating nurses in the or, should also be equipped with proper ppe. personnel entering and leaving the or should be rigorously restricted. a buffering area outside the or should be used for the delivery of surgical supplies operated by a designated team. this team also should be fully protected and be ready to enter the or should an emergency arise. all equipment used during the procedure should be thoroughly sterilized or properly disposed of to prevent viral spread. health care providers involved should perform immediate self-cleaning before leaving the procedure area, preferably showering the whole body and changing into a new surgical outfit.on february 6, 2020, a patient presented to the emergency department with headache followed by a loss of consciousness at a local hospital in guangzhou. computed tomography (ct) scan of the head revealed subarachnoid hemorrhage and left frontal lobe hematoma (figure 2a) . the patient was then transferred to our facility for neurosurgical consultation and treatment. upon arrival, the patient was unconscious, body temperature 38.9 c (102 f), pulse 61 bpm, respiratory rate 17 bpm, and blood pressure 179/120 mm hg. neurologic examination showed bilateral pupil diameter 2.5 mm, sluggish pupillary light reflex, 149  150  151  152  153  154  155  156  157  158  159  160  161  162  163  164  165  166  167  168  169  170  171  172  173  174  175  176  177  178  179  180  181  182  183  184  185  186  187  188  189  190  191  192  193  194  195  196  197  198  199  200  201  202  203  204  205  206  207  208  209  210  211  212  213  214 to the emergency department. given the travel history and high body temperature, we 297  298  299  300  301  302  303  304  305  306  307  308  309  310  311  312  313  314  315  316  317  318  319  320  321  322  323  324  325  326  327  328  329  330  331  332  333  334  335  336  337  338  339  340  341  342  343  344  345  346  347  348  349  350  351  352  353  354  355  356  357  358  359  360  361  362  363  364  365  366  367  368  369  370   371  372  373  374  375  376  377  378  379  380  381  382  383  384  385  386  387  388  389  390  391  392  393  394  395  396  397  398  399  400  401  402  403  404  405  406  407  408  409  410  411  412  413  414  415  416  417  418  419  420  421  422  423  424  425  426  427  428  429  430  431  432  433  434  435  436  437  438  439  440  441 442 443 445  446  447  448  449  450  451  452  453  454  455  456  457  458  459  460  461  462  463  464  465  466  467  468  469  470  471  472  473  474  475  476  477  478  479  480  481  482  483  484  485  486  487  488  489  490  491  492  493  494  495  496  497  498  499  500  501  502  503  504  505  506  507  508  509  510  511  512  513  514  515  516  517  518   519  520  521  522  523  524  525  526  527  528  529  530  531  532  533  534  535  536  537  538  539  540  541  542  543  544  545  546  547  548  549  550  551  552  553  554  555  556  557  558  559  560  561  562  563  564  565  566  567  568  569  570  571  572  573  574  575  576  577  578  579  580  581  582  583  584  585  586  587  588  589  590  591  592 suspected that the patient contracted the sars-cov-2 virus during the trip to hubei province. the covid-19 task force of our hospital was consulted, and a suspected diagnosis of covid-19 was made. specimens were collected for testing. a nasopharyngeal swab sample was sent for reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction q6 testing for sars-cov-2 virus. ct angiography of the head (figure 2b and c) and thoracic ct were obtained, with all health care personnel in enhanced ppe. ct angiography of the head revealed an anterior communicating artery aneurysm. thoracic ct showed bilateral lower lobe inflammatory changes and suspected right upperlobe exudative change ( figure 3a) . definitive aneurysm repair procedure was deemed necessary and urgent by the neurosurgery team; the covid-19 emergency surgery protocol was then activated. a negative-pressure or was requested, and the anesthesiology team was informed of the situation and the planned surgical treatment. an isolation room was reserved for the patient for immediate postoperative care. the patient was transitioned to the or through the designated route. all participating health care personnel was wearing enhanced ppe, as mentioned previously (figure 4) . the patient underwent a modified pterional craniotomy for hematoma evacuation with anterior communicating artery aneurysm clipping, and placement of intracranial pressure monitor.after surgery, the patient was transported to an isolation room for recovery and postoperative care, as well as covid-19 treatment. the nasopharyngeal testing of covid-19 returned to be negative. however, due to the high false-negative rate (30%) of the testing and the patient's symptoms and ct findings, a decision was made by the covid-19 task force to treat the patient as a patient under investigation for 14 days. the patient did well and eventually was discharged home at 14 days postoperatively with intact neurologic function. two-month postoperative ct of the head ( figure 2d ) was obtained, which showed resolved hematoma, stable aneurysm clip, and no hydrocephalus. a thoracic ct also was obtained and showed improvement from previous hospital admission images ( figure 3b ).although not without challenges, with proper protection following the aforementioned guidance, emergent and urgent neurosurgical surgeries and procedures can be safely performed for the benefit of critical patients during the covid-19 pandemic. 593  594  595  596  597  598  599  600  601  602  603  604  605  606  607  608  609  610  611  612  613  614  615  616  617  618  619  620  621  622  623  624  625  626  627  628  629  630  631  632  633  634  635  636  637  638  639  640  641  642  643  644  645  646  647  648  649  650  651  652  653  654  655  656  657  658  659  660  661  662  663  664  665  666   667  668  669  670  671  672  673  674  675  676  677  678  679  680  681  682  683  684  685  686  687  688  689  690  691  692  693  694  695  696  697  698  699  700  701  702  703  704  705  706  707  708  709  710  711  712  713  714  715  716  717  718  719  720  721  722  723  724  725  726  727  728  729  730  731  732  733  734  735  736  737  738  739  740 the worldwide spread of a novel coronavirus that causes severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) proceeded with unprecedented rapidity, overwhelming many hospitals and public health systems in a matter of weeks. 1, 2 as of 11 july 2003, a total of 8437 cases were reported from 32 countries. 3 in many locations, the introduction of the disease by ill travellers was soon followed by spread to health care workers and household contacts. 4, 5 this report describes the epidemiology of the sars outbreak in taiwan and proposes strategies for addressing response operations after any emerging outbreaks in the future. further, the lessons learned from the response to this outbreak may help to improve current strategies for preventing outbreaks of infectious diseases and for distributing resources efficiently during response operations.taiwan has a population of approximately 22, 549, 292 . the main island is divided into 22 cities and counties. taiwan, with its close proximity to the sars epicenters of guangdong and hong kong, and its extensive business and cultural ties, has many travellers from the most affected areas. each year more than four million taiwanese visit mainland china for business and tourism (bureau of immigration ministry of the interior) and the vast majority of flights return through hong kong. although taiwan was removed from the list of affected areas on 5 july 2003, it will remain at risk from the importation and spread of sars should it re-emerge. 3, 6 methods surveillance on 14 march 2003 , the day the first cases were reported, taiwan's department of health initiated a system to respond to the potential spread of sars resulting from the cases. a task force committee established medical aid teams to address disruption in the quarantine system; to conduct rapid assessment by reviewing every reported sars case within three days after the first case was reported; and to implement a legislative procedure for reporting sars on 28 march. all suspected sars cases were required by law to be reported to the department of health, and health authorities were required to deliver protective equipment including n-95 masks to the sars hospitals immediately and to equip all healthcare workers with enhanced protective equipment.beginning with the recognition of the first sars case on 14 march, taiwan moved aggressively to isolate all suspect or probable cases in negative pressure rooms and to equip all healthcare workers with enhanced protective equipment. specially designed isolation rooms with hepa filtered air, negative pressure under continuous electronic monitoring, and separate bathrooms and anterooms are commonly available in larger referral hospitals. until 22 april most of the probable cases were cared for in such hospital settings. from 23 april to 8 may, the 277 new cases overwhelmed the capacity of the hospital system to care for all patients in negative pressure rooms.when a sars case was reported, local public health workers pursued a case investigation and confirmed adequate home quarantine of all contacts. the case investigation reviewed the patient's history of exposure to patients with sars or sars-affected areas, reviewed the signs and symptoms as compared to the who case definition of sars, 7 and collected information on the patient's recent close contacts.death certificates were obtained from the statistics division of the ministry of interior in taiwan. information from death certificates was used to determine the cause of death. mortality was estimated by dividing the number of deaths by the total number of probable cases. it was based on cases with a known outcome and was irrespective of the immediate cause of death. 8 nasopharyngeal swab or stool specimens were obtained from reported patients and tested for sars-co-v by the laboratory of the center for disease control at the department of health in taiwan. the viral rna was extracted and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) was completed for targets specific to various rna viruses, including the influenza a and b viruses and sars-co-v. a specimen was considered rt-pcr-positive for sars-co-v if at least two different clinical specimens were positive (e.g., nasopharyngeal and stool), the same clinical specimens collected on two or more occasions during the course of the illness were positive (e.g., sequential nasopharyngeal aspirates), or if two different assays or repeat pcr using a new rna extract from the original clinical sample on each occasion of testing were positive. 7quarantine was implemented on 18 march for persons meeting one of two sets of criteria, designed as class a or class b. class a included healthcare workers exposed outside isolation settings, family and other close contacts, and those on airplanes with ill sars patients if seated within three rows in front or three rows behind the patient. initially, the duration of quarantine was 14 days, but after 10 june this was revised to ten days in accordance with the incubation period for sars. 1, 5, 6 hospital staff and patients who had been in contact with a sars patient were quarantined in a healthcare facility. all others were quarantined at home.from 28 april to 4 july, those who returned from a who-designated sars-affected area were considered class b, resulting in compulsory home quarantine for ten days. 6, 9 passengers arriving could choose to be quarantined in an airport transit hotel, at home, or at a quarantine site designated and paid for by their employer. if these options were not available, the traveller was quarantined at a government quarantine center located at a military base. on 9 june quarantine regulations were eased for the staff of taiwanese companies based on mainland china who were returning to taiwan for business. travellers in this category were allowed to conduct business if they wore a surgical mask. public health nurses from local health departments delivered food to the home three times a day. body temperature was self-monitored three times a day and reported by telephone to the public health nurses. a surgical mask was worn whenever the quarantined individual entered a communal area within their own home. if he/she became sick during the home quarantine period, the driver of the ambulance took the patient to hospital dressed in a tyvek suit, n-95 respirator and gloves. there were several hundred such ambulance trips for fever patients between mid-may and july in taiwan.after 10 april all airline passengers, outbound and inbound, were requested to have their body temperature taken at the airport. people whose body temperatures were higher than 37.5 8c were examined further by a physician.mobile sars containment teams (mobile teams), a joint program by the center for disease control in taiwan and various teaching hospitals, were initiated three days after the first suspected sars case was reported. seventeen mobile teams, comprising infection control physicians, infection control nurses, rotating staff from the county department of health, staff from the center for disease control, taiwan, and staff from the centers for disease control and prevention in the usa, were deployed from 16 march to 10 may 2003. they observed and demonstrated the recommended sars infection control practices and also provided personal protective equipment (ppe) to hospitals actively evaluating patients for sars infection. each team was equipped with an infection control checklist, personal protective equipment (ppe), blood specimen tubes, nasopharyngeal swabs, culture media, and a specimen cooler. mobile teams evaluated infection control practices through observing hospital personnel, questioning current practices, and detecting the negative pressure of the isolation room using a strip of tissue paper at the entrance of a patient's isolation room.in this study, the who case definition as published in may 2003 was used. the results were later compared with those obtained by using the case definition published in august 2003. in may, a probable case of sars was defined as a person presenting after 1 february 2003 with a history of fever higher than 38 8c and one or more of the following symptoms: lower respiratory tract illness (cough, breathing difficulty, shortness of breath) or radiographic evidence of infiltrates consistent with pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome (rds) or autopsy findings consistent with pneumonia without identifiable cause. the person also needed evidence of one or more of the following exposures during the ten days prior to the onset of symptoms: to have had close contact with a person who is a suspect or probable case of sars; to reside in an affected area. 7 a suspect case was a probable case without chest radiograph or pathological confirmation. patients were excluded if an alternative diagnosis could fully explain their illness. 7 on 14 august 2003 who proposed a new case definition, including laboratory confirmation. a clinical case of sars was defined as a person presenting a history of fever higher than 38 8c and one or more symptoms of lower respiratory tract illness (cough, breathing difficulty, shortness of breath) and radiographic evidence of infiltrates consistent with pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome (rds) or autopsy findings consistent with pneumonia without an identifiable cause. patients were excluded if an alternative diagnosis could fully explain their illness. 10 a laboratory case was a clinical case with positive laboratory finding for sars-co-v. 10 statistical analysis was conducted using spss software (spss 10.0.5, windows version). 11 univariate analysis was used to identify factors associated with outcome. in the univariate analysis, the association between illness and categorical risk factors was assessed for statistical significance by the chisquare test; the association for continuous variables was assessed using t-test. a two-sided p-value at a level of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals (95% ci) were also calculated.the first two suspected cases were diagnosed in a couple on 14 march 2003. the man was a 54-year-old businessman who had travelled to guangdong province, china, on 5 february and returned to taipei via hong kong on 21 february. on 25 february he developed fever and myalgia, and later a dry cough, but was not hospitalized until 8 march. several hours after admission he was intubated and required mechanical ventilation for 13 days. his wife and son were exposed during the period before full protective measures were in place, and both developed sars with a requirement for mechanical ventilation. the infections in the wife and son were confirmed by rt-pcr testing to be associated with the novel coronavirus associated with sars worldwide. 12 suddenly, in the last ten days of april, the number of cases began to increase steadily. the first increase was in patients and staff at hospital h and was attributed to a laundry worker employed at the hospital, aged 42 years with diabetes mellitus and peripheral vascular disease. on 12 april he had a fever and diarrhea and was evaluated in the emergency department. the laundry worker remained on duty and interacted frequently with patients, staff, and visitors. he had sleeping quarters in the hospital's basement and spent off-duty time socializing in the emergency department. on 16 april, because of worsening symptoms, this worker was admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of salmonellosis (infectious enteritis) and pulmonary edema. on 18 april he became short of breath. a chest radiograph showed bilateral infiltrates, and the patient was transferred to an isolation room in the intensive care unit with suspected sars. this was a potential index patient because he had been symptomatic for six days before sars was diagnosed. the number of potentially exposed persons was estimated at up to 10,000 patients and visitors, and 930 staff. on 24 april hospital h was contained, and all patients, visitors, and staff were quarantined within the building. 15 during the period from 29 april to 14 june, a total of 151 sars patients were transferred to 11 hospitals (mainly eight hospitals in taipei city).case clusters at eight additional hospitals in taiwan have been linked to the initial outbreak at hospital h. preliminary data suggested that many of these clusters occurred when pre-symptomatic patients, or patients with sars whose symptoms were attributed to other causes, were discharged or transferred to other healthcare facilities. sars later spread to multiple cities and regions of taiwan, including several university and private hospitals.four of these hospitals, including a 2300-bed facility in southern taiwan, discontinued emergency and routine services. 15 morbidity between 14 march and 30 july 2003, a total of 3032 patients were reported to the department of health in taiwan as having possible sars. among them, 668 (22%) patients met the may who criteria for a probable case. among these probable cases, 53 (8%) were reported to have travelled to mainland china and hong kong in the ten days before the onset of illness, 41 (6%) were close contacts of a known case, 376 (56%) were hospital-related of whom 120 (19%) were health care workers (17 doctors, 63 nurses, and 40 allied health care workers) and 256 (38%) were in the same medical ward or had visited their relatives there (table 1) . exposure for 198 (30%) could not be determined. there were 319 (48%) male patients and 349 (52%) female patients; their mean age was 51.2 ae 20.3 years. a total of 112 (17%) had coexisting medical conditions: diabetes in 39, cardiovascular disease in 29, chronic pulmonary disease in 13, chronic liver disease in three, chronic renal failure in ten, cancer in 13, immunologic disease in five. most of the health care workers were previously healthy. all patients were ethnic chinese.the most common symptoms at presentation were fever (96.9%), cough (62%), breathing difficulty (28.6%), diarrhea (18.7%), sputum production (15.1%), sore throat (14.4%), myalgia (13.8%), headache (12.1%), and rigor (11.8%). less common symp- table 2 . males had higher mortality than females (32.6% vs 22.1%, p < 0.05). for males, the age-specific mortality ranged from 9.4% for persons aged 0-29 years to 52.5% for those over 60 years. the risk of fatality was significant (p < 0.001) among patients who were older than 60 years (rr = 5.6; 95% ci = 2.4-13.0). for females, the age-specific mortality ranged from 8.1% for persons aged 0-29 years to 57.1% for person over 60 years. the risk of fatality was significant (p < 0.001) among patients who were older than 60 years (rr = 7.1; 95% ci = 3.7-13.6). it can be seen that mortality increased significantly (p < 0.0001) with age for males (chi-square for linear tread = 37.8) and females (chi-square for linear tread = 52.8)based on the who case definition of august, 10 there were 346 confirmed cases with 73 deaths (directly due to sars, 37; sars-related, 36). the mortality using this definition would be 21.1% (73/346), or 10.7% (37/346) when calculated according to the proposed method.nasopharyngeal swab and stool specimens obtained from reported patients were examined by the laboratory at the center for disease control, department of health in taiwan. from april through august 2003, rt-pcr tests of coronavirus were detected from 3032 patients, and 346 were positive. the frequency of rt-pcr positive for sars coronavirus varied significantly between probable cases (37.5%), suspected case (3.5%), and excluded (0.9%).between 28 march and 11 july, a total of 151,270 (class a, 55,315; class b, 95,955) had been quarantined. among the persons placed under class a quarantine, 112 were suspected patients of whom 34 or 6.1/10,000 were subsequently classified as having probable sars. among the persons placed under class b quarantine, 21 were suspected cases of whom 12 or 1.3/10,000 were subsequently classified as having probable sars.between 10 april and 29 july 2003, the total number of passengers who had their temperature taken was 2,760,379 (inbound, 1,317,159; outbound, 1,443,220). among them, 2134 (0.08%) had fever, of whom four or 1.4/1,000,000 were subsequently classified as having probable sars. of the study hospitals, 87% (75/86) had handwashing facilities immediately outside patients' rooms or anterooms. at the other 11 hospitals, hand-washing facilities were at a location further from the anteroom. seventy-nine (92%) had private rooms for sars case-patients and 72% (62/86) had n-95 or better respirators in stock. seventy-two percent used at least one layer of protective gown and had access to eye protection, head covers, and foot protection.overall, at the time of the mobile team visits, 46 (53%) hospitals implemented recommendations of triage and segregation of possible sars casepatients, private negative pressure isolation rooms, minimal ppe for all staff entering patients' rooms, and effective visitor policies (visitors restricted from patients' rooms). 16, 17 discussion this reported outbreak of sars in taiwan caused 668 probable cases with severe deterioration of pulmonary function and 181 deaths. consistent with other findings, 18, 19 healthcare workers in taiwan were at higher risk of infection from sars. within three months, sars developed in 120 healthcare workers after exposure at work in the medical ward where the index patient was hospitalized. all had unremarkable medical histories. recent reports suggest that infection control practices can be effective in some settings. 20, 21 just over half (53%) of taiwanese hospitals had implemented recommended infection control practice at the time of the mobile team visits; however, as with another report, 22 an outbreak occurred among hospital healthcare workers.as more becomes known about the transmission of sars-associated coronavirus infections, infection control practices at hospitals evaluating patients for sars will need to evolve. even as the sars epidemic appears to wane, 23 being prepared for sars infection control remains important among hospitals. future studies should evaluate the effectiveness of specific infection control practices, as well as assess the implementation of effective measures in countries affected by sars.in this study, a substantial difference was documented in both the number of cases and the mortality rate after applying the who definition proposed in august 2003. it is important to note that the later definition, published after the outbreak was over, was developed to serve a different purpose. in may 2003, the case definition focused on the clinical picture, and was deliberately sensitive in order to identify most suspected cases and implement control measures for sars. the case definition in august was modified to increase specificity by focusing on laboratory confirmed cases. in addition, the new definition allows for the calculation of a low mortality mainly by permitting deaths in sars patients to be attributed to other underlying diseases and therefore not contribute to the numerator. including sars patients regardless of etiology would prevent subjectivity and provide more uniform data for comparison across countries. quarantining the contacts is a new challenge to the public. within this period between 28 march and 30 july, a total of 151,270 persons (0.7% of the population of taiwan) were quarantined. only 46 (class a, 34; class b, 12) were subsequently classified as probable cases. in humans infected with the virus there is a wide range of reported incubation periods, from five to 15 days, before patients become symptomatic. 18, 19 this lag time allows apparently healthy people to travel by air almost anywhere in the world after they have been exposed. once they become symptomatic, the disease is most likely spread through person-to-person transmission. 24 as expected, based on the known transmission patterns for sars, 19, 20 the fact that transmission appeared to occur from patients in the symptomatic phase of illness, but not from those who were in the pre-symptomatic phase, suggests that the risk of transmission varies by the phase of illness. it is likely that persons who were in contact with patients with the pre-symptomatic phase were at low risk. the fact that transmission has been limited to only close contacts of patients, such as healthcare workers and family members who were not using contact or respiratory precautions, suggests that either droplet secretions or direct contact probably played a role. 4 sars patients should limit interactions outside the home and should not go to work, school, out-of-home childcare or other public areas until ten days after the resolution of fever. in taiwan, family and other close contacts, those on airplanes with ill sars patients (if seated within three rows in front or three rows behind the patient), and those returning from sars affected areas were given strictly compulsory home quarantine for ten days. it must be considered whether in the future household members or other close contacts of sars patients need to limit their activities outside the home as recommended by the usa cdc. 25 epidemiologic investigation and laboratory studies suggest that most patients with illnesses meeting the case definition of sars in taiwan were linked to a common source. to date, 37.5% of cases identified in this report were confirmed positive.in this study, some clinical and laboratory features were identified on presentation that were associated with death. advanced age, being male, and coexisting underlying medical conditions were independent predictors of mortality from sars. information on hepatitis b status was not systematically collected, a risk factor reported elsewhere. 26 sars has already become a global health hazard, and its high infectivity is alarming. the decrease in worldwide incidence is gratifying; but it may simply reflect the seasonal variation in the transmission of the virus. 24 some experts have predicted the return of sars in the cool season. containing an outbreak at an early stage affords a greater chance of success than does a later response and clearly puts less strain on the healthcare system. future strategies to control the spread of sars need to emphasize the greater risk to certain populations: health care workers, older people, and people who have chronic diseases. isolation of cases, stringent infection control measures in hospitals, and vigilant surveillance at both community and population levels are imperative. [26] [27] [28] in late december 2019, a case of unidentified pneumonia was reported in wuhan, hubei province, people's republic of china (prc). its clinical characteristics are very similar to those of viral pneumonia. after analysis on respiratory samples, prc centers for disease control (cdc) experts declared that the pneumonia, later known as novel coronavirus pneumonia (ncp), was caused by novel coronavirus [1] . who infectivity, despite of low mortality rate [2] . genome analysis of novel coronavirus sequences revealed that the complete genome sequence recognition rates of sars-cov and bat sars coronavirus (sarsr-cov-ratg13) were 79.5% and 96% respectively [3] . it implies that the coronavirus might originate from bat. on 29 february 2020, data published by world health organization showed that, since 12 december 2019 when the first case was reported, 79,394 cases were confirmed to be infected by novel coronavirus and 2,838 individuals were died in total [4] . in the meantime, 6009 cases were confirmed and 86 were died in 53 countries and regions outside of china ( figure 1 ) [4] . it posed a great threat to global public health. this report reviews the genetic structure, infection source, transmission route, pathogenesis, clinical characteristics, and treatment and prevention of the sars-cov-2, so that it can provide references for follow-up research, prevention and treatment, and may help readers to have the latest understanding of this new infectious disease.coronavirus (cov) is a single strand rna virus with a diameter of 80-120nm. it is divided into four types: α-coronavirus (α-cov), β-coronavirus (β-cov), δ-coronavirus (δ-cov) and γcoronavirus (γ-cov) [5] . six coronaviruses were previously known to cause disease in humans, sars-cov-2 is the seventh member of the coronavirus family that infects human beings after sars-cov and mers-cov [6] . sars-cov-2, like sars-cov and mers-cov, belongs to β-coronavirus. the genome sequence homology of sars-cov-2 and sars is about 79%, the 2019-ncov is closer to the sars-like bat covs (mg772933) than the sars-cov [7] , which is descended from sars-like bat covs. interestingly, for high similarity of receptor-binding domain (rbd) in spike-protein, several analyses reveal that sars-cov-2 uses angiotension-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as receptor, just like as sars-cov [8] . coronavirus mainly recognizes the corresponding receptor on the target cell through the s protein on its surface and enters into the cell, then causing the occurrence of infection. a structure model analysis shows that sars-cov-2 binds ace2 with above 10 folds higher affinity than sars-cov, but higher than the threshold required for virus infection [9] . the detailed mechanism about whether the sars-cov-2 would infect humans via binding of s-protein to ace2, how strong the interaction is for risk of human transmission, and how sars-cov-2 causes pathological mechanisms of organs damage remains unknown, which need more studies to elaborate. these results further explains the more rapid transmission capability of the sars-cov-2 in humans than sars-cov, and the number of confirmed covid-19 much higher than people with sars-cov infection. considering the higher affinity of sars-cov-2 binds ace2, soluble ace2 might be a potential candidate for covid-19 treatment.basic reproduction number (r 0 ) refers to the average amount of secondary infection that patients may produce in completely susceptible population without intervention[10]. the estimation of r 0 varies among different research teams and is updated as more information is exposed. wu, jt, leung et al. of york university estimated the r 0 of novel coronavirus to be 2.47-2.86 [11] using the seir model. majumder of boston children's hospital and his colleagues adjusted r 0 to be 2.0-3.3 using the idea model [12] . the r 0 value of other viruses of β -coronavirus, such as sars-cov, is estimated to be 2.2-3.6 [13] . the r 0 value of mers-cov is estimated to be 2.0-6.7 [14] . these indicate that sars-cov-2 has relatively high transmissibility. population is generally susceptible to sars-cov-2, the median age was 47.0 years (iqr, 35.0 to 58.0), 87% case patients were 30 to 79 years of age, and 3% were age 80 years or older, and the number of female patients was 41.9%. [15, 16] . most cases were diagnosed in hubei province, china (75%). 81% cases were classified as mild, 14% cases were severe, and 5% were critical. the overall case-fatality rate (cfr) was 2.3%, but cases in those aged 70 to 79 years had an 8.0% cfr and cases in those aged 80 years and older had a 14.8% cfr [16] . this implies that elderly male citizens are more susceptible to this coronavirus as compared with other groups, and this virus is more likely to affect elderly male citizens with chronic underlying diseases (diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, etc.) [17] .in summary, covid-19 is high in prevalence and population is generally susceptible to such virus, and covid-19 rapidly spread from a single wuhan city to the entire country in just 30 days. so that prompt measures should be taken to control the spread of the disease.previous epidemiological studies have proved that there are three conditions for wide spread of virus, i.e. the source of infection, route of transmission, and susceptibility [18] . there is no exception for sars-cov-2.bats are considered to be the natural hosts of sars-cov-2, while pangolins and snakes are thought to be the intermediate hosts. studies of institut pasteur of shanghai showed that bats might be the natural hosts of sars-cov-2. furthermore, studies of peking university [19] suggest that sars-cov-2 infection is probably caused by snakes. however, later studies [20] found that no evidence showed that snakes are the hosts of sars-cov-2. study from wuhan institute of virology showed that the similarity of gene sequence between sars-cov-2 and bat coronavirus is as high as 96.2% by sequencing technology [21] this also implied that bats are the possible source of sars-cov-2. apart from those, xu. et al. [22] showed that the similarity of sars-cov-2 isolated from pangolin and the virus strains currently infecting humans is as high as 99% using macrogenomic sequencing, molecular biological detection and electron microscopic analysis. the team also observed the typical novel coronavirus granules and revealed that pangolin is the potential intermediate host of the sars-cov-2.although the results of current research have not yet fully elucidated the potential natural host and the intermediate host of the sars-cov-2, adequate evidence has proved that this virus might be sourced from wild animals. at present, it is considered that the main infectious source of sars-cov-2 is covid-19 patients in the population. however, there is still a debate about whether sars-cov-2 patients in the incubation period are infectious, which needs further study.transmission and close contact are the most common ways of transmission for sars-cov-2.aerosol transmission might also be a way of transmission. in addition, researchers also detected sars-cov-2 in the samples of stool, gastrointestinal tract, saliva and urine. based on bioinformatics evidence indicated that digestive tract might be a potential route of sars-cov-2 infection [23] . consistently, sars-cov-2 rna was also dectected in gastrointestinal tissues from covid-19 patients [24] . moreover, sars-cov-2 was detected in the tears and conjunctival secretions of covid-19 patients [25] . meanwhile, a retrospective study based nine pregnant women with covid-19 had for the first time indicated that the possibility of intrauterine vertical transmission between mothers and infants in the late pregnancy was temporarily excluded [26] . however, available data on pregnant women infected with sars-cov-2 were inadequate, and hence further studies are required to verify the potential vertical transmission of sars-cov-2 in pregnant women.from the epidemiological investigation report, elderly citizens are susceptible groups for sars-cov-2, the median age of death was 75 years, and most of them had comorbidities or a history of surgery before admission [27] . zhong. et al. found that, based on clinical features of 1,099 covid-19 patients, the median incubation period was 3.0 days (range, 0 to 24.0), the median time from the first symptom to death was 14 days [15, 27] . for sars, the median latency of sars is 4 days, the average duration of first symptoms to hospital admission was 3.8 days, and admission to death was 17.4 days for casualties [28] , and the median latency of mers is 7 days [29] . from the median incubation period, covid-19 is shorter than sars and mers. however, the maximum latency of sars-cov-2 currently observed is as high as 24 days, which may increase the risk of virus transmission. moreover, it also found that people 70 years or older had shorter median days (11.5 days) from the first symptom to death than those with ages below 70 years (20 days), demonstrating that elderly people have faster disease progression than younger people [27] . from the above, the public should pay more attention to elderly people who might be more vulnerable to the sars-cov-2.covid-19 produces an acute viral infection in humans with median incubation period was 3.0 days [15] , which is similar to the sras with an incubation period ranging from 2-10 days [30] . the presenting features of covid-19 infection in adults are pronounced. the presenting features in adults are pronounced. the most common clinical symptoms of sars-cov-2 infection were fever (87.9%), cough (67.7%), fatigue (38.1%), whereas diarrhea (3.7%) and vomiting (5.0%) were rare [15, 31] , which were similar to others coronavirus.most patients had some degree of dyspnoea at presentation, because the time from onset of symptoms to the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) was only 9 days among the initial patients with covid-19 infection [1] . moreover, severe patients are prone to a variety of complications, including acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute heart injury and secondary infection [17] . there are already some evidences that covid-19 can cause damage to tissues and organs other than the lung. in a study of 214 covid-19 patients, 78 (36.4%) patients had neurological manifestations [32] . in addition, there is already evidence of ocular surface infection in patients with covid-19, and sars-cov-2 rna was detected in eye secretions of patient [33] . some covid-19 patients have arrhythmia, acute heart injury, impaired renal function, and abnormal liver function (50.7%) at admission [1, 34, 35] . a case report of the pathological manifestations of a patient with pneumonia showed moderate microvesicular steatosis in his liver tissue [36] . besides, tissue samples of stomach, duodenum, and rectal mucosa were confirmed positive for sars-cov-2 rna [37] (figure 2 ).in general, the radiographical features of coronavirus are similar to those found in community-acquired pneumonia caused by other organisms [38] . chest ct scan is important tool to diagnose this pneumonia. nevertheless, several typical imaging features are frequently observed in covid-19 pneumonia, including the predominant groundglass opacity (65%), consolidations (50%), smooth or irregular interlobular septal thickening (35%), air bronchogram (47%), and thickening of the adjacent pleura (32%), with predominantly peripheral and lower lobe involvement [39] . a recent study reported that most patients (90%) had bilateral chest ct findings and the sensitivity of chest ct to suggest covid-19 was 97% [33] . combining chest ct imaging features with clinical symptom and laboratory test could facilitate early diagnosis of covid-19 pneumonia.laboratory examination revealed that 82.1% of patients was lymphopenia and 36.2% of patients was hrombocytopenia. most patients had normal leukocytes, but leukopenia was observed in 33.7% of patients. in addition, most patients demonstrated elevated levels of c-reactive protein(crp), lactate dehydrogenase (ldh)and creatinine kinase(ck), but minority of patients had elevated transaminase, abnormal myocardial enzyme spectrum, or elevated serum creatinine [1, 15] . as compared with bacterial pneumonia, patients with sars-cov-2 showed lower oxygenation index. cytokine release syndrome is a vital factor that aggravates disease progression. a higher levels of il-6 and il-10, and lower levels of cd4+t and cd8+t are observed in covid-19 patients parallel with the severity of the disease [40] .the detection of viral nucleic acid is the standard for noninvasive diagnosis of covid-19.however, the present detection of sars-cov-2 nucleic acid was high in specificity and low in sensitivity, so that there might be false negatives and the testing time could be relatively long. the novel coronavirus pneumonia diagnosis and treatment plan (5 th trial version) took "suspected cases with pneumonia imaging features" as the clinical diagnostic criteria in hubei province [41] . but the sixth edition of diagnostic criteria eliminates the distinction between hubei and other provinces outside hubei [42] . one reason might be to distinguish the flu from the covid-19. furthermore, zhang f of mit developed a test paper for rapid detection of sars-cov-2 in one hour by sherlock technology. although the clinical verification has not been carried out yet, this technology, once proved, might be conducive to rapid diagnosis of the disease [43] . a research group of peking university claimed to have developed a new method for rapid construction of transcriptome sequencing library of sherry, which is helpful for rapid sequencing of sars-cov-2 [44] . found that chloroquine has an immune-modulating activity and could effectively inhibit in this virus in vitro [46] . clinical controlled trials have shown that chloroquine was proved to be effective in the treatment of patients with covid-19 [47] . remdesivir is undergoing a large number of clinical trials in several hospitals, and the final efficacy of the drug is uncertain. arbidol, a small indole derivative molecule, was found to block viral fusion against influenza a and b viruses and hepatitis c viruses [48] and confirmed to have antiviral effect on sars-cov in cell experiment [49] , so that it might be a choice for covid-19 treatment.the randomized controlled study on treatment of novel coronavirus by arbidol and kaletra undertaken at present showed that arbidol had better therapeutic effect than kaletra did and could significantly reduce the incidence of severe cases. apart from the above, lopinavir/ritonavir, nucleoside analogues, neuraminidase inhibitors, remdesivir, and peptide ek1 could also be the choices of antiviral drugs for covid-19 treatment [50] .chinese medicine also played an important role in the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection. previous studies have proved that baicalin, chlorogenic acid and forsythin in shuanghuanglian oral liquid have certain inhibitory effects on a variety of viruses and bacteria [51, 52] . the mechanism might be that these components played a therapeutic role by effectively reducing the inflammatory response of the body caused by viruses and bacteria [53] . lianhuaqingwen capsule has been proven to have a wide-spectrum effect on a series of influenza viruses, including h7n9, and could regulate the immune response of the virus, reducing the level of inflammatory factors in the early stage of infection [54] .synthetic recombinant interferon α has proven to be effective in treatment of sars patients in clinic trials [55] . pulmonary x-ray abnormal remission time was reduced by 50% in the interferon-treated group compared with the glucocorticoid-treated group alone. interferon was also found to be an effective inhibitor of mers-cov replication [56] . those findings suggested that interferon could be used in the treatment of covid-19. intravenous immunoglobulin might be the safest immunomodulator for long-term use in all ages, and could help to inhibit the production of proinflammatory cytokines and increase the production of anti-inflammatory mediators [57] . moreover, thymosin alpha-1 (ta1) can be an immune booster for sars patients, effectively controlling the spread of disease [58] . intravenous immunoglobulin and ta1 may also be considered as therapeutics for covid-19.when there are no sufficient vaccines and specific drugs, convalescent plasma therapy could be an effective way to alleviate the course of disease for severely infected patients [59] . in a retrospective analysis, convalescent plasma therapy is more effective than severe doses of hormonal shock in patients with severe sars, reducing mortality and shortening hospital stays [60] . a prospective cohort study by hung and colleagues showed that for patients with pandemic h1n1 influenza virus infection in 2009, the relative risk of death was significantly lower in patients treated with convalescent plasma [61] . moreover, from the perspective of immunology, most of the patients recovered from covid-19 would produce specific antibodies against the sars-cov-2, and their serum could be used to prevent reinfection. at the same time, antibodies can limit the virus reproduction in the acute phase of infection and help clear the virus, which is conducive to the rapid recovery of the disease [62] . theoretically, viremia peaks during the first week of most viral infections, and it should be more effective to give recovery plasma early in the disease [63] . therefore, the plasma of some patients recovered from covid-19 could be collected to prepare plasma globulin specific to sars-cov-2. however, the safety of plasma globulin products specific to sars-cov-2 deserves further consideration.at present, extracorporeal blood purification technology in the treatment of severe ncp patients [42] . according to the latest studies [34] , ace2, the key receptor of sars-cov-2, is highly expressed in human kidney (nearly 100 times higher than that in lung). kidney might be main target of attack for novel coronavirus. early continuous blood purification treatment could reduce renal workload and help to promote the recovery of renal function [64] . most of the severe patients with novel coronavirus might suffer from cytokine storm. the imbalance of pro-inflammatory factors and anti-inflammatory factors might cause immune damage.therefore, blood purification technology could be used to remove inflammatory factors, eliminate cytokine storm, correct electrolyte imbalance, and maintain acid-base balance, to control patient's capacity load in an effective manner [65] . in this logic, the patient's symptoms could be improved and the blood oxygen saturation could be increased.in summary, the drug treatment for covid-19 mainly comprised four ways, i.e., antiviral western medicine, chinese medicine, immunoenhancement therapy, and viral specific plasma globulin. machines could be used as auxiliary therapy. however, randomized double-blind large sample clinical trial should be served as the standard to determine whether the antiviral drugs could be used in clinical practice.so far, there are no specific antiviral treatments or vaccines for sars-cov-2. and the clinical treatment of covid-19 has been limited to support and palliative care until now. therefore, it is urgent to develop a safe and stable covid-19 vaccine. dr. tedros, director-general of who, said that novel coronavirus vaccine was expected to be ready in 18 months. in addition, sars-cov-2 is an rna virus. rna virus related vaccines, including measles, polio, encephalitis b virus and influenza virus, could be the most promising alternatives. and interpersonal transmission of the virus could be prevented by immunizing health care workers and non-infected population [66] .prevention of infectious diseases by traditional chinese medicine has been recorded for a long time in chinese history, and there have been previous studies on the prevention of sars by traditional chinese medicine [67] . the present principles on prevention of covid-19 are to tonify body energy to protect outside body, dispel wind, dissipate heat, and dissipate dampness with aromatic agent. the six most commonly used chinese herbal medicines are astragalus, liquorice, fangfeng, baizhu and honeysuckle. however, the decoction is not suitable for long-term use, and the best period is one week only [68] . studies have shown that vitamin c may prevent the susceptibility of lower respiratory tract infection under certain conditions [69] , while covid-19 may cause lower respiratory tract infection. therefore, a moderate amount of vitamin c supplementation may be a way to prevent covid-19. in addition, the decrease in vitamin d and vitamin e levels in cattle could lead to the infection of bovine coronavirus [70] . this suggests that proper supplementation of vitamin d and vitamin e may enhance our resistance to sars-cov-2. patients with primary basic diseases, especially those with chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease and tumor, are more susceptible to sars-cov-2 and their risk of poor prognosis will increase significantly after infection, because they have low systemic immunity as a result of the disease itself and treatments [71] . therefore, it is particularly important to enhance self-resistance. the main way to boost personal immunity is to maintain personal hygiene, a healthy lifestyle and adequate nutritional intake [72, 73] . for individuals, taking protective measures can effectively prevent sars-cov-2 infection, including improving personal hygiene, wearing medical masks, adequate rest and good ventilation [15] .in conclusion, covid-19 is a serious infectious disease caused by the novel coronavirus, sars-cov-2. its main initial symptoms, fever, cough and fatigue, are similar to that of sars.the most likely source of sars-cov-2 is bats. this virus is highly infectious and can be transmitted through droplets and close contact. some patients are life-threatening and such disease has posed a great threat to global health and safety, so to control the spread of the epidemic and reduce the mortality as soon as possible is our burning issue. but by far, the specific mechanism of the virus remains unknown, and no specific drugs for the virus have been developed. at present, it is important to control the source of infection, cut off the transmission route, and use the existing drugs and means to control the progress of the disease proactively. we should also strive to develop specific drugs, promote the research and development of vaccines, and reduce morbidity and mortality of the disease, so as to better protect the safety of people's lives. it is now believed that the disease is caused by a novel coronavirus (sars-cov). sars was first recognized as a distinct entity in february 2003 by dr carlo urbani, an epidemiologist with the world health organization who was investigating the outbreak in hanoi, vietnam. unfortunately, he himself contracted the disease and died. since then and up to , the disease has spread to affect more than 8000 worldwide. 1 although the medical community at large has been aware of this disease for only a few months, considerable progress has been made in understanding the epidemiology and clinical features, and the etiologic agent has been identified.a highly contagious atypical pneumonia first appeared in the guangdong province, people's republic of china, in november 2002. this was not widely publicized, and the condition remained isolated to china for the next 3 months. on february 21, 2003, a chinese physician from the guangdong province (patient a in figure 1 ) who cared for patients with pneumonia and had himself developed symp-toms traveled to hong kong to visit relatives. he stayed on the ninth floor of hotel m for a day. on february 22, 2003, he was admitted to hospital 2 with fever and respiratory symptoms and died of respiratory failure on march 4, 2003 . he infected 2 of his family members and 4 health care workers (hcws) in hospital 2. in addition, 12 other hotel guests at hotel m developed sars, 10 of whom (patients b through k) were in the hotel the same day as patient a; the other 2 patients (patients l and m) stayed in the hotel during the time that 3 other symptomatic patients were guests at the hotel. because of international travel and transmission to hcws before the institution of protective measures, these patients were responsible for subsequent clusters of sars around the globe. patient b was the index patient for the outbreak in hanoi involving hcws and close contacts, including dr urbani. patients c, d, and e were the index cases in singapore. patients f and g traveled back to toronto, canada, which resulted in the cluster of cases in toronto. patients h and j caused outbreaks among hcws in other hospitals in hong kong. patient l appears to have become infected during his stay at hotel m, with subsequent transmission to his wife, patient m in the united states ( figure 1 ).aggressive and unprecedented measures that included quarantine of thousands of people, travel restrictions, and temperature checks at airports have been successful to a large extent in containing the disease. vietnam reported its last case more than 30 days ago. singapore used its military forces to assist in contact tracing and enforcement of home for personal use. mass reproduce only with permission from mayo clinic proceedings. and lower respiratory tract symptoms within 10 days of either travel to an area with documented transmission of sars or close contact with a person believed to have sars. a probable case is a suspect case who also has chest radiographic findings of pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), or an unexplained respiratory illness resulting in death, with autopsy findings of ards without identifiable cause. 3 suspect and probable cases are further classified based on laboratory findings as laboratory positive, laboratory negative, or indeterminate ( table 1) .it is important to understand the meaning of close contact. it is defined as having cared for or lived with a person known to have sars or unprotected contact with body secretions from such a person. this includes kissing, embracing, sharing utensils or bedding, performing a physical examination, or other direct physical contact between persons. it does not include sitting across a waiting room for a brief period, walking by a person with sars, or other casual contact.the incubation period is 2 to 10 days. early manifestations include influenza-like symptoms, such as fever, myalgias, and headache. fever occurs in virtually all patients and is often the presenting symptom. often, fever is high and sometimes associated with chills and rigors. fever may occasionally be absent in elderly persons or may have resolved by the time respiratory symptoms occur. typically, rash and neurologic findings are absent. diarrhea has been reported in up to 25% of patients. [5] [6] [7] the respiratory phase starts within 2 to 4 days of onset of fever with a dry, nonproductive cough. this may progress to shortness of breath, usually in the second week of the illness, and might be accompanied by or progress to hypoxemia. in 10% to 20% of patients, the respiratory illness is severe enough to require tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. the case fatality rate is approximately 3% to 12% overall. the mortality rate may be as high as 45% in patients older than 60 years, particularly those with preexisting comorbidity (eg, diabetes, renal failure, and other chronic medical conditions). 8 a concerning feature of this disease has been that young, previously healthy persons, many of them health care professionals, have also died of sars. the reason for this is unclear but may be due to exposure to patients with higher viral loads or due to their host response. in contrast, sars has affected relatively few children and appears to be milder in the pediatric age group. 9 a biphasic course has been described in many patients, with an initial illness followed by improvement and then subsequent deterioration. this worsening can present as recurrent fever 4 to 7 days after initial defervescence, new chest infiltrates, respiratory failure, or watery diarrhea. in a cohort of 75 patients in hong kong, 85% had recurrent symptoms after initial improvement. 8 the authors described a triphasic course with fever, myalgia early in week 1, and recurrent fever, hypoxemia, diarrhea, and shifting chest infiltrates in week 2. twenty percent of patients progressed to ards during the third week of the illness. quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) of nasopharyngeal aspirate in 14 patients with relapse showed peak viral loads occurred at day 10 after onset of symptoms, suggesting that the late deterioration may be due to the host immune response rather than to uncontrolled viral replication.chest radiographs of patients with sars show patchy focal infiltrates or consolidation often with a peripheral distribution, which may progress to diffuse infiltrates. pleural effusions have not been reported. early findings may be subtle, and initial findings on chest radiographs may be normal in up to 25% of patients. 6 computed tomography (ct) may be more sensitive than plain films. highresolution ct scans have shown abnormalities in patients with suspected sars who have normal findings on plain films. 10 the characteristic ct finding is bilateral peripheral airspace ground-glass consolidation mimicking that seen in bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia.laboratory findings in patients with sars include thrombocytopenia and leukopenia (in particular lymphopenia). elevated creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, and transaminase levels have been noted. a high peak lactate dehydrogenase level and an initial elevated white blood cell count may carry a poor prognosis. 7the etiologic link of a coronavirus with the sars epidemic was established by peiris et al 11 in hong kong. several diagnostic laboratory methods were used to initially recover and then characterize coronavirus infection in various specimens obtained from patients with sars. these included inoculation and recovery of the virus in cell cultures, characterization of morphologic features by electron microscopy, serologic antibody determination, and molecular amplification and sequencing of the target rna of the agent. overall, 45 of the 50 patients these investigators studied had 1 or more laboratory tests (serology, 32; rt-pcr, 22; culture, 2) that supported a coronavirus etiology. the results of this initial report were quickly confirmed and expanded by collaborative studies in several major public health centers and medical institutions throughout the world coordinated by the world health organization. 12, 13 molecular sequencing analyses have indicated that the virus is only distantly related to previously sequenced coronaviruses. based on serologic studies, it appears that this virus has not previously circulated in humans and is now referred to as sars-cov. 14, 15 coronaviruses are enveloped rna viruses that cause disease in humans and animals. the previously known human coronaviruses are a major cause of the common cold and can occasionally cause pneumonia. research teams in hong kong and shenzhen, china, recently detected several coronaviruses closely related genetically to the sars-cov in 2 animal species (masked palm civet and raccoon-dog) and antibodies against the sars-cov in 1 additional species (chinese ferret badger). these and other wild animals are traditionally considered delicacies and are sold for human consumption in markets throughout southern china.this study provides the first indication that the sars-cov exists outside a human host. studies are needed to determine how widespread the sars virus might be in animals in guangdong and elsewhere and if these animals can excrete the virus in an amount sufficient to infect humans and through what route such transmission occurs.the sars-cov appears to be transmitted primarily by large droplet spread, although surface contamination and possibly airborne spread may play a role. recent data suggest that the virus may remain viable for considerable periods on a dry surface (up to 24 hours); hence, transmission through fomites may occur. the outbreak in an apartment complex in hong kong that accounted for more than 300 cases has been attributed to fecal spread. a patient with sars who had diarrhea stayed with his brother in this building. it is thought that infection spread from him to other residents in the building through a leaking sewage drain, which allowed aerosolization of virus-containing material. sewage also backed into bathroom floor drains in some apartments and may have accounted for some of the transmission. the sars-cov is stable in feces (and urine) at room temperature for at least 1 to 2 days. the virus is more stable (up to 4 days) in stool from patients with diarrhea (which has a higher ph than normal stool). 16 it is presently unclear at what stage of the disease viral shedding occurs or whether someone who is infected but asymptomatic can infect others. as our knowledge of sars and the etiologic coronavirus evolves, we will be able to address these important issues.some close contacts have reported a mild febrile illness without respiratory signs or symptoms, suggesting the ill- ness might not always progress to the respiratory phase; others have not become ill at all. in contrast, "super spreaders" have been described who have infected 10 or more contacts, including hcws, family and social contacts, or visitors to the health care facilities where patients were hospitalized. a similar phenomenon has been described with some other diseases, such as rubella, laryngeal tuberculosis, and ebola virus, and might be the result of a combination of host, environment, and virus interactions. in singapore, 5 super spreaders were responsible for a total of 170 suspect and probable cases of sars. 17 additional data on the natural history of infection are needed to understand factors that might be associated with this phenomenon. regardless of whether it is the result of other transmission routes, inadequate infection-control measures, or more viral shedding by certain patients, the fact remains that transmission of the sars virus is highly efficient in some circumstances.the initial diagnosis of sars is one of exclusion. hence, common causes of respiratory illnesses should be sought. initial diagnostic testing for patients with suspected sars should include chest radiography, pulse oximetry, blood cultures, sputum gram stain and culture, and testing for other respiratory pathogens, notably influenza a and b, respiratory syncytial virus, and legionella (table 2 ). clinicians should save any available clinical specimens (respiratory, blood, serum, and stool) for additional testing until a specific diagnosis is made. acute and convalescent (>21 days after onset of symptoms) serum samples should be collected from each patient who meets the sars case definition. paired sera and other clinical specimens can be forwarded through state and local health departments for testing at the cdc. specific instructions for collecting specimens from suspected sars patients are available from the cdc. 18 laboratory diagnostic tests used at the cdc to test clinical specimens for evidence of sars-cov include serology, pcr testing, and viral cultures.serologic testing for coronavirus antibody consists of indirect fluorescent antibody testing and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays that are specific for antibody produced after infection. patients seem to seroconvert at a mean of 10 days after onset of symptoms. the cdc has made reagents for sars antibody testing available to state public health laboratories.an rt-pcr test specific for rna from the sars-cov has been positive within the first 10 days after fever onset in respiratory specimens from most patients considered probable cases of sars who have been tested and in stool samples in the second week of illness. the duration of detectable viremia or viral shedding needs further study. 12, 13 despite the fact that several thousand specimens from patients with sars have been processed in laboratories worldwide, to date there have been no reported clusters of illness in laboratory workers. nevertheless, reasonable precautions should be taken in handling these specimens. the cdc recommends that specimens from patients with sars be labeled accordingly and that the laboratory be alerted before the samples are sent. laboratory workers who handle these specimens should use standard precautions in a biosafety level 2 laboratory. any procedure with the potential to generate fine particulate aerosols should be performed in a biological safety cabinet. 19 treatment there is no specific treatment currently available for sars. management consists of supportive care and appropriate infection control measures to prevent spread. because the diagnosis is uncertain, empirical therapy for community-acquired pneumonia should be administered by using antibiotics with activity against both typical and atypical respiratory pathogens including influenza when appropriate. in all series of sars cases described to date, therapy has involved broad-spectrum antibiotics, including a fluoroquinolone or macrolide. the antiviral drug ribavirin has been used in most patients treated in hong kong and in toronto, without evidence of efficacy. 7,10 the adverse effects of ribavirin are significant, particularly hemolytic anemia and electrolyte disturbances such as hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia; hence, empirical therapy with ribavirin is not warranted.anecdotal evidence suggests that corticosteroids may be beneficial, particularly in patients with progressive pulmonary infiltrates and hypoxemia. various regimens have been used in different centers, with dosages of methylprednisolone ranging from 40 mg twice daily (similar to therapy for pneumocystis carinii pneumonia) to 2 mg/kg per day (similar to late-phase therapy for ards) to pulse doses of 500 mg intravenously per day. 20 because cortico-steroids have potential adverse effects, clinicians should carefully assess the risk vs the benefit on a case-by-case basis.early recognition and isolation of patients with sars is key to limiting spread of the disease. based on our current understanding of disease transmission, infection control measures for suspected sars cases should include the following.early identification of patients with sars in health care facilities and appropriate isolation are essential in preventing large outbreaks. the cdc has recommended that in health care settings, patients should be screened with targeted questions as soon as possible after arrival or while the patient is on the telephone making an appointment. we have been using a simple screening tool have you been asked about your travel history today?have you traveled to china, hong kong, singapore, taiwan, or vietnam* in the past 2 weeks or had close contact with someone who has traveled and is ill with fever or cough or has difficulty breathing?have patient put on surgical mask and put patient in the room immediately physician to evaluate further all health care workers must wear an niosh-approved (tb) mask and gloves before entry to patient's room (figure 2 ) to screen all patients in our facility. patients who have positive findings on the initial screen are given a mask, separated from other patients, placed in an examination room (a negative-air room if available), and evaluated further by a physician with airborne (n-95 respirator) and contact (gown, gloves) precautions. if, during this evaluation, the patient fits the cdc case definition for sars and needs admission, the patient is admitted to a negative-air room. if admission is unnecessary but further testing is required, the patient is escorted to appropriate areas (for laboratory tests, radiological studies, etc) and testing expedited so that exposure of other patients is minimized.diagnosis of sars does not automatically necessitate admission. patients who do not otherwise need to be admitted to a hospital should be managed as outpatients as long as they can limit interactions outside the home. persons being managed as outpatients should be instructed to wear a surgical mask when in the presence of household members, and they should contain respiratory secretions in facial tissue and place these in lined containers for disposal with household waste. they should wash their hands frequently with soap and water or an alcoholbased hand sanitizer, especially after touching respiratory secretions and other body fluids. sharing of eating utensils, towels, and bedding between patients with sars and others should be avoided until these items have been washed with soap and hot water. such patients should stay away from work, school, or other activities in a public place for 10 days after the resolution of fever provided that cough and other respiratory symptoms have resolved or have improved. a plan will need to be formulated to decide how these outpatients will obtain food and other supplies such as surgical masks during the period of isolation and how arrangements will be made for travel to and from necessary medical appointments.household members or other close contacts of patients with sars should be advised to wear disposable gloves for any direct contact with body fluids from the patient and to practice good hand hygiene. such people should be vigilant for the development of fever or respiratory symptoms, and if these occur, they should seek health care evaluation. they should inform their health care provider in advance of arriving for the evaluation that they have had close contact with a patient with sars so that arrangements can be made, as necessary, to prevent transmission to others in the health care setting. in the absence of fever or respiratory symptoms, they need not limit their activities outside the home.patients who require hospitalization should be admitted to a negative pressure, specially ventilated room. visitors should be discouraged; the number of hcws involved in the patient's care should be limited. all hcws should use personal protective equipment appropriate for standard, contact, and airborne precautions (ie, hand hygiene, gown, gloves, and n-95 respirator) in addition to eye protection while caring for these patients. procedures that result in coughing and aerosolization of respiratory secretions should be avoided. if bronchoscopy is considered essential for patient care, it should be performed by experienced personnel using maximum infection control precautions (table 3) .an important feature of the sars outbreaks in canada, singapore, and hong kong has been the fact that several hcws have developed sars after caring for patients with sars. transmission to hcws appears to have occurred after close, unprotected contact with symptomatic individuals. this has placed additional strain on health care systems that have already been stressed by outbreaks of sars.active surveillance for fever and respiratory symptoms (eg, daily screening) should be conducted in hcws with unprotected exposure for 10 days after the exposure, including checking the temperature when the employee reports to work and taking a history of respiratory symptoms. workers with unprotected exposure who develop fever and/or respiratory symptoms should not come to work; they should stay home and report symptoms to infection control or the employee health service immediately. health care workers with unprotected exposure during aerosolgenerating procedures (intubation, suctioning, bronchoscopy, etc) should be quarantined for a 10-day period at home because these procedures pose a higher risk of disease transmission.case definitions of sars are currently based on the presence of epidemiological risk factors (close contact with patients with sars or travel to sars-affected areas) and a combination of fever and respiratory symptoms, with or without chest radiographic changes. however, if sars spreads into the general population, our ability to distinguish it from other community-acquired pneumonias based on such epidemiological linkages will fail. if this happens, sars will need to be considered in the differential diagnosis of any community-acquired or nosocomial pneumonia. a "typical" history, suggestive laboratory values, and failure to respond to conventional antibiotics should raise suspicion. diagnostic tests will be crucial in the future both to ensure that patients are isolated rapidly and to provide appropriate therapy.sars has resulted in important challenges for the medical community. in affected areas, policies are changing daily as more information about the virus and the disease is obtained.the resurgence of cases in toronto in early may 2003 shows the difficulty of maintaining control over a new disease characterized by many puzzling epidemiological and clinical features. the continued alertness of singapore, which most recently broke the chain of sars transmission, shows the importance of maintaining a high level of vigilance and preparedness to ensure that a single imported case does not reignite an outbreak. currently, control depends on prompt detection and isolation of cases, good infection control in hospitals, and the tracing and quarantine of contacts. lung ultrasound gained a leading position in the last year as an imaging technique for the assessment and management of patients with acute respiratory failure. in coronavirus disease 2019 , its role may be of further importance because it is performed bedside and may limit chest x-ray and the need for transport to radiology for computed tomography (ct) scan. since february 21, we progressively turned into a coronavirus-dedicated intensive care unit and applied an ultrasound-based approach to avoid traditional imaging and limit contamination as much as possible. we performed a complete daily examination with lung ultrasound score computation and systematic search of complications (pneumothorax, ventilator-associated pneumonia); on-duty physicians were free to perform ct or chest x-ray when deemed indicated. we compared conventional imaging exams performed in the first 4 wk of the covid-19 epidemic with those in the same time frame in 2019: there were 84 patients in 2020 and 112 in 2019; 64 and 22 (76.2% vs. 19 .6%, p < 0.001) had acute respiratory failure, respectively, of which 55 (85.9%) were covid-19 in 2020. when covid-19 patients in 2020 were compared with acute respiratory failure patients in 2019, the median number of chest x-rays was 1.0 (1.0-2.0) versus 3.0 (1.0-4.0) (p = 0.0098); 2 patients 2 (3.6%) versus 7 patients (31.8%) had undergone at least one thoracic ct scan (p = 0.001). a self-imposed ultrasound-based approach reduces the number of chest x-rays and thoracic ct scans in covid-19 patients compared with patients with standard acute respiratory failure, thus reducing the number of health care providers exposed to possible contamination and sparing personal protective equipment.<kw>key words: lung ultrasound, lung monitoring, covid-19, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), lung imaging.on march 11, 2020, the world health organization declared the new coronavirus disease 2019 as an ongoing pandemic emergency. the first reported case had been identified in wuhan, china, on december 8, 2019. since then, the disease has rapidly spread worldwide. around 5%-10% of covid-19 patients require mechanical ventilation for acute respiratory failure (arf), of whom 65%-85% are classified as having acute respiratory distress syndrome (wu et al. 2020; yang et al. 2020) . the typical radiologic findings are consolidations and ground glass opacities with a peripheral distribution.frequently, lung involvement is bilateral, with destruction of pulmonary parenchyma caused by consolidations and interstitial inflammation (chung et al. 2020) .as in all acutely ill respiratory patients, lung imaging is mandatory for assessment of disease severity and to guide clinical management. however, radiology societies have advised against the systematic use of computed tomography (ct) and have suggested reducing the number of chest x-rays (cxrs) in covid-19, to minimize the exposure of health care providers to this highly infective disease (simpson et al. 2020) . in this context, lung ultrasound (lus) could be the ideal imaging technique as it is available at the bedside, it is performed directly by the in-charge physicians and it provides reliable information for diagnosis and monitoring of arf (chiumello et al. 2018; mojoli et al. 2019; pescarissi et al. 2020) . the aim of our study was to test whether the systematic use of a lus-based approach could reduce the number of conventional radiologic exams during the covid-19 epidemic.we admitted the first covid-19 patient on february 21 and progressively transformed our intensive care unit (icu) into a coronavirus unit, reaching 100% of patients with covid-19 on march 6, 2020 (mojoli et al. 2020) . because our health care providers have high skills and experience in lus and habitually use ultrasound in daily management of arf patients, although in general integrated with traditional imaging, from the beginning we decided to use an lus-based approach. the aim of this selfimposed limitation was to minimize transport of covid-19 patients to the radiology department, reduce the number of bedside cxrs and therefore reduce the exposure of health care professionals. a complete 12-area examination, with computation of the lus score (mongodi et al. 2017) , is performed daily with a results concerning the use of traditional imaging are outlined in table 2 the main result of the present work is that a self-imposed lus-based approach reduces the number of cxrs and thoracic ct scans in covid-19 patients compared with standard arf patients; this implies that lus helps to reduce the need for transport of infectious patients to the radiology department and for bedside cxrs, thus reducing the number of health care providers exposed to possible contamination and sparing personal protective equipment.interestingly, in our center, not all patients with arf underwent at least one cxr and fewer than 1 in 3 underwent chest ct in the examined time frame in 2019. for many years, lus has been used in our center for the assessment and management of arf patients. even in the context where the use of conventional chest imaging had already been optimized by the daily practice of lus, a self-imposed lus-based approach could further reduce the number of conventional exams. the two covid-19 patients who underwent ct for lung assessment both had a condition preventing lus examination (i.e., subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum).as for limitations, first we analyzed only thoracic ct scans and cxrs, as no covid-19 patient required imaging other than thoracic, so far. second, the integration of lus findings in the management of arf requires well-trained physicians (rouby et al. 2019) . automation may be of help in the future to overcome this limitation for lung aeration quantification (brusasco et al. 2019; piculjan et al. 2019) . lung ultrasound gained a leading position in the last year as an imaging technique for the assessment and management of patients with acute respiratory failure. in coronavirus disease 2019 , its role may be of further importance because it is performed bedside and may limit chest x-ray and the need for transport to radiology for computed tomography (ct) scan. since february 21, we progressively turned into a coronavirus-dedicated intensive care unit and applied an ultrasound-based approach to avoid traditional imaging and limit contamination as much as possible. we performed a complete daily examination with lung ultrasound score computation and systematic search of complications (pneumothorax, ventilator-associated pneumonia); on-duty physicians were free to perform ct or chest x-ray when deemed indicated. we compared conventional imaging exams performed in the first 4 wk of the covid-19 epidemic with those in the same time frame in 2019: there were 84 patients in 2020 and 112 in 2019; 64 and 22 (76.2% vs. 19 .6%, p < 0.001) had acute respiratory failure, respectively, of which 55 (85.9%) were covid-19 in 2020. when covid-19 patients in 2020 were compared with acute respiratory failure patients in 2019, the median number of chest x-rays was 1.0 (1.0-2.0) versus 3.0 (1.0-4.0) (p = 0.0098); 2 patients 2 (3.6%) versus 7 patients (31.8%) had undergone at least one thoracic ct scan (p = 0.001). a self-imposed ultrasound-based approach reduces the number of chest x-rays and thoracic ct scans in covid-19 patients compared with patients with standard acute respiratory failure, thus reducing the number of health care providers exposed to possible contamination and sparing personal protective equipment.<kw>key words: lung ultrasound, lung monitoring, covid-19, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), lung imaging.on march 11, 2020, the world health organization declared the new coronavirus disease 2019 as an ongoing pandemic emergency. the first reported case had been identified in wuhan, china, on december 8, 2019. since then, the disease has rapidly spread worldwide. around 5%-10% of covid-19 patients require mechanical ventilation for acute respiratory failure (arf), of whom 65%-85% are classified as having acute respiratory distress syndrome (wu et al. 2020; yang et al. 2020) . the typical radiologic findings are consolidations and ground glass opacities with a peripheral distribution.frequently, lung involvement is bilateral, with destruction of pulmonary parenchyma caused by consolidations and interstitial inflammation (chung et al. 2020) .as in all acutely ill respiratory patients, lung imaging is mandatory for assessment of disease severity and to guide clinical management. however, radiology societies have advised against the systematic use of computed tomography (ct) and have suggested reducing the number of chest x-rays (cxrs) in covid-19, to minimize the exposure of health care providers to this highly infective disease (simpson et al. 2020) . in this context, lung ultrasound (lus) could be the ideal imaging technique as it is available at the bedside, it is performed directly by the in-charge physicians and it provides reliable information for diagnosis and monitoring of arf (chiumello et al. 2018; mojoli et al. 2019; pescarissi et al. 2020) . the aim of our study was to test whether the systematic use of a lus-based approach could reduce the number of conventional radiologic exams during the covid-19 epidemic.we admitted the first covid-19 patient on february 21 and progressively transformed our intensive care unit (icu) into a coronavirus unit, reaching 100% of patients with covid-19 on march 6, 2020 (mojoli et al. 2020) . because our health care providers have high skills and experience in lus and habitually use ultrasound in daily management of arf patients, although in general integrated with traditional imaging, from the beginning we decided to use an lus-based approach. the aim of this selfimposed limitation was to minimize transport of covid-19 patients to the radiology department, reduce the number of bedside cxrs and therefore reduce the exposure of health care professionals. a complete 12-area examination, with computation of the lus score (mongodi et al. 2017) , is performed daily with a results concerning the use of traditional imaging are outlined in table 2 the main result of the present work is that a self-imposed lus-based approach reduces the number of cxrs and thoracic ct scans in covid-19 patients compared with standard arf patients; this implies that lus helps to reduce the need for transport of infectious patients to the radiology department and for bedside cxrs, thus reducing the number of health care providers exposed to possible contamination and sparing personal protective equipment.interestingly, in our center, not all patients with arf underwent at least one cxr and fewer than 1 in 3 underwent chest ct in the examined time frame in 2019. for many years, lus has been used in our center for the assessment and management of arf patients. even in the context where the use of conventional chest imaging had already been optimized by the daily practice of lus, a self-imposed lus-based approach could further reduce the number of conventional exams. the two covid-19 patients who underwent ct for lung assessment both had a condition preventing lus examination (i.e., subcutaneous emphysema and pneumomediastinum).as for limitations, first we analyzed only thoracic ct scans and cxrs, as no covid-19 patient required imaging other than thoracic, so far. second, the integration of lus findings in the management of arf requires well-trained physicians (rouby et al. 2019) . automation may be of help in the future to overcome this limitation for lung aeration quantification (brusasco et al. 2019; piculjan et al. 2019) . dear editors of kidney international, we read with concern the articles that report the presence of coronavirus in kidney based on electron microscopic evidence (1, 2) . neither article, in fact, demonstrates the presence of coronavirus in the kidney. the authors of one paper (1) show purported virus particles in the cytoplasm of kidney tubular epithelium and podocytes. these structures are not viral particles, but rather clathrin-coated vesicles, normal cell organelles involved in intracellular transport. the objects in figs a, b (~60 nm) are somewhat smaller than coronaviruses (~80 to140+ nm), but more importantly, their "spikes" (peplomers) are in contact with the cytosol, as are those on clathrin-coated vesicles; the larger particle in d also has spikes that are touching cytosol and does not have a dense core. coronaviruses, on the other hand, have their projections either facing the extracellular space between cells or the space inside vacuoles within the cells (3, 4, 5) . this phenomenon is due to the fact that coronaviruses receive their outer covering by budding into or upon cellular membranes, thereby forming intracellular vacuoles with the viral projections in contact with the vacuolar content, not the cytosol. during assembly, viral structural proteins are incorporated into the endoplasmic reticulum-golgi complex of the infected cell, and viral rna, packaged with another protein, buds into these membranes, forming a membrane-bound sac containing mature virions; the spikes are on the outside of the virion, but inside the vacuole and not in direct contact with the cytosol (fig 1) . these virions get out of the cell by exocytosis knowledge of virus morphology and morphogenesis, as well as of cellular architecture, is necessary to distinguish viral pathogens from normal subcellular organelles. this distinction is frequently difficult, since numerous cellular components can masquerade as viruses (7, 8, 9) . s evere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 , the causative agent of coronavirus disease , is presumed to spread primarily via respiratory droplets and close contact. however, these transmission modes do not explain all cases.to determine how the virus may have spread among a cluster of covid-19 cases associated with a shopping mall in wenzhou (a city with 8 million residents), china, we monitored and traced close contacts and hypothesized possible transmission modes. we analyzed clinical and laboratory data for cases by using real-time reverse transcription pcr (1). the study was approved with written consent from the ethics committee of wenzhou central hospital and written informed consent from all case-patients.on january 20, 2020, a 23-year-old man (patient e) sought care at a hospital after 11 days of fever and headache. on january 21, covid-19 was confirmed for patient e and his co-worker, patient g. the wenzhou center for disease control and prevention traced and tested their contacts, and by january 28, covid-19 was confirmed for 7 persons (patients a-g) from the same office (on floor 7).patient a, a 30-year-old woman, the only case-patient who indicated that she had been in wuhan, china, returned from wuhan on december 18, 2019. on january 15-16, 2020, she had a fever, but symptoms resolved without treatment. despite symptom resolution, on january 30 she was confirmed to have sars-cov-2 infection. if patient a is the index patient, infected in wuhan, her incubation period would have been 28 days, which would be extremely long, according to updated information (w.j. guan et al., unpub. data, https://www. medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.02.06.20020974v1). asymptomatic carrier transmission has been reported for sars-cov-2 (2); hence, patient a could have been screened as a close contact during her incubation period and then hospitalized on the basis of a positive test (pcr) result only. however, her clinical symptoms did not appear until after hospitalization. because persons with asymptomatic covid-19 can spread the virus, patient a also could have been an asymptomatic carrier with a persistent infection (3).on january 22, the mall was shut down. during january 19-february 9, covid-19 was diagnosed for 7 mall staff from floors b1-3 and for 10 mall customers. close contacts associated with the mall were traced, and covid-19 was confirmed for 11 persons. sixteen patients had had direct contact with other patients or had gone shopping in the mall. the average incubation period was 7.3 (range 1-17) days.the mall has 8 floors above ground and several basement levels; floors b1 to 6 are commercial shopping space, and floor 7 contains shopping and office space. we created an illustration showing the floors where the eventual covid-19 case-patients worked or shopped, along with dates of symptom onset, potential incubation periods, symptom durations, confirmed times of positive diagnosis, and times of discharge (figure 1, panel a) . except for those who had been on floor 7, all other case-patients denied direct close contact with other casepatients. the possibility of customers being infected from other sources cannot be excluded. however, most customers reported early symptom onset in a concentrated time frame (figure 1, panel b) . we found no convincing evidence of definitive transmission pathways in this building. patients a-g (figure 1, panel a) worked in the same room on floor 7. other case-patients who had been on other floors denied any direct contact with confirmed patients from floor 7, but they shared common building facilities (e.g., restrooms, elevators). also, staff from floor 7 visited shops on other floors daily.until now, no evidence has shown that sars-cov-2 can survive outside the body for long. however, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus demonstrates high robustness and a strong capability to survive outside the body and can remain infectious for up to 60 minutes after aerosolization (4) . hence, the rapid spread of sars-cov-2 in our study could have resulted from spread via fomites (e.g., elevator buttons or restroom taps) or virus aerosolization in a confined public space (e.g., restrooms or elevators). all case-patients other than those on floor 7 were female, including a restroom cleaner, so common restroom use could have been the infection source. for case-patients who were customers in the shopping mall but did not report using the restroom, the source of infection could have been the elevators. the guangzhou center for disease control and prevention detected the nucleic acid of sars-cov-2 on a doorknob at a patient's house (5), but wenzhou center for disease control and prevention test results for an environmental sample from the surface of a mall elevator wall and button were negative.we cannot exclude the possibility of unknown infected persons (e.g., asymptomatic carriers) spreading the virus. however, according to screening protocols implemented by the wenzhou center for disease control and prevention, we traced all close contacts and included all patients with positive pcr results, including the asymptomatic carrier (patient a), in this study. our findings appear to indicate that low intensity transmission occurred without prolonged close contact in this mall; that is, the virus spread by indirect transmission.during december 2019, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) emerged in wuhan, china and spread among humans in china and other countries [1, 2] . global attention was soon focused on this virus due to the rapidly increasing number of confirmed cases [3] . sars-cov-2 infection may result in severe and even fatal respiratory diseases [4] . as of march 13, 2020, 132,536 confirmed cases have been reported in 123 countries with 4,947 deaths [5] . despite the rapid spread of the disease worldwide, the clinical characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) remain largely unclear. furthermore, there are no directly antiviral drugs for covid- 19 .several studies have reported the clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients who were hospitalized in wuhan (the outbreak center of the infection) [4, 6, 7] . huang et al. first reported 41 cases of covid-19 and most patients had a history of exposure to huanan seafood market in wuhan [6] . fever and cough were the most common symptoms [6] . 13 (32%) patients were admitted to an intensive care unit (icu) due to the severity of disease and six (15%) patients died [6] . chen et al. conducted a retrospective, single-center study which included 99 confirmed cases of covid-19 in wuhan and found that the virus was more likely to infect older men with comorbidities, and the mortality rate was as high as 11% [4] . another single-center study which analyzed 138 hospitalized patients with confirmed covid-19 in wuhan, found that 26% of patients received icu care and the mortality rate was only 4.3% [7] .although several studies have reported the clinical manifestations and short-term prognosis of covid-19, the source of cases in majority of these studies was from a single center in wuhan. the characteristics of the disease and risk factors of severe illness among inpatients in other parts of china outside wuhan were still lacking. chang et al. reported early clinical features of 13 patients with confirmed covid-19 who were admitted to hospitals in beijing, china [8] . in their study, all the patients recovered indicating milder clinical presentation caused by infections [8] . however, the sample size was very small with only inclusion of 13 patients and the study was limited by the lack of detailed data since patients were transferred to the designated hospitals after diagnosis [8] . xu et al. summarized the clinical characteristics of 62 patients in zhejiang province, which revealed that the symptoms of patients were relatively mild [9] . however, only 62 patients were included in the study and risk factors for severe illness could not be analyzed due to the limitation of sample size [9] . nevertheless, these studies provide important evidence that the clinical characteristics of patients outside wuhan may differ from those initially reported in wuhan.in this multi-center study, we aimed to describe the clinical characteristics of covid-19 and to identify the risk factors of severe illness among inpatients with confirmed covid-19 in jiangsu province, which is located in the east of china. 1) .data of the confirmed covid-19 patients were collected from january 22, 2020 to february 10, 2020. the 8 designated hospitals are responsible for the treatment of covid-19 clinical findings of covid-19 patients in jiangsu patients in jiangsu province, china, assigned by the chinese government. all confirmed patients were diagnosed based on the criterion of world health organization (who) interim guidance [10] . the study was approved by the institutional ethics board of these hospitals, with a waiver of informed consent.all the medical records of confirmed cases were reviewed by more than two health care workers in each medical center. the data of epidemiology, clinical laboratory, radiology, treatment, and prognosis were collected from medical records. the demographic characteristics, comorbidities, exposure history, symptoms, signs, laboratory data, radiological data, treatment data, and outcomes were collected. all data were entered into a computerized database for further analysis. different researchers preformed the cross check of the data to avoid errors. unclear information was further clarified by directly contacting the specific clinicians who were responsible for the patients. the diagnostic criteria of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), acute cardiac injury, acute renal injury and acute liver injury were based on the corresponding guidelines [11] [12] [13] [14] . additionally, treatment medication and outcomes of the enrolled cases were also collected based on the medical records. the criteria for discharge was based on the guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus infection by the chinese national health commission (trial version 5) [15] . patients were grouped into severe and non-severe covid-19 according to the same guidelines [15] .all patients were confirmed by throat swab sample obtained from the upper respiratory tract and detected by a real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) in accordance with the protocol by the world health organization [16] .the positive throat swab samples were confirmed by both hospitals and local centers for disease control and prevention. these routine laboratory tests were detected according to the state of disease, including blood routine tests, liver function, renal function, coagulation function, inflammatory biomarkers and myocardial enzymes. radiological assessments including chest x-ray or chest computed tomography (ct) were performed for each patient.continuous variables were described as medians (interquartile range (iqr)), and categorical variables were presented as the counts and percentages. continuous variables were compared by the independent group t tests (normal distribution) and mann-whitney u (non-normal distribution). categorical variables were compared by chi-square or fisher exact test. the risk factors for severe illness were analyzed by binary logistic regression. variables having p values <0.05 in the univariate analysis were further used for a multivariate logistic regression analysis. p<0.05 was regarded to be statistically significant. the data analysis was performed by spss version 22.0 software (spss inc., chicago, il, united states). distribution map was plotted by qgis version 3.10.2 (qgis development team, open source geospatial foundation project).a total of 202 admitted patients who were identified as covid-19 were included in the study. the median age of the patients was 44.0 (iqr 33.0-54.0) years ( although only 3 (1.5%) patients had direct exposure to huanan seafood market, 84 (41.6%) patients visited hubei province and 92 (45.5%) patients had contact with people who visited hubei province after the onset of the covid-19 epidemic. 98 (48.5%) patients had known contact with suspected or confirmed cases. however, 32 (15.8%) patients did not report any known contact with hubei. the median time from symptom onset to admission was 5.0 days (iqr 2.0-7.0 days). age ( 23 (11.4%) of the patients developed severe illness in our study. the age of severe patients was comparable with non-severe patients (median age 49.0 yr vs. 44.0 yr, p = 0.066) and the bmi index of severe patients was higher than non-severe patients (median bmi, 26.4 kg/m 2 vs. 24.2 kg/m 2 , p = 0.004). nearly half (44.4%) of the severe patients were obese (bmi � 28 kg/ m 2 ) compared to only 10.4% of the non-severe patients. furthermore, more severe patients had history of type 2 diabetes (34.8% vs. 6.1%, p<0.001). more non-severe patients contacted with suspected or confirmed patients than severe patients (51.4% vs. 26.1%, p = 0.022).the most common symptoms at onset of illness were fever (156 [ compared to non-severe patients, severe patients presented higher percentage of shortness of breath (7.3% vs. 26.1%, p = 0.004), lower lymphocytes (median 0.8 ×10 9 /l vs. 1.2×10 9 /l, p<0.001) and albumin (alb) levels (median 38.1 g/l vs. 41.1 g/l, p = 0.002). however, prothrombin time was not significantly different between severe patients (median 12.3 s) and non-severe patients (median 12.8 s, p = 0.089). the proportion of patients with crp < 10mg/ l, 10-50mg/l, and � 50mg/l were 40.0%, 30.0%, and 30.0% in severe patients, while patients with crp < 10mg/l, 10-50mg/l, and � 50mg/l account for 65.3%, 30.6%, and 4.0% in nonsevere patients, respectively. more patients showed elevated crp in severe patients than nonsevere patients (p<0.001). furthermore, severe patients had higher fasting blood glucose (median 6.5 mmol/l) as compared with non-severe patients (median 5.7 mmol/l, p = 0.009).on admission, abnormalities of chest ct examinations were detected in 193 (95.5%) patients. out of 193 patients, 158 (78.2%) had bilateral involvement, and 149 (73.8%) had ground glass opacity (table 2) . bilateral pneumonia was more commonly observed in severe patients (95.7%) than non-severe patients (76.0%, p = 0.031). representative chest ct findings for a 30-year-old man on admission to the hospital were shown in fig 2. bilateral ground-glass opacities were observed in both lungs on admission (fig 2) .oxygen therapy was required in 109 (54.0%) patients and non-invasive mechanical ventilation was required in 9 (4.5%) patients. none of the patients required intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation. 196 (97.0%) patients received antiviral therapy (lopinavir/ritonavir, 89.1%; interferon α-2b, 59.9%; arbidol, 29.2%; oseltamivir, 15.8%). 149 (73.8%) patients were administered with empirical antibiotic treatment. additionally, sixty-four (31.7%) patients were given corticosteroids and 31 (15.3%) patients were given gamma globulin. (table 4 ).our study provides a comprehensive description of the clinical characteristics of laboratoryconfirmed cases of covid-19, and the risk factors for severe covid-19 in 202 cases from 8 designated hospitals in 8 cities of jiangsu province, china. consistent with the study by wang et al., about half of the patients in our study were male [7] . these data differ from the recent report by huang et al. and chen et al. which showed sars-cov-2 is more likely to infect male [4, 6] . one possible explanation is that more covid-19 patients in the previous report had an exposure history of the huanan seafood market in wuhan, and most of patients tended to be male workers [7] . however, only 1.5% of patients in our study had known contact with huanan seafood market. the median age of the patients was 44 years and only 12.9% of the patients aged over 60 years. 27.2% of the patients had chronic comorbidities. several studies suggested that sars-cov-2 is more likely to infect elder adult males with chronic comorbidities [4, 7, 17] . however, our study indicated that patients at a wide age range can be infected by sars-cov-2. recently, wei et al. even reported nine infants infected by sars-cov-2 [18] . although 15.8% of the patients did not report any known contact with wuhan-related people, the majority of patients in our study were wuhanrelated which indicated the epidemiology are important for the diagnosis of covid-19 for patients outside wuhan.consistent with two recent reports, fever and cough were the common symptoms whereas other symptoms such as diarrhea were much rare [4, 6] . however, our study found that 22.8% of the patients were afebrile on admission. the percentage of patients with fever was lower than the previous study which was ranged from 83% to 98.6% [7] . thus, the afebrile patients with an epidemiological link of the disease should be also suspected for covid-19. compared with symptoms of non-severe patients, shortness of breath was more common in severe patients. the most common laboratory abnormalities observed in this study were decreased white blood cells and lymphocyte counts as well as increased crp and ldh levels. compared to non-severe patients, severe patients had laboratory abnormalities such as lower lymphocytes and alb levels as well as higher ldh and cpr levels. the onset of symptoms and laboratory abnormalities on admission may help the physicians identify the covid-19 patients who likely develop severe illness and provide better supportive care. currently, except for meticulous supportive care, no specific treatment has been recommended for covid-19. although antibacterial agents are ineffective for covid-19, over 70% of the patients in this study still receive antibacterial agents. about 90% of the patients received antiviral therapy, such as atomized inhalation of interferon α-2b, lopinavir/ritonavir, arbidol, and oseltamivir. the benefit of the antiviral agents for covid- 19 is not yet clear and deserves further investigation. 31.7% of the patients used corticosteroids during the treatment, especially for severe patients (78.3%). although some experts recommend the prudently use of short courses of corticosteroids at low-to-moderate doses for critically ill patients with covid-19, the use of corticosteroids remains controversial in covid-19 [19] . moreover, the optimal time, dose and duration of corticosteroids for patients with covid- 19 are not yet clear and need to be evaluated by randomized controlled trials to provide a more solid evidence for treatment recommendations in the future. gamma globulin was also used for the treatment of covid-19 and severe patients were more likely to receive gamma globulin treatment. however, the efficacy of gamma globulin for covid-19 remains controversial. 23 (11.4%) patients were identified as severe illness cases in our study which is lower than the previous study (15.7%) [20] . the icu admission (5.4%) was also lower as compared with the previous studies which ranged from 26.1% to 32% [6, 7] . as of february 10, 2020, no patients died in our study. the mortality rate in our study is significantly lower than patients in wuhan as previously reported which ranged from 4.3% to 15% [6, 7] . wu et al. also reported only 1 of 62 patients was transferred to an icu and no patient died in zhejiang province [9] . the possible interpretation of the mild disease and better outcomes in our study may be that the patients were younger than previous reports. the elderly people may have an increased risk of coexisting disorders and are more susceptible to developing severe forms of disease than younger people [21, 22] . indeed, less patients had comorbidities (27.2%) in our study as compared with the previous reports (32.0%-46.4%) [4, 6, 7] . the median time from symptom onset to admission was 5.0 days which is also shorter than the previous studies (7.0 days) [6, 7] . thus, early diagnosis and prompt care of the covid-19 patients might also together contribute to the significant reduction in mortality rate in our study [20] . early identification of patients with severe illness is important for the management of patients with covid-19. we conducted univariate and multivariate analysis for risk factors of covid-19 patients with severe illness on admission. for the first time, we identified the obesity (bmi over 28 kg/m 2 ) and a history of type 2 diabetes as two independent risk factors of severe illness, suggesting that the metabolic conditions was associated the severity of covid-19. in the previous study, metabolic syndrome-related conditions such as diabetes and obesity were also demonstrated to be etiologically linked to middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) pathogenesis [23] . these disorders were reported to down regulate some key mediators of host immune response to pathogenesis [23, 24] . previous study found that a known history of type 2 diabetes was also an independent predictor of death and morbidity in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) [25] . whether the obesity and known history of type 2 diabetes could predict the fatal outcome of patients with covid-19 deserves further investigation.this study has several limitations. first, only 202 patients with confirmed covid-19 were included from eight cities of jiangsu province. it would be better to include as many as possible patients in jiangsu province to get more comprehensive understanding of covid-19 outside wuhan. moreover, we only included patients with laboratory confirmed cases. the suspected but undiagnosed cases were not included in the present study. as of february 10, 2020, 515 confirmed cased have been reported in jiangsu province [5] . in fact, about a half of the confirmed cases were included in our present study. thus, our study is very representative. second, clinical outcomes of the remaining 165 hospitalized patients were not available at the time of analysis. thus, we could not assess the risk factors for poor outcomes of patients. however, this multicenter study provides an early assessment of the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 outside wuhan, china.in conclusion, covid-19 patients in jiangsu province were less severe and have improved prognosis than the initial covid-19 patients as previously reported in wuhan indicating that mild cases might already have occurred. a bmi > 28 kg/m 2 and a history of type 2 diabetes are independent risk factors for severe illness of covid-19. sustained intensive control efforts remain urgently needed to minimize the risk of covid-19. no current treatment or prophylaxis has proven to be effective in coronavirus disease 2019 , and patients receive either symptomatic treatment for milder presentations or more advanced life-support strategies in moderate to severe cases. as the global community eagerly awaits credible scientific solutions for this pandemic, researchers and scientists are under much pressure to identify effective therapeutic and preventive strategies for covid -19. this commentary focuses on the quality of current covid-19 research. we used published clinical studies on chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine as an example to demonstrate some of the methodological concerns around research currently conducted in the field.in recent weeks, academic journals and public media published and disseminated information on the use of quinine derivatives (i.e., chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine) (1, 2) for the treatment of covid-19. chloroquine has long been and still is used to prevent and treat malaria. whereas, hydroxychloroquine was first used to prevent and treat malaria and is currently used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, some symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and other autoimmune diseases.although ongoing clinical trials are testing the efficacy and safety of several treatments for covid-19, including chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, there is not yet credible evidence from clinical trials on the efficacy and safety of those agents in covid-19. most of the data released or published thus far on chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine, and covid-19 research in general, are imprecise and at high risk of biased estimates of effect. here lies our concern.this pandemic emergency is fraught with tremendous uncertainty about the evidence on treatment or prophylaxis. there are many unknowns, and the massive demand for evidence on the treatment of a novel disease like covid-19 may be unintentionally affecting studies' design and conduct. furthermore, it may inadvertently affect the peer-review and publication process, leading to significant methodology gaps and overall lower quality evidence on covid-19. these gaps lead to less informative studies, loss of precious time, and valuable resources. therefore, current research should balance feasibility and efficiency against methodological rigor and carefully address methodology gaps as much as possible. in order to support universal clinical decision-making and minimize harm, the research community should focus on conducting and publishing trust-worthy evidence. hypothesis generating studies are welcome and essential but should be explicitly framed as such, acknowledging their limitation, and not be used for critical decisions, at the national or global level.furthermore, experimental studies aiming to confirm or refute these observations should be supported. until there is a certainty, patients deserve, for themselves and for the sake of future patients, to be randomized in ethical and well-designed clinical trials. our concerns on the state of the chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine research thus far expand to the quality of research methodology we see spanning across covid-19 research. we sought to draw attention to this.to optimally inform our appraisal of the quality of covid-19 research, we searched the medline and embase electronic databases to identify clinical studies on the use of these agents in covid-19 (2019 to april 3 rd , 2020), finding 564 initial citations that were screened for eligibility, yielding six clinical studies judged eligible (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) .based on the quality of the evidence to date, can a clinical practice guideline issue any recommendations on the use of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine alone or combination with other treatments? the case has not been made either way for these quinine derivatives. the body of evidence thus far has been from both in vitro studies (2) (3) (4) and clinical studies (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) of sub-optimal methodological quality. the emerging clinical studies such as case-series, cohort studies, and randomized control trials (rcts), are all inconclusive; while some may suggest some benefit, the entire body of evidence does not reach the level of certainty and confidence that is required to justify the use of quinine derivatives as a treatment for covid-19 (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) . as exciting as some of these results may appear, the underlying research methodologies are often flawed, and as such, the reported results cannot be trusted. a most recent french prospective study (10) on the use of chloroquine in combination with azithromycin completely contradicts a prior french study asserting the benefit of the combination (8, 9) . when critically appraised using the appropriate risk of bias tools, all studies (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) have been classified as high risk of biased estimates of effect (11, 12) (table 1) . overall, the methodologies of the published studies are not robust, and the results are tempered by selection bias and residual confounding bias. at the design level, most studies lack the randomization and blinding/masking needed to generate sound evidence, when they are rcts and not observational uncontrolled single arm case-series. at the analysis level, they lack the standard steps taken to minimize confounding such as prospective design, statistical adjustment for prognostic factors, (propensity) matching, or stratification (13) . the reporting is very sparse, and patient-important outcomes needed for decision-making are often not studied or not reported. we do understand the urgency to identify effective treatments, as well as the barriers to perform rigorous research in health care settings overwhelmed by an unprecedented workload and a novel deadly disease. however, these unprecedented and unfortunate circumstances do not transform flawed data into sound results. the adequately powered, comparative, rigorous effectiveness research that is needed for optimal evidence-informed decision-making remains absent. researchers need to prioritize minimizing bias by randomizing a large enough number of patients and masking the treatment allocation as much as it is feasible, and fully accounting for all the patients enrolled in the study following the intention-to-treat analysis principle ( table 2 ). these critical components of high-quality, trustworthy research are required to generate high confidence that the estimates of effect reflect the true effects. at this time, more than ever, the high-quality, robust, comparative evidence from ethical randomized controlled trials (rcts) is urgently needed to assess patient-important outcomes, including mortality, morbidity, need for life support, safety, and toxicity, informing on the safe use of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine (with and without azithromycin) in people with covid-19.again, we make this clarion call across the breadth of covid-19 research, and across all research in general. of course, these studies will need to be fast, and even better, conducted in a flexible framework (such as adaptive trials) able to accommodate the adding of and switching to different treatments as soon the ones under study are proven ineffective or more promising alternatives are suggested. consideration of master protocols (harmonization of efforts) and adaptive trial designs become very important (16) . the world health organization (who) has advocated for randomized multi-center adaptive clinical trials to evaluate the efficacy and safety of investigational therapeutic agents in combination with standard-of-care for the treatment of hospitalized patients with novel coronavirus disease (covid-19) (17) . researchers aligning their methodology to who's master protocol will surely improve quality of the covid research (16, 17) . additionally, global research groups conducting clinical trials would help in disseminating their results by adhering to the consort (consolidated standards of reporting trials) checklist for optimal clinical trial reporting (15) and the strobe (strengthening the reporting of observational studies in epidemiology) statement that outlines the guidance for optimal reporting of observational studies (14) . this is critically important and especially in this covid-19 urgency when very serious national and global public health decisions are being made based on what information is shared (or not shared). evidence exists to show that clinical trial results are biased when the trials utilize inferior methodology or report findings without satisfactory description of the methods used. failing to conceal allocation of the generated sequence has been linked to an exaggeration of the effectiveness of 30% or greater (15) .the urgency of the covid-19 situation would also make it appropriate to be creative and move beyond the classical modalities and boundaries of academic research: what if a mobile app was made available by a respectable institution to allow randomizing any small number of consenting patients, collecting a small set of relevant covariates (age, sex, days since diagnosis, relevant comorbidities), by any doctor willing to participate in a chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine trial wherever the treatment is available for compassionate prescription (i.e. most of the world)? what if mortality in the two groups, masked as being treatment and control, was posted on a website every 100 patients reaching the outcome (recovered or dead) to transparently show if equipoise persists? what if the dataset at 1000 patients, or every 1000 patients if needed, was made publicly available for highly skilled statisticians to propose their interpretation? we would get 1000 patients every few days, and we would be receiving clinically sound results faster than any traditional study framework. of course, this flexibility may not warrant publication in a top tier journal but could save thousands of lives. we need to use the most optimal methodology and not compromise on rigor but be willing to think outside of the box.the outcomes being reported in the covid-19 research thus far are informative but are not ideally patient-important that could help in patient and clinician decision-making. in addition, research question gaps are glaring and future methodologically strong comparative research of quinines for covid-19 (as well as other drug treatments) should assess the following: 1) the net benefit ratio of chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine alone or in combination with other interventions; 2) specific subgroups classified by age, stage and severity of illness, and other potential effect modifiers; and 3) optimal dosing and timing of dosing. we do believe there is still full equipoise justifying the continued investigation of the role of chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine in studies in patients hospitalized with covid-19. caution is urged regarding large scale uptake of the treatment as open-label use of the drug.why extreme caution is urged in using chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, or any drug? we could be doing more harm than good.primum non nocere -first, do no harm. potential adverse effects, toxicities, and medication interactions must remain key considerations when using any drug, and chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine, in combination with azithromycin, are no exception. indeed, the evidence suggests that both drugs prolong the qt interval leading predisposing patients to serious arrhythmias (18) (19) (20) (21) . this is of particular concern when co-administering macrolides (azithromycin) (22) , also known to affect cardiac electrophysiology. indeed, the use of doxycycline (22) has been proposed in azithromycin's place. the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) has even warned the public that azithromycin (zithromax or zmax) can potentially cause irregular changes in the electrical activity of the heart and could lead to a potentially fatal irregular heart rhythm (23) . in this regard, researchers recently looked at 84 covid-19 infected patients who were administered a hydroxychloroquine/azithromycin combination (24) . they found that the qtc was prolonged maximally after 3-4 days from the beginning of treatment, and in 25 patients the qtc increased more than 40ms. they also found that in 9 patients (11%), the qtc increased to >500 ms, indicative of a high-risk group for arrhythmia.this issue of potential harmful effects and the urgent need for high-quality, methodologically robust studies also comes from a recent pre-publication (not yet peer-reviewed) of in vitro activity of hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine in combination with metformin (used in treatment of type 2 diabetes to lower blood sugar in humans) in mice (25) . researches reported that when hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine was combined with metformin as a possible anti-cancer drug, 30-40% of all mice died.until more high-quality evidence is available and particularly that excludes harm, caution is urged especially with combination therapy outside rcts. there must also be acute pharmacovigilance and monitoring of adverse drug reactions with regards to these and other drugs in covid-19 patients given so much in unknown.some countries have chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine readily available, in some cases as an overthe-counter medicine as they are required to treat common conditions. national authorities should be mindful of these situations and take measures to govern the use of these medicines and prevent dangerous self-medication. on the equity side, there is a concern of massive purchasing, including for both personal use and research, leading to possible shortage of supply. this can lead to treatment shortages for malaria and autoimmune diseases where there is confirmed benefit.the use of existing drug treatments such as chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine outside of current guidelines and recommendations may result in adverse effects, including serious illness and death, affect patients with other diseases who may benefit from its use, and hinder the ability to conduct clinical trials if there are high demands to sue these agents by clinicians and patients. toxic results from in vitro studies may not translate to toxicity in humans, but we caution that care must be exercised in extrapolating in vitro results before establishing clinical efficacy and safety (26) .in summary, while the massive effort in generating and disseminating evidence globally in response to covid-19 has to be applauded, the accumulated body of evidence thus far can at best be considered hypothesis generating due to the methodological flaws across covid clinical research. the methodological quality of ongoing and planned clinical research has to be urgently upgraded if the vast amount of time and resources are not to be squandered in this emergency. until availability of sound results from one or more covid-19 clinical trial (s) showing a favorable risk-benefit, caution is urged in considering indiscriminate use of these two drugs, alone or in association. public health authorities are urged to prioritize resources on those interventions that are currently recommended as standard of care and ensure that empirical clinical use or research on these medication does not endanger adequate supply for the patients that need it for conditions in which the efficacy is already known.declaration of interest:none to declare but note, most of the co-authors are heavily involved in guideline development as well as the grade working group, including the guide methods group out of mcmaster university, hamilton, ontario.roles in the study and manuscript: none for the project what is new?clinical decision-makers must be informed by the best, most trustworthy, highest-quality, robust evidence. this translates into how much confidence we can have in the research findings and thus be optimally informed for decision-making.the estimates of effect in clinical research depends on the underlying research methodology.covid-19 disease is presenting global health systems, clinicians, and patients grave challenges.no treatment or prophylaxis currently exists for covid-19.the overall body of covid-19 research is very flawed methodologically.an examination of hydroxychloroquine-azithromycin research findings due to the recent media focus revealed very low-quality methodology underpins the research.vast amounts of time and resources are being allocated to covid-19 research, and being potentially squandered.flawed methodology and sub-optimal reporting of research findings could lead to biased estimates of effect.this could lead to treatment decisions that are not optimal based on biased estimates which could harm the patient.this article provides specific suggestions for improving on the covid-19 methods and reporting with a focus on the issues that researchers must consider in their methodology and reporting if we are to have confidence in the estimates of effect.failure to consider harms in research could be detrimental to the patient. this article focuses on the potential harms when therapeutic agents such as hydroxychloroquine, are being considered.research thus far on finding an optimal therapeutic agent (s) for covid-19 could be hampered by methodologically flawed research.covid-19 researchers must immediately and acutely focus on improving their methodology and reporting.1none to declare but note, most of the co-authors are heavily involved in guideline development as well as the grade working group, including the guide methods group out of mcmaster university, hamilton, ontario.roles in the study and manuscript: none for the projectdoctors need to wear complete protective equipment when large numbers of patients flood into the emergency room. taiwan has so far managed to prevent a large scale community outbreak, city forces wearing face masks on public transportation, and keep social distancing to stem the virus from spreading. the protective device may be contaminated and must be replaced. in the situation of limited resources, how to take care of the physiological needs of the doctor without increasing the chance of contamination during replacement is a consideration. by reducing the chance of contamination during removal and storage, the previous designs were analyzed and improved. we proposed three improved designs to reduce the contact. design-a features a mask with a water channel that allows the user to remain hydrated without removing the cover. design-b has a folding pattern that hides the outer surface. design-c combines the mask with the brim of a cap which form an extended air-intake area. through understanding the problem, related product began distribute on the market, design-d extend the mask usages period with less contact.face mask designs following novel coronavirusthis paper proposes three mask improvement designs for both general users and hospital staff to reduce the chance of face mask contact transmission. influenza virus infection occurs through contact transmission between people. infectious diseases can spread through droplets, respiratory aerosols, or direct and indirect contact with contaminated surfaces. the effectiveness of face masks in disease prevention has been verified through research. 1 macintyre et al. examined the effect of surgical masks and handwashing on the prevention of influenza transmission. 2 public compliance with infection control measures is crucial. if a large number of people use masks during a severe pandemic, the spread of the epidemic is reduced. reducing exposure can reduce the spread of disease in public places such as schools. cauchemez et al. 3 have shown that holidays lead to a 20-29% reduction in the rate at which influenza is transmitted to children in school. face mask comfort is a key to public compliance with infection control measures. in a survey by purdy, 4 participants were asked to use a likert scale of 1-6 to assess the n95 filtering facepiece respirator (ffr) based on fitness, temperature, and respiratory comfort. 4 in terms of discomfort, warmth, and breathing comfort, fitness was rated the most important, and two-dimensional patterns expanded the mask area to cover the facial contours for individuals.the use of reusable cloth masks is widespread, particularly when surgical face masks are scarce, but there is no clinical guidance regarding their use. many people repeatedly use a mask every day, and the masks are repeatedly donned and doffed, placing their users at risk of contact transmission. masks are often placed in a purse or pocket, further compromising their cleanliness. 5 people feel using a face mask is uncomfortably humid and inconvenient for inhalation. in a previous evaluation of mask contact diffusion, individuals who donned and doffed a face mask during a simple task polluted an average area of 530 square centimeters. 6a novel coronavirus was eventually identified on 1 january 2020, who had set up the imst (incident management support team) across the three levels of the organization. 7 virus can be transmitted even during the incubation period. as a result, asymptomatic carriers may still pass the disease to other people. some patients exhibit normal temperatures, and there are many milder cases. medical practitioners are required to wear complete protective equipment when large numbers of patients flood into the emergency room. if the face mask is removed while going to the restroom or drinking water, this protective suit may be contaminated. in a situation with limited resources, it is essential to take care of one's physiological needs without contamination.taiwan has so far managed to prevent a large scale community outbreak, city forces wearing face masks on public transportation, and keep social distancing to stem the virus from spreading. when asked by fox news reporter, gates highlighted taiwan as an exemplary country because it quickly 8 identified the problem and initiated community-wide testing early on and reduced the disease burden.taiwan had learned valuable lessons from the sars outbreak in 2003. a centralized cecc command center led the actions and resource allocation and the necessity to be highly skeptical of data and information when an explosion begins. the central epidemicwe demonstrated the potential for facemask contact to transmit viruses among staff and people. after an investigation of the existing product and patent database, we redesign the mask that could reduce contact transmission with a low-cost approach. through understanding the problem, product-related improvements have already begun in the market, these designs also extend the mask usages period during daily work or a hospital visit. in this article we reviewed the process of finding problems and needs. designers connect needs with product features through creativity. the process of exploring solutions requires a combination of domain knowledge.command center (cecc) announced standards for the suspension of classes. high schools and below will shut down for 14 days based on following rules: i) if one teacher or student is listed as a confirmed case of covid-19 by the cecc, their classes will be suspended; ii) if two or more teachers or students are confirmed to have contracted the disease, all courses in the entire school will be suspended; iii) if one-third of schools in a township or city shut down due to infections, all schools will be closed.the coronavirus is spread through coughing or sneezing or by touching an infected person. commuters are particularly at risk, since they travel with large crowds in enclosed spaces, and subway handrails may spread the virus through contact transmission. 9, 10 there is also a risk of the virus adhering to the car doors and elevator buttons. people cannot avoid the germs that touch their hands and masks, which puts them under substantial psychological and physiological pressure.relevant literature on masks is mainly in the product catalog or patent database. let's summarize them separately from below.several variations on the standard surgical face mask are currently offered by companies. halyard health face masks offer several features and levels of protection. the materials and donning attachments are sonically bonded, and a nose piece assists the mask in conforming to the contours of the face (figure 1 ). most surgical face masks contain an adjustable iron wire which is bent with finger pressure to fix its shape close to the bridge of the nose. this one-dimensional fixation creates a gap when the mask moves. figure 1a also shows an adjustable nose bridge design that maintains a closer fit to the user's face. three charging techniques (viz., corona charging, tribocharging, and electrostatic fiber spinning) were used to charge fibers or fabrics of different polymer types. 11 electrostatic charging technology enables regular masks to filter more air particles. figure 1b shows an extended surgical mask designed with respiratory comfort concerns in mind. a flat-fold design protects against airborne biological particles and serves as a respirator. the three-panel, low-profile n95 particulate respirator mask features a soft cover and nose clip. the mask is opened by pulling up and down, and closed in the opposite way. however, although it is folded vertically, the front outer surface is still touchable during donning and doffing. many existing product designs are based on considerations of filtering performance and suitability for individual face shapes. figure 1c is a design with an elongated elastic restraint. a three-dimensional mask increases the protection of the mask and is convenient to carry. 13 figure 1d shows the upper section and the lower sections are respectively lifted away from the middle to form a three-dimensional shape. the sheet is bent along the first fold line and toward the opposite surface to facilitate carrying. the packaging of the snack face mask is easily opened for fast use (figure 1e ). the packaging is part of the mask, so it does not come into contact with the outside world when it is folded. although there are different folding methods for each design, there is no product that can avoid outer layer contact completely.the elongated hexagon-shaped portion of the face mask has a clear surface. 13 another patent features a gathered peripheral bottom, which provides an air-tight seal under the face. 14 greenblat 15 proposed a mask with a unique shape design which decreases in volume when folded with a joint style. nilsson et al. 16 proposed a cone-shaped tent structure with forward-extending support with an additional air valve device used to reduce the difficulty of inhalation. wang altered the periphery of the breathing area with a compressible gasket and a three-dimensional sealing structure to abut the user's face. 17 a tight seal is necessary between the face and the mask when worn. if it is not tight enough, contaminants may be inhaled by the user. m563890 is a narrow strip mask with reinforced covering. 18 the m464196 folding three-dimensional mask folds to make a three-dimensional mask with a larger exhalation space. 19 since the lower edge of the upper mask portion is engaged with the upper edge of the symmetrical mask portion, mutual contact is ensured to improve safety. after the patent database survey, we did not find a model that could completely prevent the outer layer from contacting contaminants after folding."design thinking" has generated significant attention in the business press and has been heralded as a novel problem solving methodology well suited to the often cited challenges designers face in encouraging innovation. 20 the solid background of knowledge help starts to "think alternative ways to view the problem." after the team member identifies innovative solutions, the prototype is used to redefine one or further problems.li 21 proposed six rules for innovation, which used in different fields such as advertising, commerce, engineering, and design. the six rules are reverse, transfer, combination, reduction, change of direction, and extension. the rules were applied to the development of mask redesign. their contents are: during the design process, the designer needs to think about possible situations and parameters repeatedly and pick the appropriate settings to reduce the time spent on attempts. the design flow is, firstly, i) we look for problems and available materials, ii) we observe the medical characteristics through a simplified model, and iii) we try to find appropriate implement way. secondly, concept drawings provided by the design group and screened based on producibility. in a medical design, the designer needs to extend his knowledge through international regulations such as iso, mdr and fda. the mdr sets high standards for ensuring reliable data are generated from clinical investigations. 22 recently, fda recommendation on device reuse, so that developing cost-effective reusable face masks for the public is essential. the 510(k) submission of surgical mask evaluates medical devices for marketing to ensure they are safe and effective. ultraviolet germicidal irradiation, microwave-generated steaming, and dry heating were tested in reducing or inactivating viral and bacterial pathogens. 23 a costeffective full-face mask was developed to support safety of stuff. 24 in this urgent need of the epidemic, it also urged the creation of improved mask design. designers can develop concepts firmly and realize ideas through cross-domain cooperation.through thinking about the real-life environment situation, brainstorming between medical consultants and designers, we selected ideas and presented three realistic and feasible ideas below.caregivers must wear n95 masks before entering closed spaces. because the mask isolates the virus from the user via the surface layer, touching the mask with hands is dangerous. after a sneeze, droplets soak through the mask, and other individuals have the chance to be infected. in addition, when caregivers remove their masks to drink water, they put themselves at risk of infection. design-a aims to reduce mask removal and infection chance during drinking. the creative rules applied are: reverse-drink water without taking off your mask; transfer-transfer the pet cap to the mask; extension-drink water with an extension straw. medical staff can drink water safely and conveniently without removing their masks. a water bag will engage the inlet on the front of the cover ( figure  2 ). the flange of the water bag can be extended to the user's lips, and the water outlet does not touch the outer surface of the mask while drinking which avoids the risk of contact transmission.after taking off their masks, most subjects carry them in purses or pockets. the hands touch the contaminated areas on the mask and the outer edge of the mask also touch the interior of the purse or pocket. therefore, it is crucial to minimize the chances of contacting the outer edge of the mask. design-b can be folded in a w shape so that the outer part of the mask faces inward and reduces contact transmission (figure 3a) . when the mask is unfolded, a three-dimensional convex surface is formed over the nose (figure 3 b,c) which increases the available area for inhalation. the creative rules applied are: reverse-change of direction, outer surface facing inward; transfertechniques of origami; reduction-reduce the chance of hand contact.because people often do not wear masks when going out, design-c (figure 4 ) combines the mask with the brim of a cap. the design usually acts as a hat, and when needed, the user pulls down the headband, which is made of a flexible material. at this time, the mask and the brim form a sizeable three-dimensional space, and it is easy for the user to breathe with a large area of air intake. when the mask is doffed and folded, the user holds the headband of the cap to avoid contact transmission. the creative rules applied are: reverse-cap front edge elastic can be pulled down; combine-mask combines with hat; change direction-pull down; extension-increase front end size. a major epidemic makes people aware of the importance of avoiding contact and related improvements have distributed in local market. the design-d (figure 5a ) added a breathable thin cloth cover outside the mask, the outer surface of the cover is in contact with the virus, and the inner surface is in contact with the mouth foam; after using for a period of time, remove the cover to wash and dry to increase the use time of the mask. figure 5b shows a foldable box. after removing the mask, the outer surface folds inwards; place the mask in the protective shell with an elastic band to close the protective shell and put it in the pocket. this avoids the opportunity for the outside of the mask to contact the body and clothing. the creative rules applied are: reverse-mask with another mask; combination-mask combines with package; change direction-the outer surface facing inward to reduce contact.the current coronavirus epidemic has increased the need for face masks and respirators that can be used without increasing the chances of contact transmission. residents who live in affected areas are at risk of infection from close contact with other residents, especially during their daily commute. in addition, it is nearly impossible to avoid contact with pathogens on face masks and hands. current face mask patent designs do not protect the outer layer of the mask from outside pathogens after they have been folded.as a result, we propose three improved mask designs to reduce the chances of infection from direct contact. design-a features a mask with a water channel which allows the user to remain hydrated without removing the mask. design-b has a folding pattern which hides the outer mask surface and reduces contact transmission. design-c combines the mask with the brim of a cap. the mask and the brim form an extended air-intake area for easier breathing. the design-d shows related improvements distributed in local market which reduce the chance of mask contact with users' body and clothing. an epidemic makes us aware of the detail living behaviors which strengthen public health. beginning in december 2019, the 2019 novel coronavirus disease (covid- 19) has caused a pneumonia epidemic in wuhan, china, and as of this writing is rapidly spreading throughout the whole world, particularly in italy and the united states.the clinical spectrum of covid-19 disease appears wide, encompassing asymptomatic infection, mild upper respiratory tract infection, and severe pneumonia with respiratory failure, with many patients being hospitalized and requiring subintensive or intensive care [1à3] .the majority of severe complications and deaths are reported among older patients with evidence of underlying illness such as cardiovascular, liver, kidney disease, or cancer [1à4] . several factors leading to the progression of covid-19 pneumonia have been identified [5] . in addition to age, smoking status, maximum body temperature, respiratory failure, c-reactive protein, and serum albumin have been shown to be independent prognostic markers [5] . although albumin is not exclusively dependent on nutritional status, it is part of several nutritional screening indices and is associated with nutritional conditions [6] . interestingly, low prealbumin levels, another marker of malnutrition, have been demonstrated to predict the progression to respiratory failure and mechanical ventilation [7] . this evidence strengthens the concept that nutritional derangements should be systematically and urgently managed in patients affected by covid-19, also considering that the immune response has been shown to be weakened by inadequate nutrition [8, 9] .the few available articles that mentioned supportive care in covid-19 recommend that nutritional status should be evaluated in all infected patients at hospital admission [10, 11] and patients at nutritional risk should receive nutritional support as early as possible, particularly increasing protein intake by oral nutritional supplements (ons) [11] . they also underline that even patients with covid-19 who are not at risk for malnutrition should maintain adequate protein (1.5 g/d) and calorie (25à30 kcal/d) intake [11] and that several vitamins and nutrients may have the potential to benefit infected patients due to their anti-inflammatory and antioxidants properties [10] .given the above and considering the well-known deleterious consequences of malnutrition [12] , which can be prevented or contained by prompt nutritional support [13] , and having in mind the peculiarities of the intensive care unit (icu) setting, we are presenting our shared pragmatic protocol for early nutritional supplementation of non-icu patients hospitalized for covid-19.we are aware that our simplified and direct approach may be debatable, as it may not appear to be in complete agreement with the current guidelines on clinical nutrition [14] . however, to cope with the current emergency crisis, its principal aim is to promptly and pragmatically implement nutritional care in hospitalized non-icu covid-19 patients, which might be overlooked despite being potentially beneficial to clinical outcomes and effective in preventing the consequences of malnutrition in this patient population. guidelines are based on the best available scientific evidence. therefore, our protocol should not be considered as guidelines, but rather as the practical implementation of the need to provide nutritional care given the current clinical and organizational situations.the early nutritional supplementation protocol is summarized in figure 1 . it is based on the observation that almost all hospitalized patients present at admission with severe inflammation and anorexia leading to a major reduction of food intake, and that a substantial percentage of them develops respiratory failure requiring non-invasive ventilation (niv) or even continuous positive airway pressure (cpap) in a few days.specific high-calorieàdense diets in a variety of different textures and consistencies with highly digestible foods and snacks (yogurt, custard, fruit mousse, sliced fruit, soft cheese, etc.) are available for all hospitalized patients, to favor the maintenance/increase of protein-calorie intake. however, we are unfortunately recording a significant number of patients reporting severe eating difficulties as a consequence of the symptoms. hence, beyond a simplified nutritional risk screening procedure and biochemical nutritional markers ( fig. 1) , we decided to start with a systematic supplementation of oral whey proteins (20 g/d) and intravenous multivitamin, multimineral, trace elements solutions (target: satisfaction of recommended dietary allowance [rda]) upon admission). the choice of whey proteins is based on their anabolic and antioxidant properties combined with high digestibility [15, 16] . their potential clinical benefits have been underlined in cancer cachexia [17] and have been recently shown in a randomized controlled trial with malnourished advanced cancer patients conducted by our group [18] . whey proteins also have immunomodulatory properties [19] and potential antiviral activity [20] . furthermore, whey protein supplementation has been associated with improved immune recovery in patients with hiv during the first 3 mo of antiretroviral treatment (art) [21] .the straight intravenous supplementation of multivitamin, multimineral, trace element solutions aimed at satisfying rda is due to the consideration of their antioxidant properties and that specific vitamin and micronutrient deficits have been shown to be harmful during viral infections [22à36]. although we are aware that this approach is not precise, as it should be ideally guided by singular vitamin and micronutrient assessment, we think that it may be beneficial, with very limited risk for harm secondary to overdosing in consideration of the dosages used.in the presence of 25-hydroxyvitamin d (25[oh]d) deficit, cholecalciferol is promptly supplied according to blood tests results (50 000 ui/wk if 25(oh)d <20 ng/ml; 25 000 ui/wk if 25(oh)d 20 to <30 ng/ml). the particular focus on vitamin d is justified by the increasing evidence that its supplementation and restoration to normal values in infected patients may improve immunologic recovery during art, reduce levels of inflammation and immune activation, and increase immunity against pathogens [37à41].if nutritional risk is detected by the simplified screening procedure ( fig. 1) , two to three bottles (125/200 ml/d) of protein-calorie ons (600à900 kcal/d; 35à55 g/d of proteins) are provided to patients, to be consumed between or immediately after meals. if ons are not tolerated (i.e., <2 bottles/d are consumed for 2 consecutive days) and/or respiratory conditions are worsening (i.e.: niv or cpap are expected to be necessary), supplemental/total parenteral nutrition (pn) is prescribed by the clinical nutrition and dietetics unit, which plans blood tests and glucose monitoring.the preference of pn over enteral nutrition (en), which may certainly be debatable, is due to the consideration that the presence of a nasogastric tube (ngt) may result in air leakage and compromise the effectiveness of niv or cpap and that, particularly in this emergency scenario, special niv masks with a port for ngt are rarely available [42] . positive pressure ventilation through a face mask may also result in gastric distention, which may adversely affect diaphragmatic function, further compromising the respiratory conditions. receiving en during niv was associated with a significantly higher rate of airway complications and longer niv duration compared with patients who did not receive en [43] and there is currently no validated strategy to reduce the critical complications of en among patients with niv or cpap [44] . moreover, in a randomized trial conducted in an icu setting, which compared early pn with en in critically ill shocked patients, the en group had higher cumulative incidences of vomiting, diarrhea, and other gastrointestinal complications, whereas no differences in mortality rates were detected [45] . a further consideration regarding the choice of pn is that patients receiving art, which is currently being used in covid-19 disease, are frequently likely to experience diarrhea that can contribute to treatment interruption [46, 47] and further worsen nutrient absorption. finally, it has been shown that gastrointestinal symptoms are frequently reported in covid-19, particularly by patients with rapid progression and worse outcome [48] , which may increase the risk for en intolerance.regarding pn, treatment consists of multichamber bags containing glucose, amino acids with or without lipids, and electrolytes, and supplemented with multivitamin and multimineral trace elements, which are infused via either central (when available) or peripheral infusion lines for 18 to 24 h/d, according to clinical conditions and biochemical data (fig. 1) . in particular, pn bags without lipids are prescribed in the presence of basal triglyceride levels the principal aim of this empirical protocol is to promptly and pragmatically implement nutritional care in hospitalized non-icu covid-19 patients, which would risk being overlooked as a consequence of the current emergency crisis. a clear example of this risk is given by the recent guidelines issued by the european society of intensive care medicine and the society of critical care medicine, which do not address the issue of nutritional support in critically ill covid-19 patients [49] . we are aware of the possible limitations of this approach, but we believe that action is much more important than methodological subtlety, given the tragic situation we are living in our hospitals.systematic weight and height measurement can be difficult or even impossible to perform owing to the lack of scales and in consideration of the hygienic precautions required. similarly, body composition assessment cannot be regularly performed during the peak of epidemics with many patients admitted to the wards and the associated safety concerns. this can obviously limit the accuracy of nutritional assessment and support, but it is seems very difficult to us to find a valid alternative to relying on estimated or referred anthropometric values.likewise, we acknowledge that underfeeding occurs in patients hospitalized for covid-19 for several reasons. owing to the emergency scenario and the constantly increasing number of admitted patients, assisting even the oldest and most fragile ones during meals is time consuming and distracts health care professionals from taking care of other important procedures. also, patients' relatives are not admitted to the wards. hence, the accurate monitoring of food intake may be extremely difficult, if feasible at all, which we believe justifies our straight approach. also the pn support may only partially fit the needs of pre-icu covid-19 patients, as central infusion lines may be rarely available outside the icu wards and energy requirements are likely to be elevated, considering the concurrent severe acute inflammatory state and that the average bmi of covid-19 patients is high (>27 kg/m 2 in our preliminary case histories) upon admission. furthermore, the cardiovascular and pulmonary compliance may limit the infused volume of pn. also, clinical nutrition units are not widespread in italian hospitals, thus specific competences in nutritional care of patients are not available for all italian patients. finally, also the timely provision and availability of ons, en formulas, pn bags, and enteral and infusion pumps could be problematic in the current scenario.nonetheless, we believe that every effort should be made to try to avoid or at least limit underfeeding, even if it means struggling against objective and often insurmountable difficulties. regarding specific nutritional support issues, the peculiarity of covid-19 is that it can suddenly require intensive care measures, including intubation. also in the icu setting, nutritional support could become very problematic, as new icu wards are progressively being created in emergency circumstances and en tolerance may be incomplete because of gastric distention and erosive gastritis. hence, different strategies should be considered, like the use of supplemental pn or specific high protein-calorie, highly digestible enteral formulas enriched in v-3 fatty acids or other anti-inflammatory or immunomodulatory nutrients. the use of v-3 fatty acids may be relevant because of their recognized anti-inflammatory properties [50] . however, their use should be cautiously considered on a case-by-case approach, keeping in mind their potential effect on the immune response [51] , which may interfere with the currently tested treatments for covid-19 [1, 4] . clinical research focused on the aforementioned nutritional issues could be decisive for this purpose, but the present emergency scenario renders it extremely difficult if not impossible to perform.implementing prompt and appropriate nutritional care in covid-19 disease management is a difficult challenge owing to the current dramatic emergency circumstances. however, all efforts should be made to try to guarantee adequate nutritional support to hospitalized patients, as it may be potentially beneficial to clinical outcomes and effective in reducing or preventing the deleterious consequences of malnutrition in this patient population.the outbreak of novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2)-infected disease began in wuhan, hubei province in december 2019 1 and spread throughout china, 2 increasing the risk of global dissemination. 3 although the chinese government provided a quick response and took drastic measures, including quarantining wuhan city on january 23, covid-19 has become a major public health threat and economic burden on china. on 9 february 2020, the date we finished data collection and started analysis, there were a total of 37 251 confirmed, 28 942 suspected and 6188 severe/ critical cases, with 812 deaths and 2731 hospital significance of this study what is already known on this subject? ► the national spread and global sporadic appearance of the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2)-infected disease (covid- 19) have become an enormous threat to human beings. ► our understanding of covid-19 has been greatly increased after efforts to study its gene homology with bat coronavirus, varied transmission capacity, potential effective drugs such as remdesivir and other transmission routes such as faeces. ► most of the current data are focused on wuhan, which may have selection bias, since more severely affected patients were admitted to hospitals due to the region's insufficient healthcare resources. ► in addition, respiratory symptoms and fevers have been overemphasised at times, while some non-classical symptoms have been overlooked, posing a threat to the public.what are the new findings? ► in this study, we report for the first time on the largest cohort of patients with covid-19 outside wuhan with gi symptoms. ► we found that the percentage of patients with covid- 19 with gi symptoms was also higher than that in wuhan. ► we uncovered novel characteristics of covid- 19, including increased family clustering and liver injury, severe/critical type tendency and higher rate of body temperature >38.5°c. ► the findings of novel m 6 a methylation loci in the s protein of sars-cov-2 may provide underlining mechanisms for its change of virulence and transmission capacity during the spread.how might it impact on clinical practice in the foreseeable future? ► our results indicated that global authorities should pay more attention to patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms and its novel features, as those presentations may change the treatment strategy. ► gi doctors and other health professionals treating suspected patients with covid-19 without respiratory symptoms and fever should take precautions.discharges, according to official reports from the national health commission. the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid- 19 in wuhan have been reported elsewhere, 4 5 with estimated early transmission dynamics presented as the varied basic reproductive numbers (r 0 ) of 2.2 6 and 2.68, 7 indicating a high virus transmission capacity. sars-cov-2 was the seventh coronavirus identified with human infection capacity by the chinese authorities. its genomic features were revealed in a wuhan patient, showing 89% and 82% nuclear acid sequence similarity with bat sars-covzxc21 and human sars-cov, 8 respectively. further functional studies indicated that the spike (s) protein of 2019-ncov had a high affinity to ace2, which is responsible for the virus invasion. 9 it is well-known that viral mutations occur during transmission and spreading. therefore, we would like to know the mutation and transmission ability, virulence change and associated clinical features of sars-cov-2 during its spread.currently, most published data focus on wuhan, reporting an approximately 11% fatality rate caused by various complications such as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and acute respiratory failure. 4 however, since wuhan is the original location of the sars-cov-2 outbreak, the disease outburst caused a shortage of healthcare resources; hence, the hospitals only admitted patients with severe/critical disease. in addition, 'spring festival travel', especially train transportation, greatly increased the risk of spreading the virus. 10 therefore, it is necessary to explore specific features of covid-19 in areas outside wuhan. starting from january 17, sars-cov-2 was first identified in zhejiang province, eventually reaching 1117 cases by february 11, with 10.54% of cases having a lower severe/critical type of covid-19 and zero death cases.since the latest study reported the finding of sars-cov-2 nucleic acid in patient faeces 11 and single cell analysis revealed the digestive system as a potential route for the virus infection, 12 it is theoretically plausible that a portion of patients may present with gi tract symptoms. we should be very cautious about this speculation since the outpatient centres of gi endoscopy may become high-risk places. more formidably, doctors serving in these centres may behave less vigilantly, with lower levels of protective personal equipment compared with those doctors working in clinics serving those with fevers, unknowingly putting the gi practitioners under high exposure risk. therefore, in this study, we provide the first report on the epidemiological, clinical and virological characteristics of patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms outside wuhan, which is helpful for disease control and medical staff protection.a retrospective study investigating the epidemiological, clinical and virological characteristics of covid-19 between 17 january 2020 and 8 february 2020 was performed. the data were uniformly collected by the health commission of zhejiang province in designated hospitals, with all successfully enrolled patients diagnosed as having covid-19 according to who interim guidance. 13 our preliminary data were reported to the authority of zhejiang province and open for sharing with who. written informed consent was waived by the ethics commission of the designated hospital, as this study was carried out for emerging infectious disease purposes and is part of a continuing public health outbreak investigation under national authorisation.the definition of positive gi symptoms required that the patients have at least one of the following symptoms: nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea. gi symptoms were recorded on admission, precluding the influence of other medical therapy and external factors. the definition of diarrhoea was the passing of loose stools >3 times per day. a stool culture was performed with negative results for all patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms. since the diarrhoea was diagnosed on admission, those patients had no history of recent antibiotic use. therefore, clostridium difficile was not detected in the stools. patients with covid-19 were divided into four subtypes according to the degree of disease severity, based on the diagnosis and treatment scheme for sars-cov-2 of chinese (sixth edition). the mild type is defined as having slight clinical symptoms without pneumonia on radiography. the common type is defined as presenting with fever and/or respiratory symptoms plus pneumonia on radiography. the severe type was diagnosed according to dyspnoea (respiratory rate (rr) ≥30 times/min), resting finger oxygen saturation ≤93%, artery pao 2 /fio 2 ≤300 mm hg (1 mm hg=0.133 kpa). the critical type is defined as respiratory failure with shock and multiorgan failure requiring mechanical ventilation and intensive care unit (icu) admission. the definition of liver damage was alanine aminotransferase (alt) >50 u/l or aspartate aminotransferase (ast) >40 u/l. the incubation period was calculated from the specific date of contact of the confirmed patient with covid-19 to the time of onset of illness.epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, therapeutic and outcome data were collected from patients' medical records, with verification by independent doctors. clinical outcomes were followed up to 8 february 2020, when specimens were obtained from throat swabs and sputum. for missing or vague data, direct communications with attending doctors and other healthcare providers were performed. laboratory confirmation of sars-cov-2 was performed in our hospital and the centre for disease control and prevention of zhejiang province/city level under authorisation by previously reported real-time rt-pcr. 5 all patients data are presented as medians (iqr), n (%) and n/n (%). copd, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.received chest radiography or ct at admission, while other respiratory viruses were excluded, such as influenza a (h1n1, h3n2 and h7n9), influenza b, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, sars-cov and mers-cov.in this study, we collected and calculated epidemiological data (exposure to infected area, contact with confirmed/suspected patients with covid-19, cluster situation and median incubation period) and other anthropometrics, demographics, symptoms and signs on admission. laboratory and chest x-ray/ct results, comorbidities, treatments (including drugs, intensive care and mechanical ventilation) and clinical outcomes were also summarised.gene sequences of sars (aas00003.1 and ay278489.2) and wuhan-hu-1 (mn908947.3) were obtained from the ncbi viral genome database (https://www. ncbi. nlm. nih. gov/). zj01 was separated and named from a zhejiang patient (online supplementary material-zj01 sequence). sramp (http://www. cuilab. cn/ sramp) was used to analyse gene sequences and predict post-transcriptional methylation (n6-methyladenosine) modification sites. according to the results, the relevant predicted m 6 a sites can be divided into four levels: very high, high, medium and low confidence. multalin (http:// multalin. toulouse. inra. fr/ multalin/ multalin. html) was used to compare the differences among these sequences. the swiss-model online server (https:// swissmodel. expasy. org/) was used to reconstruct the three-dimensional structure of proteins according to gene or amino sequence. the poisson-boltzmann equation can be used to calculate the electrostatic behaviour of s protein in aqueous solution through the vacuum electrostatics function of pymol. further analysis of the power of the protein model showed a difference in the electrostatic power distribution on the protein surface of the three virus strains.for continuous variables, mean (sd) and median (iqr) were used for normally and abnormally distributed data, followed by unpaired t-test and non-parametric test when appropriate. categorical variables were expressed as number (%) and compared using the χ 2 test. univariate logistic regression analysis was used to identify the risk factors of severe/critical type patients. all significant variables achieved from univariate analysis were included in a multivariate logistic regression model with the forward method to identify independent predictors of the severe/ critical type. no adjustment for multiple testing was performed. a two-sided α of <0.05 was considered statistically significant and spss (v.26.0) was used for all analyses.this study enrolled 651 patients with confirmed covid-19 from 17 january 2020 to 8 february 2020 in zhejiang province, among which 74 (11.4%) patients presented with at least one gi tract symptom (nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea), which was higher than previous wuhan data (table 1) . in detail, of 74 patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms, 53 patients had only the symptom of diarrhoea, 11 patients had only the symptom of vomiting and 10 patients had only the symptom of nausea. in addition, only three patients had all the gi symptoms of diarrhoea, vomiting and nausea, while four patients had the symptoms of both nausea and vomiting. diarrhoea was the most common gi symptom in this study and accounted for 8.14% of the total enrolled 651 patients with covid-19, which was higher than the rate of 3.8% reported previously. 14 of 53 patients with covid-19 with diarrhoea, the median duration period was 4 days (iqr: 3-6 days), with the shortest duration of 1 day and longest of 9 days. most diarrhoea was self-limiting. the average age of the patients with gi symptoms was 46.14±14.19 years and the male:female ratio was 1:1. there were no coexisting conditions of cancer, chronic renal disease, pregnancy, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or immunosuppression. thirty-eight (51.35%) patients had a wuhan exposure history and 32 (43.24%) patients had a history of contact with patients with covid-19. intriguingly, the rate of chronic liver disease was 10.81% in patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms, which was significantly higher than that of 2.95% in those without gi symptoms (p=0.004). more importantly, the rate of the severe/critical type was also markedly increased in patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms than in those without gi symptoms (22.97% vs 8.14%, p<0.001). family clustering is another pivotal phenomenon of covid-19. we identified that 23 (31.08%) patients with gi symptoms had family clustering, which was prominently higher than that in patients without gi symptoms (20.45%, p=0.037). twenty-one patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms and 195 without them had definite exposure times, with the median calculated incubation period as 4 days (iqr 3-7 days) and 5 days (iqr 3-8 days), respectively.the clinical characteristics of patients with gi symptoms are shown in table 2. fever, cough and sputum production were the most common symptoms. of the aforementioned symptoms, 29 as shown in table 3, 5 (6.76%), 13 (17.57%) and 1 (1.35%) patient with covid-19 with gi symptoms had complications of ards, liver injury and shock, respectively, where the former two were significantly higher than their counterparts of 2.08% and 8.84% in patients with covid-19 without gi symptoms, respectively (p=0.034; p=0.035). all 74 patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms were treated in isolation with supportive and empiric medication, while 66 (89.19%) patients received antiviral treatment, including interferon-α sprays, arbidol hydrochloride capsules (two tablets three times daily), lopinavir and ritonavir two tablets (500 mg) twice daily, via the oral route. furthermore, the average time from illness onset to antiviral therapy was 5.56±4.09 days. compared with wuhan data, we had lower rates of glucocorticoid and antibiotic use, 14.86% and 41.89%, respectively. no patients received continuous blood purification due to renal failure, and no patients were treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. until now, only one patient has died. five (6.76%) patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms were treated with mechanical ventilation and transferred to the icu, which was a significantly higher rate than that of 2.08% in the patients with covid-19 without gi symptoms (p=0.034).of severe/critical patients with covid-19, 22.97% presented with gi symptoms in this study. when compared with mild and common covid-19, initial univariate analysis of epidemiological, clinical and laboratory variables identified 11 significantly changed risk factors for severe/critical covid-19, including increased ors of age, age ≥50 years, period between illness onset and hospital visit, sputum production, any existing medical condition, multiple lung infection, alt, lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), glucose and crp, as well as decreased or of the infected area (online supplementary table 1 ). based on these variables, further multivariate analysis using the forward method was performed, and we found that sputum production of patients from infected areas such as wuhan and increased ldh/glucose levels were the independent risk factors for severe/ critical covid-19 in patients with gi symptoms (table 4) .zj01 is a strain of sars-cov-2 with 29 381 bases. the results of the potential methylation sites of s protein sequences of sars, wuhan-hu-1 and zj01 indicated that there were significant differences between sars-cov-2 and sars. these coronaviruses can infect host cells through using the s protein to bind to the host cell surface receptor ace2. during virus maturation, s proteins are glycosylated and divided into the parts s1 and s2. s1 is spherical and mainly involved in the recognition and binding of viruses to host cells. s2 is stalked and able to promote the fusion of the virus into host cells. the comparison results of three virus strains showed that zj01 and wuhan-hu-1 had one high-confidence site, two moderate-confidence sites and four low-confidence sites. sars has three high-confidence sites, three moderate-confidence sites and five low-confidence sites. from the perspective of high-confidence sites (figure 1a, red arrow), the potential methylation points of sars-cov-2 (n=1) and sars (n=3) are predominantly concentrated in the s1 and s2 segments of the s protein. the positions of two low-confidence sites and one medium-confidence site on s2 are relatively fixed among the three virus strains (blue arrow). these results suggest that the s proteins of the two viruses may have structural and functional differences due to m 6 a methylation during transcription and translation. additionally, the results of gene sequence alignment ( figure 1b) showed that the variation in s protein sequences between zj01 and wuhan-hu-1 was subtle, and these variations were highly concentrated in the s2 segment. these variations resulted in five amino acid substitutions and two amino acid deletions. however, from the perspective of the simulated threedimensional protein structure, the effect of these variations on the overall s protein structure is relatively limited. the difference between sars-cov-2 and sars is significant, especially at the specific recognition point position in segment s1 (figure 1c, red circle). on the one hand, this change may affect the viral binding force on host cells. on the other hand, the electrostatic changes between zj01 and wuhan-hu-1 are largely concentrated in the mutation zone of s2 (figure 1c, green ellipse), where the detailed mechanisms need further exploration.the national spread and global sporadic appearance of sars-cov-2 have become an enormous threat to human beings, and the threat is not restricted to china. an endeavour has been made by scientists to reveal the epidemiological, clinical and virological characteristics of sars-cov-2 with over 30 publications published in pubmed by 5 february 2020. 2 4-7 nevertheless, most of these studies focused on the situation in wuhan, china. in addition, the initiative for sars-cov-2 screening started from fever clinics, while fever, cough and shortness of breath were the most emphasised symptoms, which increases the risk of omitting those patients with other symptoms and normal body temperature. it is theoretically plausible that one characteristic of a viral spread is an increased transmission capacity at the cost of decreased virulence, which is also true for sars-cov-2. 15 therefore, caution should be exercised for suspected patients with covid-19 who had normal body temperatures and visited various outpatient clinics for non-respiratory symptoms. the suspected patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea, should be seriously considered, since accumulated evidence supports sars-cov-2 transmission through faeces 11 and tears 16 and its ability to bind to ace2 of the gi tract has been identified. 9 12 in this study, we reported the epidemiological, clinical and virological features of 74 patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms from zhejiang province. to our knowledge, this is the first report that describes the situation of patients with covid-19 gi symptoms and is the largest group of cases outside wuhan. our novel findings are valuable for disease prevention by emphasising suspected patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms and their specific clinical characteristics.among the 651 total patients with covid-19 we investigated, the rate of patients with gi symptoms was 11.4%, which is higher than in the previously reported data of 3% from wuhan. 4 however, a recent report from wuhan revealed that 10.1% experienced nausea/diarrhoea and 3.6% vomiting. 17 additionally, the latest data from wuhan revealed that 79.1% of patients with covid-19 presented gi symptoms, but such data were collected during 1-10 days after illness onset and reported in a chinese domestic journal, 18 differing from our strategy of collecting gi symptom data on admission that may be less biassed by various influencing factors, including drugs. more importantly, nationwide data showed gi symptoms in 8.7% of 1099 confirmed patients with sars-cov-2, 14 reinforcing our data. all these data indicated that there were symptom changes in patients with covid-19. we suspect that sars-cov-2 may cause acute gastritis and enteritis, as evidenced by the vomiting, nausea and diarrhoea. since previous studies indicated high ace2 expression in the gi tract, we envision that such a change indicates the potential of virus mutation towards increased transmissibility, decreased virulence and multiorgan infection, as reflected in the clinics of increased r0 and infection routes. taken together, the patients with covid-19 showed an increased tendency to present with gi symptoms in dissemination, increasing infection risk in healthcare providers who were treating suspected patients with covid-19 without respiratory symptoms and fever.we further analysed the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms. we identified a significantly higher rate of >38.5°c fever and family clustering, increased complications of ards and a high severity tendency (rate of severe/critical type, mechanical ventilation and icu admission) in patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms, when compared with those without gi symptoms. we suspect that gi symptoms may cause patients with covid-19 to be more prone to electrolyte disturbance, such as significantly decreased serum sodium levels (p=0.016), and hence they trend towards the severe/critical type of the disease. other reasons should be considered and explored based on future data. in addition, the higher rates of familial clustering may be related to faecal shedding in shared toilets in households. further multivariate analysis revealed sputum production from infected areas and increased ldh/glucose levels as independent risk factors for the disease. in addition, symptoms of fatigue, shortness of breath and headache were also significantly higher in patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms, which may be caused by their higher fevers and increased electrolyte imbalance. liver damage should be carefully monitored, as we found significantly increased ast levels and coexisting conditions of liver disease in patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms. since the ratio of chronic liver disease was higher in patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms, it could lead to increased levels of alt and ast. although there were no significant differences in glucocorticoid and antibiotic therapy between patients with covid-19 with and without gi symptoms, they were both lower than their counterparts in wuhan, 4 showing our own experience in effective therapy.the change and mutation of sars-cov-2 are the basis of its variation in epidemiological and clinical features. using in-depth bioinformatics analysis of the novel identified sars-cov-2 sequence from zhejiang province, we identified many m 6 a methylation sites in the s1 segment of zj01 and s2 segment of sars, indicating that the s proteins of the two viruses may have structural and functional differences due to m 6 a methylation. the addition of chemical modifications is critical to many steps of mrna processing and fate regulation, while the most abundant internal modification is n 6 -methyladenosin. 19 20 given the wide prevalence of m 6 a modification on cellular mrna, it is not surprising that a number of viruses contain m 6 a in their rna. 21 22 the function of m 6 a methylation on viruses may be diverse with both proviral and antiviral roles. 23 24 coronaviruses are enveloped rna viruses containing the largest single-stranded, positive-sense rna genome with a length between 25.5 and 32 kb. 25 in contrast to previously reported m 6 a modification in viruses, methylation at the n7 position of the 5'-cap structure of coronavirus rna is commonly identified, which facilitates viral rna escape recognition by the host innate immune system. 26 therefore, our findings on the novel m 6 a methylation situation in sars-cov-2 may provide a novel mechanism for further study.a large reservoir of sars-like bat coronavirus has the capacity to efficiently use the human ace2 receptor for docking, replication and entry. 27 ace2 is predominantly expressed in human alveolar cells and intestinal epithelial cells. the binding force change is caused by the sequence mutation of sars-cov-2, which merits further investigation. we found that the electrostatic changes between zj01 and wuhan-hu-1 were highly concentrated in the mutation zone of s2 (the portion of s protein which promotes the fusion of the virus into host cells). therefore, further studies exploring the underlining mechanisms for these conformations and binding force changes are urgently needed. these may help explain the increased gi symptoms in the later phase of this virus outbreak and their novel epidemiological/clinical features.this study has several limitations . first, it is better to obtain the outcomes and more detailed therapeutic responses in a cohort study of patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms. second, although the risk factors for the severe/critical type of covid-19 were identified according to patient data on admission, there is still a lack of a predictive model for disease progression. third, cytokine storm is common in coronavirus 28 and reported in a previous sars-cov-2 study 5 ; thus, it would be better if we could also detect cytokine changes in this study. fourth, it will have more clinical relevance to propose an effective strategy for identifying patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms who lack the typical symptoms such as fever and cough in the early stage. according to our experience, we should pay more attention to exposure history and family clustering during the screening process. fifth, it would be meaningful to investigate the correlation between the viral genome and gi symptoms. finally, since over 50% of sars-cov-2 was detected in the faeces according to one study, 29 the prevalence of viral rna from faeces samples in patients with gi symptoms should be compared with those in patients without gi symptoms in the future. moreover, because of the relatively low detection rate for virus in the stool (three of nine patients with covid-19 positive in our hospital) and rare stool samples were re-tested for the virus in patients after their recovery in this study, it is difficult to evaluate the implications of faecal-oral transmission, so this needs further investigation.in summary, we reported, for the first time, the largest cases of patients with covid-19 with gi symptoms outside wuhan and showed its novel characteristics of increased family clustering and liver injury, severe/critical tendency and higher rate of body temperature >38.5°c. global authorities should pay more attention to patients with covid-19 with gi and other non-classic symptoms and remain cautious in health provider protection.in december 2019, some cases of viral pneumonia were epidemiologically related to a new coronavirus in the province of hubei, china. subsequently, there has been an increase in infections attributable to this virus throughout china and worldwide. the world health organization (who) has officially named the infection coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), and the virus has been classified as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). this appears to be a virus from rhinolophus bats, but the intermediate host has not yet been identified. the mechanism of infection of sars-cov-2 is not yet known; it appears to have affinity for cells located in the lower airways, where it replicates. the interhuman transmission of coronaviruses mainly occurs through saliva droplets and direct and indirect contact via surfaces. as of march 10, 2020, the number of cases worldwide was 113,702. along with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers), covid-19 appears to cause a severe clinical picture in humans, ranging from mild malaise to death by sepsis/acute respiratory distress syndrome. the prognosis is worse in elderly patients with comorbidities. to date, there is no specific therapy for covid-19. prevention of sars-cov-2 infection implies strategies that limit the spread of the virus. who and other international and national bodies have developed continuously updated strategic objectives and provisions to contain the spread of the virus and infection.coronavirus: update related to the current outbreak of covid-19.background coronaviruses (covs) are a large family of respiratory viruses that can cause mild to moderate diseases, ranging from the common cold to severe respiratory syndromes [1] .these viruses are common in many animal species, and, in some cases, albeit rarely, they can evolve and infect humans and then spread to the population [2] .most of the numerous human pathogenic coronaviruses are associated with mild clinical symptoms, with two notable exceptions: severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). sars is caused by a virus that emerged in southern china in november 2002 and led to [ 8000 human infections and 774 deaths in 37 countries in the 2002-2003 period [3] ; mers is related to a virus detected for the first time in saudi arabia in 2012, responsible for 2494 laboratoryconfirmed cases of infection and 858 deaths since september 2012 [4] .in december 2019, some cases of viral pneumonia were epidemiologically linked to a new coronavirus in the province of hubei in china. in the following days a possible association with the huanan fish market in wuhan was identified. in fact, most of the initially identified patients had visited, worked at or lived near this market in the month preceding the infection. in early january, a new coronavirus, tentatively called 2019-ncov, was isolated, and interhuman transmission was confirmed [5] .on february 11, 2020 , the world health organization (who) officially named the new coronavirus 2019 infection coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) [6] . subsequently the coronavirus study group (csg) of the international taxonomy committee of viruses (ictv) officially classified the virus as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [7] . this article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.coronaviruses (covs) are rna viruses belonging to the subfamily of the coronavirinae, coronaviridae family, order nidovirales [8] .their definition is related to the fact that covs are virions with projections resembling a crown. all covs share similarities in organization and genomic expression with 16 nonstructural proteins and at least 4 structural proteins (spike: s; envelope: e; membrane: m; nucleocapsid: n proteins) [9] .they are divided into four genera: alphacov, betacov, gammacov and deltacov [10] .covs can infect different hosts and have a different tissue tropism: generally, alphacovs and betacovs infect mammals while gam-macovs and deltacovs infect other animals such as birds, fishes and only a few mammals [8] ( table 1) .seven human covs are known to date, common worldwide. the first ones were identified in the mid-1960s, others more recently [9] .the human covs are: 229e (alfacov), nl63 (alfacov), oc43 (betacov), hku1 (betacov), mers-cov (betacov, which causes mers), sars-cov (betacov, which causes sars) and 2019-ncov/sars-cov-2 [11] .in the past 20 years, two major human cov epidemics have occurred: sars and mers. both viruses infect the lower airways and cause severe respiratory syndromes in humans. other covs have a global distribution with a seasonality characterized by a peak in winter and in spring and few cases in summer [10] .the sars epidemic began in 2002, starting from the town of foshan in the chinese province of guangdong, and then spread globally, involving 33 countries in 5 different continents. more than 8000 cases were recognized (21% in health workers) with a case fatality rate (cfr) of almost 10% [3] and a basic reproduction number (r 0 ) equal to 2-3 [12] .in humans, the incubation period ranges between 2 and 10 days, and interhuman transmission is very effective, which is why the delay of 3 months between the beginning of the epidemic and the first investigations has allowed a worldwide spread of the virus. the bat was identified as the natural reservoir of sars-cov and the civet as the intermediate host [13] . despite active surveillance, no more sars cases have been recognized since july 2003 [3] .mers was first identified in 2012. from then until january 16, 2020, 2521 cases were reported worldwide. these include 919 deaths, with a cfr of 36% [4] and an estimated r 0 of 0.7 [12] . most cases were found in the arabian peninsula and approximately 84% in saudi arabia [4] . however, the virus was isolated in 27 countries [10] , and all patients outside the arabian peninsula had a travel history to or a contact with someone who had traveled to this region [4] . in humans, the incubation period ranges between 2 and 14 days, and, unlike sars, interhuman transmission is limited. the virus is not easily transmitted from person to person, unless a close contact occurs. the bat was also identified as an animal reservoir for the mers-cov, while the intermediate host was the camel [13] . both sars and mers have a broad spectrum of clinical pictures ranging from flu-like symptoms to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). age and comorbidities are prognostic predictors. sars mainly involved healthy young adults while half of mers cases were identified in subjects [ 50 years of age. the clinical picture at hospital admission is characterized by fever, cough, dyspnea and myalgia in both sars and mers. atypical symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting are common in both syndromes [10] .epidemiology on december 31, 2019, the who chinese office was informed about some cases of pneumonia of unknown origin in the city of wuhan, located in the chinese province of hubei [14] .on january 3, 2020, a new coronavirus was isolated from the bronchial wash samples of a patient from wuhan and was identified as the pathogen responsible for pneumonia [15] . on january 11 and 12, 2020, the who received further details and information from the chinese national health commission regarding the possible association of this epidemic with exposure in a fish market in wuhan, and the chinese authorities shared the genetic sequence of a new coronavirus, subsequently identified as sars-cov-2 [14] .new evidence shows the relation between sars-cov-2 and other covs that are circulating in bats, specifically in rhinolophus bats [16] . these subspecies are abundant in southern china and asia, the middle east, africa and europe. the mode of transmission to humans is still unclear. bats are rare in chinese markets; however, they are captured and sold directly to restaurants as food. the most recent hypothesis is that there is an intermediate animal host that has played a role in the new sars-cov-2 infection [6] . several animals have been considered as possible hosts, including pangolins [17] . identifying the animal source of this new virus would help to prevent other new infections and to understand the initial dynamics of spreading in the wuhan market. in this regard, strengthening the control of food and hygiene within live animal markets is essential to prevent future new zoonosis [6] .the mechanism of sars-cov-2 infection is not yet known. the key to human transmission is the ability of the virus to bind to human cells: covs use the spike protein to bind to cells, and it seems that sars-cov-2, as sars-co virus, uses the same receptor for the conversion enzyme of angiotensin 2 (ace2) [5, 13] . a recent study showed that the binding affinity between the viral receptorbinding domain (rbd) and the host receptor ace2, in the initial viral attachment step, determines the host susceptibility to sars-cov-2. the greater transmissibility of sars-cov-2 than sars-cov is partly explained by the fact that, due to a higher affinity, the binding capacity of viral rbd increases and the number of viruses required to infect a cell is reduced [18] . sars-cov-2 appears to have affinity for cells located in the lower airways, where it replicates, causing radiologic evidence of pneumonia in patients without any particular clinical symptoms [19] .usually, the interhuman transmission of covs occurs through different pathways that include droplets, direct contact and indirect contact through surfaces [13] . the virus has also been isolated in serum, blood, rectal swabs, saliva, urine and stool [18] . fecal-oral transmission has not yet been proven [20, 21] .a recent study indicates that the highest viral load is found immediately after the onset of symptoms and in greater quantities in the nose rather than in the throat. this analysis suggests that the spread of the sars-cov-2 virus resembles that of influenza more than that of sars. the viral load found in asymptomatic subjects was similar to that of symptomatic ones; this suggests the potential transmission role of asymptomatic subjects [22] .despite several uncertainties, the evidence indicates that the cfr for hospitalized covid-19 patients is substantially lower than that for hospitalized sars, mers and 2009 pandemic flu h1n1 patients (4%, 28%, 65% and 9%, respectively). taking into account covid-19 and influenza (pandemic and seasonal), it is important to carefully consider the differences in definition of cases, as these are relevant for cfr estimation [18] .the r 0 has been estimated between 2 and 3 [18] , and the risk assessment calculated by who is very high for the whole world [23] .as of march 10, 2020, there were 113,702 confirmed cases of sars-cov-2 infection in the world, with 4125 new cases in the last 24 h. in china, the country with the highest number of confirmed cases, 80,924 occurred, of which 20 were within 24 h with 3140 total deaths (17 new in the last 24 h) [23] .the first case of sars-cov-2 laboratory-confirmed infection outside china was reported on january 13, 2020, in thailand [14] .as of march 10, 2020, outside china there were 32,778 confirmed cases and 872 deaths, and 109 countries were involved [23] . in the western pacific region, the countries with the highest number of cases were republic of korea (7513), japan (514) and singapore (160) [23] .in the european region, italy counted 9172 cases; thus it was the second country with the most cases after china. france, germany and spain reported 1402, 1139 and 1024 cases, respectively, while another 44 countries reported \ 400 cases [23] . in the eastern mediterranean region, iran was the country with the highest number of cases (7161) [23] . in the usa, 472 cases were reported [23] .of note, 696 cases, including 7 deaths, were reported in subjects on a cruise ship that had been anchored in japanese territorial waters [23] .several clinical pictures have been associated with sars-cov-2 infection; they range from mild malaise to death, which occurs from sepsis and/or ards.early recognition of the clinical picture is essential to promptly start the adequate preventive measures and supportive treatments to avoid spreading of the virus and possible complications in patients [19] (table 2) .it seems that covid-19 presents with three worsening clinical pictures that evolve in few days: at the onset a slight malaise with symptoms of the upper respiratory tract, subsequently a mild pneumonia that can later worsen with a picture of ards [19] .several retrospective studies show that hospitalization generally takes place on the 7th day after the onset of the symptoms (fever, fatigue and dry cough with dyspnea) [1, 15] .other possible symptoms are myalgia, headache, anorexia, pharyngodynia and gastrointestinal complaints with diarrhea. many patients developed multiorgan dysfunction, radiologic signs of bilateral pneumonia with ards and acute renal failure; furthermore, mental confusion may occur [15] . the incubation period lasts up to 14 days (4-5 days as median incubation period) [12, 18] .recently, the chinese center for disease control and prevention (ccdc) has published a work on a series of cases, currently the most numerous in the literature, concerning mainland china (updated on february 11, 2020). healthcare workers represent 3.8% of cases; 14.8% of these have been confirmed as serious or critical cases [24, 25] .as for the distribution by age, 1%, 8% and 87% of cases were registered in young subjects (\ 10 years and between 10 and 19 years of age), young adults (aged between 20 and 29 years) and adults and elderly people (age range 30--79 years), respectively. elderly patients aged c 80 years represented 3% of cases. regarding the spectrum of the disease, 81%, 14% and 5% of cases were affected by a medium intensity, severe and critical form, respectively [24, 25] (table 3) .according to these data, the overall cfr rate is 2.3%. in detail, cfr was equal to 8% and 14.8% in subjects aged between 70 and 79 years and in patients aged c 80 years, respectively. no subject \ 9 years of age died. no deaths have been registered in subjects suffering from mild or medium intensity forms, while cfr was equal to 49% in critical cases [24, 25] (table 3) .notably, cfr was high in subjects with comorbidities; in detail, cfr was equal to 10.5%, 7.3%, 6.3%, 6.0% and 5.6% for cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, chronic respiratory diseases, hypertension and tumors, respectively [24, 25] (table 3 ).in conclusion people [ 60 years of age and patients with comorbidities (most of all cardiovascular diseases) have a greater risk for a more severe clinical picture and for fatal outcome. furthermore, deaths occurred only in critical cases. fortunately, covid-19 seems to be relatively rare in children, whose clinical picture is often mild [18] .according to another chinese study, the median age of patients is 56 years, with a slightly higher percentage in males (54.3% males vs. 45.7% females). intensive care unit (icu) admission was needed in 26% of subjects, and 4.3% of them died of multiorgan failure. once more, the worst clinical pictures refer to elderly subjects with comorbidities such as diabetes, high blood pressure and cardiovascular diseases [15] .inter-human transmission was considered for 41% of patients: the infection seems related to previous exposure to the huanan fish market in 8.7% of cases, family members in 12.3% and healthcare workers in 29% [15] .according to another study, some cases have also been reported in children aged 1--11 months: the clinical picture was less severe than in adults, with fever and mild respiratory infections as prevalent symptoms. the transmission was mainly intra-familiar or through contacts with visitors to the huanan market [26] . a recent study analyzed nine pregnant women with sars-cov-2 pneumonia. their clinical picture was similar to that of nonpregnant women affected by the virus. in all cases, a cesarean delivery was done, and no vertical transmission has been documented. therefore, it can be assumed that there is no evidence of vertical transmission during the third trimester of pregnancy [27] .the diagnosis and confirmation of sars-cov-2 infection are carried out by specific tests recommended by who that are described on a dedicated webpage [28] .the european centre for disease prevention and control (ecdc) also provided a specific webpage on laboratory support by a coronavirus-specialized laboratory in the european union [29] .any person satisfying the criteria of a suspected case ( table 2) should be tested for sars-cov-2, and, when possible, samples from both the lower respiratory tract (bronchoalveolar lavage, endotracheal aspirate, expectorated sputum) and upper respiratory tract (nasopharyngeal swab, oropharyngeal swab, nasopharyngeal aspirate or nasal wash) should be collected [29] .according to a recent chinese study, collecting specimens from different sites could be useful to improve the sensitivity and reduce false-negative test results. this study highlights that bronchoalveolar lavage fluid specimens showed the highest positive rates, followed by sputum, nasal swabs, bronchial biopsy, pharyngeal swabs, feces and blood [30] .to date, there is no specific therapy for covid-19. patients with covid-19 should receive supportive care to help relieve symptoms, and, for severe cases, treatment should include care to support vital organ functions [31, 32] .several randomized clinical trials (rcts) are currently underway, not yet published, which are testing different therapies for covid-19. one of the drugs, normally used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, targets the interleukin 6 receptor and has been included in the covid-19 treatment guidelines issued by the chinese national health commission [33, 34] . in addition, several rcts are underway regarding the use of antiviral drugs for the treatment of covid-19 [32, [35] [36] [37] [38] . finally, a recent study evaluates the use of plasma from convalescent patients with previous sars-cov-2 infection as a potential therapeutic treatment [39] . another study shows that the use of systemic corticosteroids for covid-19 is not recommended [40] .the advent of covid-19 is unquestionably reminiscent of previous sars and mers epidemics. the increase in the number of cases and expansion of geographical areas have revealed issues regarding the future management of the infection: on march 11, 2020, the who declared covid-19 a pandemic [41] .at the beginning, efforts were made by the chinese government to limit the spread of the virus, such as suspension of public transport, closure of airports [42] , cancellation of the lunar new year celebrations and closure of parks and cinemas. a ban on the wild animal trade within china was declared on january 26, 2020 [12] . as the number of cases increased, more drastic containment measures were applied in china up to the suspension of all non-essential activities. these measures appear to have slowed the progression of sars-cov-2 infections in china, as can be seen from the progressive decrease in incidence in wuhan [23] .since the beginning, the who and the emergency committee under international health regulations have stressed china's need to strengthen screening of exits from affected areas. in general, evidence in the peer-reviewed literature does not support entry screening as an effective measure for detecting infected travelers, especially when symptoms of the disease are very common/aspecific and the seasonal flu activity in europe and china is ongoing. however, some imported cases of covid-19 in asian countries have been detected through entry screening procedures at the destination airports [12] .one of the screening methods for covid-19 is the measurement of body temperature, although current evidence shows that this method is not effective in controlling disease transmission [18] .as of march 10, 2020, who believes that restrictive measures for travelers and the exchange of goods must be proportional to the risk to public health, with the minimum duration possible and daily updates accordingly on the available epidemiology [43] .currently, the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) has increased the level of traveler health alert and recommends avoiding non-essential travel [44] . other countries are considering implementing restrictions for people traveling from and to the most affected countries.since the beginning of the pandemic, the who has developed a strategy and response plan to contain the impact of covid-19. the main points included in this plan are related to blocking the chain of transmission (working on patients as well as close contacts), identifying and reducing transmission from animal sources, developing correct and scientifically sound risk communication and controlling the social and economic impact of the pandemic as much as possible to minimize it through multisectoral partnerships [6] .the ecdc, taking into account the evolving epidemiologic situation, considers five possible scenarios (from 0 to 4). the objective is to avoid the health system disruption and to limit the impact of the pandemic as much as possible [18] ( table 4) .crucial general preventive measures should include: rigorous hand hygiene, avoiding coughing and/or sneezing without covering the mouth and the use of disposable tissues to mechanically block droplets [18] . the who recommends hand washing with soap and water or use of alcohol-based solutions [45] .the use of surgical face masks can reduce the risk of infection transmission; masks should be used by subjects with respiratory symptoms. there is no evidence of the usefulness of face masks by healthy subjects; besides, their use can be related to an increased risk due to a false sense of safety [18] .isolation of symptomatic subjects can be considered to reduce transmission; patients (suspected or confirmed) should be asked to wear a surgical mask to reduce the spread of table 4 different scenarios and options to limit the impact of the epidemic (modified from [18] )risk management and options for response localized outbreaks, which start to merge, becoming epidemiologically indistinctreduce burden on the health system and protect the population at risk scenario 4widespread sustained transmission and health care system over-burdened because of the large demand for services mitigate the impact of dissemination, protect the population at risk and reduce excessive mortality respiratory droplets, considered the most likely route of transmission [18] . currently, many countries are considering or have already implemented relevant social measures such as school closures, smart working and cancelling meetings, sports and cultural events. social distancing is essential. it implies avoiding shaking hands and kissing, use of public and crowded means of transportation, and gatherings of people [18] .strict compliance with all these measures is essential to lower the spread of infection to gain time to identify adequate therapeutic options and to design and hopefully develop a vaccine [18] .italy is now the second country in the world in terms of case numbers [23] . the first cases occurred in some areas of lombardy and the veneto regions and then spread all over the country. as of march 9, 2020, considering that new cases of covid-19 registered in italy had started to increase considerably and national restrictive measures had not yet been put in place, the council of ministers issued a decree law with measures to prohibit access to and exit from the country as well as suspension of all the activities that were not strictly necessary [46, 47] .the current italian situation confirms that a local outbreak, once started, can quickly spread and have a huge impact on the most vulnerable citizens, mainly elderly subjects with comorbidities [18] . although to date no sars-cov-2 bloodborne transmission has been documented, the national blood center of the national institute of health (iss) has activated precautionary measures to prevent the spread of the new coronavirus sars-cov-2 from blood donors [48] .ecdc reports that, as of march 2, 2020, the risk of covid-19 infection in europe is currently moderate to high and can change. it should be considered that the transmission chain has not always been identified and that the epidemiologic situation is constantly evolving [18] .the spread of the sars-cov-2 virus represents a global health emergency involving the health authorities of all countries, especially since the pandemic state was declared.many aspects of the infection have been studied. available epidemiologic, clinical and impact data have made it possible to outline preventive interventions that have been shared internationally. unfortunately, the spread of the virus is ongoing, and the impact of the infection is still growing, despite the application of preventive interventions, which in some contexts are very restrictive. the impact of the infection is evident not only from a clinical but also from an economic point of view.the considerable cost in terms of infected/ dead health workers, who operate on the front line and, as such, are particularly exposed to the risk of infection, should not be underestimated [25] .strict observance of the rules issued by the who and the other international bodies (e.g., cdc, ecdc, etc.) is essential, as we need to understand the dynamics of virus spread in more detail, identify new diagnostic and therapeutic approaches and develop a vaccine reasonably quickly. the international effort is enormous and hopefully will allow preventing further spreading of the virus [42] .epidemiologic daily updated cases can be found on the following web pages: https://www.who. int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/ >situation-reports/. https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/ en/novel-coronavirus-china.funding. no funding or sponsorship was received for this study or publication of this article.authorship. all named authors meet the international committee of medical journal editors (icmje) criteria for authorship for this article, take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole and have given their approval for this version to be published.disclosures. erica d'anchera, federica sandri, marta savio and armando stefanati declare that they have no conflict of interest. giovanni gabutti declares that he does not have a specific conflict of interest related to this paper; however, he reports grants from sanofi pasteur msd, gsk biologicals sa, pfizer, sanofi pasteur italy, msd italy, emergent biosolutions and seqirus for taking part to advisory boards, expert meetings, for acting as speaker and/or organizer of meetings/congresses and as principal investigator and chief of o.u. in rcts.compliance with ethics guidelines. this article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.data availability. data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.open access. this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution-noncommercial 4.0 international license, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/.continue to have a unique role in helping to manage these patients. here, we summarize recommendations for bedside urologic interventions specific to sars-cov-2 positive patients based on experiences from a large metropolitan hospital system. regulations and requirements may differ on an institutional basis, so these guidelines are intended to augment specific local protocols.abbreviations: personal protective equipment (ppe), continuous bladder irrigation (cbi).the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) has profoundly impacted the practice of urology in fundamental ways-most elective surgeries are on hold, outpatient visits are shifting to telehealth, and protocols for in-person visits have been significantly modified. 1 according to the centers for disease control and prevention covid-net data, 74.5% of hospitalized sars-cov-2 patients are 50 years or older and 54.4% are male. 2 given these demographics, patients hospitalized with sars-cov-2 are likely to have urologic conditions, previously diagnosed or undiagnosed. in addition, 42% of patients in the intensive care unit require invasive mechanical ventilation, necessitating sedation and foley catheter insertion. 3 inpatient urologic consultations are very common, 26% of which will result in bedside procedures. 4 in the first few weeks of the current outbreak, roughly 20-25% of urologic consults at our institution have been for patients with confirmed or suspected sars-cov-2, although this percentage may change over time. bedside procedures performed for these patients have included: difficult foley placement, bedside cystoscopy, suprapubic tube exchanges, incision and drainage of scrotal and perineal abscesses, and gross hematuria with clot retention. as the number of patients hospitalized with sars-cov-2 continues to increase, we anticipate growth in urologic consults and bedside procedures for infected patients.we queried urologic trainees and attending physicians at our institution who are familiar with existing safety recommendations and guidelines regarding the care of infected patients regarding their experiences. this data was compiled to summarize an expert consensus on best practices for bedside procedures for sars-cov-2 positive patients. our aim is to share our experiences performing bedside urologic procedures on sars-cov-2positive patients and offer considerations to maximize the safety of the patients and providers involved and conserve supplies while maintaining a high standard of care.to decrease the amount of time providers and patients spend together in close contact, we support telehealth for the initial evaluation of inpatient consults. for patients who do not require a bedside procedure or for whom physical exam would be unlikely to change treatment, an in-person evaluation is deferred. for patients who require an exam or procedure, the history and any procedural consent can be obtained prior to intervention to reduce the duration of potential exposure (for both provider and patient) and minimize the usage of personal protective equipment (ppe).for procedural interventions, a decision needs to be made as to whether it should be performed in the operating room or at the bedside. this will largely depend on the type of procedure, need for anesthesia, patient's health status, availability of resources, and the provider's comfort level. given the risk of aerosolization with intubation, increased ppe consumption in the operating room, and potential for exposure of additional operating room staff, we suggest attempting bedside interventions whenever possible.for bedside procedures, we suggest judicious use of ppe for providers during the procedure, but recommendations may vary by institution. if not ventilated, the patient should wear a surgical mask. other forms of barrier protection can be considered on an individual basis. as urine does not appear to contain sars-cov-2, 5 a face shield or eye protection to protect against gross contamination is advisable, but not specific to coronavirus-infected patients.we also recommend collecting all supplies that may be needed outside the patient's room, but only those that will definitely be used should be taken inside initially. the rest should be left outside to avoid unnecessary contamination. a second person, a nurse or colleague familiar with the supplies, should be enlisted to help and remain outside the room. to remain in contact with the primary provider, the provider may require a hands-free headset or speakerphone within the room to facilitate easy communication. this assistant can pass additional supplies into the room as needed or obtain other instruments from other treatment areas. to keep the patient's door closed as much as possible, we recommend the assistant transfer additional supplies under the door or through a crack in the door onto a small table in the patient's room, avoiding direct handoff to the contaminated provider. it also reduces excessive donning and doffing of ppe, expedites the procedure, and decreases time in the patient's room. once the procedure is complete, contaminated supplies should be disposed of in the patient's room.for men, we typically bring 18fr coudé and 12fr silicone catheters in addition to a foley kit (with lubrication, bag, and water syringe for balloon inflation), as well as lidocaine jelly, into the patient room for an initial attempt. we also leave a glide wire and council-tip catheter outside the room in case the first two attempts at catheter placement are unsuccessful. it is also useful to have irrigation supplies available, including saline and a catheter-tipped syringe. if these maneuvers are unsuccessful, we proceed to bedside cystoscopy. after a catheter has been successfully placed, we recommend discharging patients home with the catheter to follow up in the outpatient setting in several weeks. this allows for complete recovery prior to attempting another void trial.our bedside cystoscopy cart is stocked with a wide variety of catheters, a light source, several types of wires, dilators, a cystoscope, saline bags, and irrigation tubing. however, we cannot bring the entire cart into the room of a patient with sars-cov-2 due to the risk of contamination of the entire cart and its supplies. we have instead created makeshift carts with only a single light source, light cord, flexible cystoscope, saline bag, and irrigation tubing. this makeshift cart with a single guide wire and council-tip catheter are brought into the patient's room while other types of wires, catheters, and dilators are left outside as backup. a portable monitor is also highly recommended, both to reduce the risk of possible facial contamination with body fluids during direct visualization to improve the difficulties of visualization through an eyepiece when wearing appropriate eye/face protection. after the procedure is complete, the cystoscope is cleaned per institutional protocol, placed inside a biohazard bag, and sent to sterile processing. the entire cart and light source are sanitized once inside the room and then additionally outside the patient's room.all supplies should be brought into the room including local anesthetic and either sutures or hemostatic agents in case bleeding is encountered. the patient should be taught early on how to manage the wound and packing. for larger defects, the benefits and risks of negative pressure wound therapy are clear prior to this pandemic, but should be considered on a case-by-case basis for sars-cov-2 patients. while it would allow for less frequent dressing changes and faster closure of larger wounds, there may be an increased need for troubleshooting of leaks. in addition, it is unknown if negative pressure can lead to aerosolization of viral particles.for patients with sars-cov-2 and gross hematuria, it is critical again to ensure adequate irrigation fluid and supplies are obtained prior to beginning the procedure. we have a low threshold to then initiate continuous bladder irrigation (cbi) to reduce the need for manual irrigations and prevent unnecessary exposures for nursing staff. it is important to initially irrigate out as much clot burden as possible to prevent possible clot obstruction of the catheter. to allow for easier monitoring and titration of continuous irrigation flow from a distance, it is important to set up the irrigation fluid, tubing, and catheter bag to be easily visible. we recommend ensuring that adequate gravity drainage is present throughout the system and securing all tubes to prevent migration or kinking to avoid the need for difficult troubleshooting after the procedure. for men, we also routinely inflate the retention balloon to 30 cc with light catheter traction for a limited period. if these patients need an endoscopic fulguration procedure, spinal anesthesia may reduce the amount of aerosolization.outlined above are our experiences with inpatient consultations and bedside procedures in sars-cov-2 patients and how we have attempted to address urologic challenges that have emerged with this pandemic. please review these suggested protocols within your department and relevant hospital administrators prior to implementing. we recognize that while there is tremendous variation in how different regions have been affected by this pandemic, we have no doubt urologists will have a prominent role helping manage these patients throughout the country.abstract-we report on measurements of bluetooth low energy (le) received signal strength taken on mobile handsets in a variety of common, real-world settings. we note that a key difficulty is obtaining the ground truth as to when people are in close proximity to one another. knowledge of this ground truth is important for accurately evaluating the accuracy with which contact events are detected by bluetooth le. we approach this by adopting a scenario-based approach. in summary, we find that the bluetooth le received signal strength can vary substantially depending on the relative orientation of handsets, on absorption by the human body, reflection/absorption of radio signals in buildings and trains. indeed we observe that the received signal strength need not decrease with increasing distance. this suggests that the development of accurate methods for proximity detection based on bluetooth le received signal strength is likely to be challenging. our measurements also suggest that combining use of bluetooth le contact tracing apps with adoption of new social protocols may yield benefits but this requires further investigation. for example, placing phones on the table during meetings is likely to simplify proximity detection using received signal strength. similarly, carrying handbags with phones placed close to the outside surface. in locations where the complexity of signal propagation makes proximity detection using received signal strength problematic entry/exit from the location might instead be logged in an app by e.g. scanning a time-varying qr code or the like.there is currently a great deal of interest in the use of mobile apps to facilitate covid-19 contact tracing. this is motivated by the hope that more efficient and scalable contact tracing might allow the lockdown measures currently in place in many countries to be relaxed more quickly [1] .in this report we take a first step in evaluating the potential for using bluetooth low energy (le) received signal strength to detect periods of close contact between people. we present measurements taken on mobile handsets in a variety of common, real-world settings. we also measure the effect on received signal strength caused by the human body, by different types of indoor wall, the relative orientation of mobile handsets and so on.the basic idea of a contact tracing app is that if two people carrying mobile handsets installed with the app spend significant time in close proximity to one another (e.g. spending 15minutes within 2 metres 1 ) then the apps on their handsets will both record this contact event. if, subsequently, one of these people is diagnosed with covid-19 then the contact events logged on that person's handset in the recent past, e.g. over the last two weeks, are used to identify people who have been in close contact with the infected person. these people might then be made aware of the contact and advised to self-isolate or take other appropriate precautions. for this approach to be effective it is, of course, necessary that the app can accurately detect contact events.almost all modern handsets are equipped with bluetooth le wireless technology and there is currently much interest in using this as the means for detecting contact events. the singapore tracetogether contact tracing app [2] , [ tracetogether uses the bluetooth le received signal strength to estimate proximity, and likely the apple/google api will do the same. in general, a radio signal tends to get weaker as it gets further from the transmitter since the transmit power is spread over a greater area. bluetooth le devices can be configured to transmit beacons at regular intervals and the idea is that the signal strength with which a beacon is received provides a rough measure of the distance between transmitter and receiver. namely, when the received signal strength is sufficiently high then this may indicate a contact event and, conversely, when the received signal strength is sufficiently low then this may indicate that the handsets are not in close proximity.however, the propagation of radio signals in practice is often complex, especially in indoor environments where walls, floors, ceiling, furniture etc can absorb/reflect radio waves and so change the received signal strength. a person's body also absorbs bluetooth le radio signals so that the received signal strength can be substantially reduced if their body lies on the path between the transmitter and receiver.with this in mind, we report here on measurements of bluetooth le received signal strength taken on mobile handsets in a variety of common, real-world settings. a key difficulty in evaluating proximity detection accuracy in real-world settings is establishing ground truth i.e. recording when contact events actually happened. this ground truth is needed so that the contact events flagged by a contact tracing app can be compared against the actual contact events and so allow the accuracy of the app at detecting contact events to be assessed.to address this we generally adopt a scenario-based approach. for example, we take measurements as two people walk a circuit in city streets side by side while maintaining a 1 metre distance between them. this has the great advantage that (i) ground truth is clear (to within experimental error, e.g. people will not be able to maintain an exactly 1 metre distance while walking) and (ii) data is collected in real-world settings with all their associated complexity. the disadvantage of course is that this limits our study to fairly simple, well structured scenarios. however, by selecting scenarios that aim to capture some of the key elements in common activities we can still gain useful insight into the real-world performance of bluetooth le received signal strength for proximity detection.we present measurements for four real-world scenarios: people walking outdoors in city streets, people sitting around a meeting table, people sitting in a train carriage and people grocery shopping in a supermarket. in addition we present supporting measurements evaluating the impact of the relative orientation of handsets on received signal strength, and on the signal attenuation caused by the human body, by a woman's handbag and by different types of indoor wall.in summary, we find that (i) the bluetooth le received signal strength can vary substantially depending on the relative orientation of handsets and on absorption by the human body. this means that, for example, the received signal strength is considerably higher when people are walking side by side compared to when they walk one behind the other at the same distance. similarly, we find that when people are sitting around a meeting table with their phones in their trouser pockets the received signal strength is low even when the people are sitting less than 1m apart. when they place their phones on the table the received signal strength is much increased. we also find that (ii) within complex indoor environments the received signal strength need not decrease with distance and indeed may increase with distance (recall that we generally expect signal strength to decrease with increasing distance, not to increase). for example, for two people walking around a large supermarket we find that the received signal strength is much the same when they walk close together and when they walk 2m apart. we observe increases in signal strength with increasing distance within a domestic house and within a train carriage. on a more positive note we find that (iii) outdoors the received signal strength indeed tends to decrease with increasing distance thus facilitating proximity detection, also that blockwork walls strongly attenuate bluetooth le radio signals and so leakage of these signals between adjacent houses/buildings is likely to be small.while we consider a much wider range of real-world scenarios and our focus is on contact tracing, our observations are consistent with previous measurement studies on the use of bluetooth for proximity detection for other purposes. for example, [6] , [7] , [8] , [9] in the context of measuring social interaction and [10] , [11] , [12] in the context of indoor localisation. these previous studies have generally found simple thresholding of received signal strength to be highly error prone and therefore found it necessary to use machine learning methods trained on data collected from the particular environment of interest in order to obtain accuate proximity detection. these methods depend upon the availability of ground truth data, and the ability of the developed methods to generalise beyond the specific setting considered is not clear.this suggests that the development of accurate methods for proximity detection based on bluetooth le received signal strength is likely to be challenging. apps based on bluetooth le are therefore probably not a panacea but rather are best viewed as a potentially useful addition to existing contact tracing methods. our measurements also suggest that combining use of bluetooth le contact tracing apps with adoption of new social protocols 2 may yield benefits although this requires further investigation. for example, placing phones on the table during meetings is likely to simplify proximity detection using received signal strength. similarly, carrying handbags with phones placed close to the outside surface. in locations where the complexity of signal propagation makes proximity detection using received signal strength problematic, one might consider logging entry to/exit from the area in an app. this would allow the bluetooth data collected in that area to be flagged as being less reliable, hopefully reducing the rate of contact tracing errors. logging of entry/edit might, for example, be achieved by scanning a time-varying qr code, tapping a handset on a near-field tag (similar to contactless payment) or by placing a dedicated bluetooth beaconing device at the entry/exit point whose beacons can be logged 3 .bluetooth low energy (le) was standardised in 2010. the low energy moniker refers to the reduced drain on the device battery compared to the older bluetooth classic technology. the first mobile handsets using bluetooth le appeared in 2011-12 (e.g. the iphone 4s) and today almost all modern handsets come equipped with it.bluetooth le operates in the same 2.4ghz unlicensed radio band as wifi and other devices (including microwave ovens). bluetooth le devices advertise their presence by periodically (typically once per second) broadcasting short beacon messages. to mitigate the effects of interference from other users of the 2.4ghz band each beacon is broadcast simultaneously on three widely spaced radio channels.each beacon essentially consists of a short fixed preamble, followed by a small beacon payload. the payload contains an identifier of the device making the boadcast (in modern devices this identifier is usually randomised and changes frequently to improve privacy) plus a short message (generally up to 31 bytes long). this message is typically used to indicate that the beacon is associated with a particular app or service, e.g. to associate it with a contact tracing app.a device equipped with a bluetooth le receiver scans the three beacon radio channels listening for beacon transmissions.when the start of a transmission is detected the receiver uses the fact that the beacon preamble is fixed and known to fine tune the radio receiver to the incoming signal. as part of this fine tuning process a received signal strength indicator (rssi) is output, which is an estimate of the radio power in the received signal. it is worth noting that this rssi measurement is intrinsically noisy, with fluctuations of ±5db or greater common even in situations with simple line-of-sight radio transmission, e.g. see [10] and figure 1 below. if the received signal strength is too weak either the transmission is simply not noticed or this fine-tuning process fails. typically this occurs when the received signal strength is below around -90db (the noise floor of the receiver). upon successful fine-tuning of the receiver the payload of the beacon is decoded and passed up to the operating system and then on to relevant apps.the received signal strength is affected by the transmit power used by the device broadcasting the beacon. bluetooth le devices generally use a relatively low transmit power (to save on battery drain) and a rough guideline is that beacons cannot be decoded at distances beyond about 10 metres from the transmitter. in practice the received signal strength is, however, also greatly affected by the way in which the radio signal propagates from transmitter to receiver. in general the radio signal gets weaker as it travels further since the transmit power is spread over a greater area. however, many complex effects can be superimposed upon this basic behaviour. in particular, obstacles lying on the path between the transmitter and receiver (furniture, walls etc) can absorb and/or reflect the radio signal and cause it to be received with higher or lower signal strength. a person's body also absorbs radio signals in the 2.4 ghz band and so the received signal strength can be substantially reduced if their body lies on the path between the transmitter and receiver. in indoor enviroment walls, floors and ceilings can reflect radio signals even when they are not on the direct path between transmitter and receiver, and so increase or decrease the received signal strength.metal, in particular, strongly reflects radio waves and this can be an important factor in radio propagation in environments with a lot of metal. in buses and trains the walls, floor and ceiling are mainly metal and the seats often contain metal parts. in supermarkets not only are the shelving, fridges and freezers typically made of metal but also tinned groceries etc located on the shelving. we can therefore expect that radio propagation in these environments will be complex, and in particular due to reflections the signal strength may not decrease as quickly with distance as in other environments e.g. see [13] , [14] .in our tests we used two pairs of mobile handsets: a pair of google pixel 2's and a pair of samsung galaxy a10's, both running android 9. since we only acquired the galaxy a10's after our measurement study had already started most of our measurements were made using the pixel 2's, and unless otherwise stated the measurements that we report below are pixel 2 data.we used the opentrace app [3] to collect measurements. this is an open source version of the tracetogether [4] contact tracing app used in singapore. we slightly modified opentrace to (i) dump the measured receive signal strength values to disk in csv format and (ii) to scan/advertise bluetooth beacons more frequently (allowing us to collect data more quickly, albeit at the cost of an increased drain on the handset battery which is why these settings would not be used in a production contact tracing app). note that in our initial experiments we used the default scan/advertise settings of opentrace, which yields a receives signal strength measurement roughly every 10s. the change (ii) above increases the sample rate to a measurement roughly every second. we verified that this caused no other change to the collected received signal strength values.to provide a baseline we collected measurements of received signal strength vs distance. we placed two handsets at the same height and collected measurements of received signal strength as we varied the spacing between them. at each distance the handsets are held in a fixed position for at least 10 minutes while the measurements are taken, giving around 80 signal strength observations (one for each advertised beacon detected) at each distance. the handsets are placed flat with the screen facing upwards (as we will see later the relative orientation of the handsets can affect the received signal strength).the solid line in figure 1 (a) shows the measured received signal strength vs distance for our pair of google pixel 2 handsets placed in an open space outdoors (the location is shown in figure 1 (b)). it can be seen that the received signal strength decreases steadily with increasing distance, as expected. also shown are error bars indicating one standard deviation of the measured signal strength at each distance. it can be seen that the standard deviation is around 5db, consistent with previous observations in the literature, e.g. see [10] .since the received signal strength depends on the transmit power and antenna gain of the transmitter and also on the antenna gain at the receiver it can be expected that the measured received signal strength may vary with the handset model. the dashed line in figure 1 (a) shows received signal strength vs distance for a pair of samsung galaxy a10 handsets. observe that the received signal strength is lower than with the pixel 2's (presumably their transmit power and/or antenna gain differs) and also the standard deviation is somewhat higher at around 10db. we also collected measurements for a huawei p10 and the rssi vs distance curve (not shown in the figure to avoid clutter) is almost the same as that for the pixel 2 but again with somewhat higher standard deviation.it is also important to note that due to reflections from walls, furniture etc wireless signal propagation indoors is usually more complex than it is outdoors. figure 2 (a) shows measurements of received signal strength vs distance taken in a relatively open domestic indoor space (shown in figure 2(b) ).observe the increase in received signal strength in figure  2 (a) as the distance increases from 2 to 2.5m. this effect is consistent and reproducible using multiple devices, it is not a measurement error. we believe that it is associated with the narrowing of the indoor space that can be seen towards the top of figure 2 blockwork covered in plaster) acting to focus the wireless signal and so increase the received signal strength as the handset is moved from the open room into this narrower space. we have also observed similar effects outdoors. such behaviour has obvious implications for the use of received signal strength to measure proximity, and confirms that caution is needed when interpreting received signal strength.we also expect that attenuation of bluetooth le wireless signals by the human body (bluetooth le transmits at 2.4ghz, a frequency which is absorbed by water molecules hence why it is also used in microwave ovens) may affect received signal strength, and that the relative orientation of handsets may matter. figure 3 (a) shows measurements of received signal strength as a person rotates around a fixed point 1m away from a mobile handset places flat on a wooden table. the person carries a second handset in their left trouser pocket. figure 3 (b) shows the experimental setup schematically.it can be seen from figure 3 (a) that the received signal strength varies by around 20db as the person rotates. the received signal strength is slightly higher (around -75db) when the person's left side is oriented towards the fixed handset than when their left-side is oriented away from the handset (around -80 db), as might be expected since in the latter case the person's body lies between the phone in their left pocket and the fixed handset. observe also that the received signal strength is substantially higher (around -60db) when the person is facing the fixed handset than when they have their back to it (around -80db), again presumably due to signal absorption by the person's body (the pocket is located towards the front of their trousers).in figure 3 (a) both the signal path between the two handsets and their relative orientations change. to separate out these effects we also took measurements with two handsets held in fixed positions at a 1m distance and roughly waist height (1m above the ground). figure 4 shows the measured received signal strength as a person takes up various positions close to one of the handsets. perhaps unsurprisingly, it can be seen that when the person stands close in front of the handset (roughly fig. 4 : measured received signal strength between two handsets spaced 1m apart as a person changes position relative to the handsets (the positions of the handsets remains fixed). in the left-hand section of the plot nobody is near the handsets, in the centre-left section a person stands closely behind one of the handsets (mimicking a handset being in a front trouser pocket), in the centre-right section they stand closely in front of the handset (mimicking a handset being in a rear trouser pocket) and in the right section they stand beside the handset.mimicking a handset being in a rear trouser pocket) the received signal strength is around 15db lower than when the person stands closely behind the handset (roughly mimicking a handset being in a front trouser pocket).we also took measurements with a person holding a phone in a fixed position and orientation at chest height at a 1m distance from a fixed handset. the received signal strength with the person facing the fixed handset, so with an unobstructed path between the two handsets, was observed to be around 10db higher than when the person faced away from the fixed handset so that their torso lay on the signal path.figure 5(a) plots received signal strength measurements for a similar setup to the previous section but now with one handset placed inside a handbag rather than in a trouser pocket. the handbag contains other items (purse, cosmetics, hairbrush etc) and the phone is located within a pocket inside the left side of the bag. a second phone is placed 1m from the handbag and the measurements are taken as the handbag is rotated, see figure 5 (b) for a schematic of the setup.in section (i) of figure 5 (a) the handbag is orientated so that left-hand side is facing the second phone and a signal strength of around -68db is observed. the handbag is then rotated 180 • so that the right-hand side of the bag now faces the second phone, section (ii) of the plot. it can be seen that the signal strength falls by about 10db to around -75db. the handbag is now rotated by 90 • so that it is end on to the second phone, section (iii) of the plot, and this change increases the signal strength to around -65db. house. comparing figure 6 (a) with the 1m point in figure  1 (a) it can be seen that the stud wall creates little signal attenuation. in contrast, it can be seen from figure 6 (a) that the blockwork wall attenuates the signal by around 20db. blockwork is commonly used for the party walls separating semi-detached houses and apartments. these measurements therefore suggest there is little danger of bluetooth signal strength data triggering a false alarm regarding proximity between people located in adjacent houses/apartments. stud walls, however, are widely used internally within buildings and our measurements indicate that they have little effect on bluetooth received signal strength. hence, false alarms regarding proximity between people located in adjacent rooms within the same building may be a concern.iv. scenario-based measurementsour first scenario seeks to evaluate proximity measurement between people walking in city streets. the observations from this scenario are probably also applicable to people walking in parks and large indoor spaces such as shopping centres and airports.we collected measurements of bluetooth le received signal strength for two people walking the same 1.5km circuit along suburban streets in dublin in four different configurations: side by side (shoulders touching), side by side maintaining a 1m gap, one behind the other maintaining a 1m gap and a 2m gap. both people carry a mobile handset in their left-hand trouser pocket. figure 7 shows time histories of the measured received signal strength for each configuration. when the two people are walking close together, figure 7 (a), the received signal strength is around -65db±10db. from figure 7 (d) it can be seen that when walking with a 2m gap the received signal strength consistently falls to around -95db±10db. that is, there is a clear shift in received signal strength as the distance changes. this suggests that the limited task of distinguishing between whether people outdoors are side by side or one is 2m behind the other, when no other configurations can occur, can indeed likely be achieved using bluetooth le received signal strength data.unfortunately the situation becomes more complex when other configurations are considered. figure 7 (b) shows measurements taken when walking side by side while maintaining a 1m gap and figure 7 (c) when walking one behind the other with a 1m gap. in the first case the received signal strength is around -75db±10db but in the second case it is much lower at around -92db±10db i.e. similar to the signal strength measured when one behind the other and 2m apart. this indicates that this data cannot readily be used to distinguish between whether people are 1m or 2m apart when they are walking behind each other. that is, this data suggests that we cannot reliably distinguish whether people are located less than 2m of each other when walking behind each other in a city street, although we may be able to distinguish this when people are walking side by side.further investigation suggests that the substantial difference in measured received signal strength at a distance of 1m seen in roughly speaking, when two people are walking one behind the other with handsets in their pockets then the handsets are orientated edge on, i.e. similarly to the configuration in the middle section of figure 8 . when the people walk side by side the handsets are roughly orientated so that the screens face one another. data for this configuration is not shown in figure 8 , but our measurements indicate that the received signal strength at 1m is similar to that when the phones are lying flat i.e. to the right-hand side of figure 8 and around 10db higher than when the handsets are edge on. the data in figure 8 is for a controlled indoor setup with no obstructions from people's bodies etc and so is not directly comparable to the data in figures 7(b)-(c) , but it does suggest that significant shift in received signal strength observed when walking side by side vs one behind the other can largely be explained by the change in relative phone orientation.our second scenario aims to evaluate proximity measurement within an office-based workplace. a crude model of workplace movement is that during the work day people mainly spend time either (i) at their desk and (ii) in meetings. regarding (i), if it is a shared office then if one person becomes infected their office mates are known and so contact-tracing is straightforward (with the possible exception of a large openplan office, but we leave evaluation of that more complex scenario to future work). regarding (ii), the hope is that to assist with contact tracing we can augment an infected persons recollection of meetings attended and of the other people present by using bluetooth le received signal strength measurements. we assume that during a meeting people spend the bulk of their time sitting around a table and so we try to evaluate the accuracy of bluetooth le signal strength data for proximity detection in this scenario..we collect measurements of bluetooth le received signal strength with four people sitting around a wooden table as illustrated schematically in figure 9 . we take measurements both when people have their mobile handset in their trouser pocket and when it is placed on the based on this received signal strength data this suggests it would be hard to detect when people sitting close together at a table unless people place their handsets on the table during the meeting.our third scenario aims to evaluate proximity measurement while travelling on public transport. our rough model is that people mainly spend their time seated and so we take measurements of the received signal strength between various seating positions. we focus on a train since irish rail very kindly let us take measuments on two of their rail carriages at short notice, but of course buses, trams and aircraft are also important. while our measurements are taken within a stationary train carriage we do not expect movement of the carriage to change things much. figure 11 (b) shows the carriage layout. seats are arranged in groups of four around a small table. we placed a handset on one seat, indicated at the bottom left of figure 11 (b). a person with a second handset in their left trouser pocket then sat in the positions marked 1, 2 and 3 in figure 11 (b) and the received signal signal strength from the first handset recorded. figures  11(a) , (d) and (d) show the measurements obtained. it can be seen from figures 11(a) and 11(c) that the received signal strength is about -62db when the person is seated around 1m from the first handset, which is in quite good agreement with figure 1(a) . when seated around 2.7m from the first handset the signal strength falls to about -70db, also in reasonable agreement with figure 1(a) .we also collected measurements of received signal strength vs distance along the aisle in the middle of the rail carriage, roughly at the seat height (approximately 50cm above the floor), see figure 12 (b). the measurement setup used is the same as that used in figure 1 . figure 12 (a) shows the measured received signal strength, with the error bars indicating one standard deviation. it can be seen that the received signal strength remains roughly constant up to a distance of 2m and then falls sharply. as noted above, seats in this carriage are arranged in groups of four around small tables. the sharp fall in received signal strength coincides with moving from one group of four seats to another. this data therefore suggests that the signal strength is high between seats with the same in (b) they stay close together while walking around the aisles for 10mins, in (c) they walk one behind the other maintaining a distance of 2m.group but lower between seats in different groups.it can be seen from figure 12 (a) that the received signal strength then stays roughly constant out to a distance of 4m, but appears to increase when moving from 3.5 to 4m (recall that we expect signal strength to generally fall with increasing distance). hence while our measurements suggest that received signal strength might be used to distinguish between people sitting in the same group of seats and those sitting in a different group, the increase in signal strength at 4m is potentially of concern for proximity detection based on received signal strength. we note that the walls, floor and ceiling of a train carriage are primarily made of metal, albeit with the walls and ceiling lined with plastic cladding and the floor with carpet. the seats also likely contain metal. since metal strongly reflects radio signals it is unsurprising that the radio signal propagation behaves in quite a complex manner and a further, more extensive, measurement campaign would be prudent.this scenario aims to evaluate the use of bluetooth le for proximity measurement while grocery shopping in a typical irish supermarket. grocery shopping is, of course, something that everyone has to do and under the current lockdown for many people it is also one of the few activities where they are likely to come into relatively close contact with people outside their immediate social circle. shoppers (who are social distancing) are also present, see figure 13 (a). the two people walk one behind the other (the relatively narrow aisles in the shop encourage this in any case) and both carry a phone in their left-hand trouser pocket.in figure 13 (b) the two people stay close together (although still one behind the other) while walking, in figure 13 (c) they walk one behind the other maintaining a distance of 2m. somewhat surprisingly, it can be seen that the received signal strength measurements look much the same in both cases.presumably this is due to a mix of the impact of the handset orientation already noted when walking one behind the other, and of the effect on wireless signal propagation of the complex environment (metal shelves etc) within the supermarket.these measurements suggest that received signal strength probably cannot be used to distinguish between whether people are close together or 2m apart when walking around a supermarket. however, we note that it is probably unlikely that people will spend more than 15 minutes within 2 metres of each other while walking around a supermarket, and so failure to detect close proximity using received signal strength is perhaps of less importance than in other scenarios. of more concern are false positives, where people are detected as being close together when in fact they are not, in light of the relatively high received signal strengths we see in figure  13 (c) when people are 2m apart.current social distance measures in ireland limit the number of people who can be inside a shop at the same time. this means that people often need to queue outside until allowed to enter. while queueing people are asked to remain spaced 2m apart. figure 14 shows received signal strength measurements collected while queueing outside a supermarket beside metal shopping trolleys. comparing figures 14(a) and 14(b) it can be seen that the received signal strength falls as people stand further apart. a third person standing in between does not change the received signal strength by much, see figure  14 (c). this data suggests that received signal strength might successfully be used to detect proximity while queueing.v. related work while there have been some studies on use of the magnetometers on smartphones for contact tracing, e.g. see [15] , [16] , to the best of our knowledge there are no previous measurement studies on the use of bluetooth le specifically in the context of contact tracing. perhaps the closest work is fluphone [17] , an approach proposed in 2011 that made use of bluetooth rather than bluetooth le and did not try to distinguish between contact events where people are less than 2m apart and when they are further away (the app simply logged all observed bluetooth mac addresses). use of bluetooth le for proximity detection has, however, been investigated in the context of measuring social interaction and also indirectly in the context of indoor localisation.bluetooth le was standardised in 2010 with the first devices using bluetooth le appearing in 2011-12, although the original (non-low energy) bluetooth classic technology is older. the use of the bluetooth received signal strength reported by smartphones to infer proximity has received attention since around 2014, mainly in the context of studies on social interaction in indoor office settings and only more recently making using of bluetooth le. in summary, this work highlights that (i) simple thresholding of received signal strength to estimate proximity results in a high error-rate, (ii) by using standard machine learning classifiers much better accuracy can be achieved, but since these are supervised learning methods they require training data, which is generally difficult and timeconsuming to obtain (in these studies determining ground truth involved manual observation of camera footage or shadowing of people by observers).one of the earliest studies is that reported in [6] . this makes use of bluetooth (rather than bluetooth le). measurements are collected as two people carrying mobile handsets follow a prescribed path on a university campus, walking between two buildings and spending time indoors and outdoors. the aim is to use received signal strength to detect when the two people are within 1.5m of each other. it was found that simple thresholding of the received signal strength yields a high error rate of around 50% even when people are in the proximity of one another for 10 mins. averaging of the measured signal strength values improves the accuracy somewhat, but since the signal strength was observed to vary significantly depending on whether people were indoors or outdoors then in order to achieve a low error rate the authors needed to employ multiple thresholds tuned to the particular environment used on the study, combined with use of a light sensor to detect operation indoors or out. the latter meant that operation in evening and at night needed to be excluded. a much larger follow-up study is also reported on in [6] but since it lacks ground truth it is hard to draw quantitative conclusions regarding the accuracy with which proximity is estimated.around the same time the use of bluetooth (again, not bluetooth le) for proximity detection was also considered by [7] . in this study it is noted that phone orientation can have a substantial effect on received signal strength. water-filled cylinders with mobile handsets attached were used to collect baseline data on received signal strength that was then used to train a decision tree classifier. in experiments involving 8 students interacting in an office environment, and with ground truth obtained via a human observer, proximity was estimated with an accuracy of around 80%.more recently, [8] studies the use of bluetooth le for proximity sensing within 3m. they use custom bluetooth le bracelets rather than smartphones and take measurements in an officebased workplace. ground truth is obtained by an observer logging all interactions, plus the office space is equipped with multiple static beacons whose transmissions are logged by the smartphones. a decision tree classifier was trained using this data and an accuracy of around 80% reported for bluetooth le settings similar to those used in android. similarly, last year [9] reports on a study where people carry ibeacons. data is collected data for 24 people interacting in a 6m by 5m indoor space with ground truth on interactions being obtained via two video cameras covering the indoor space. a regression tree classifier achieves an accuracy of around 80%.apple introduced ibeacons using bluetooth le in mid-2013 [18], [19] . these are typically placed in fixed locations indoors and transmit bluetooth le beacons. these beacons typically transmit at low power so that they can only be detected when a receiver is relatively close and this allows them to be used by a mobile handset to roughly estimate its location within an office or shop. handsets use the received signal strength to estimate their distance from an ibeacon, but this is limited to whether the beacon is immediate, near, far or has unknown status. other manufacturers have since developed similar beacon technology.there has, of course, been much interest in obtaining more accurate distance estimates so as to improve indoor localisation. however, received signal strength measurements are known to exhibit large fluctuations, e.g. see [10] , and so in more recent work it has been common to (i) try to combine received signal strength data with other measurements e.g. accelerometer and time of flight data, and (ii) employ machine learning methods to help map from received signal strength data to distance, similarly to the approaches adopted by the proximity detection community (see above). see [10] , [11] , [12] , and citations therein for recent work in this direction.we report on measurements of the bluetooth le received signal strength taken on mobile handsets in a variety of common, real-world settings. in summary, we find that the bluetooth le received signal strength can vary substantially depending on the relative orientation of handsets, on absorption by the human body, reflection/absorption of radio signals in buildings and trains. indeed we observe that the received signal strength need not decrease with increasing distance. this suggests that the development of accurate methods for proximity detection based on bluetooth le received signal strength is likely to be challenging and time consuming. our measurements also suggest that it may be necessary for bluetooth le contact tracing apps to be combined with the adoption of new social protocols to yield benefits although this requires further study. for example, placing phones on the table during meetings is likely to simplify proximity detection using received signal strength. similarly, carrying handbags with phones placed close to the outside surface. in locations where the complexity of signal propagation makes proximity detection using received signal strength problematic, additional non-bluetooth le mechanisms may be required.looking ahead, further work is needed to try to quantify the error rates of proximity detection methods based on bluetooth le received signal strength. in particular, it is important to distinguish between false positives (where people are flagged as having been in contact with an infected person but in fact have not been) and false negatives (where people are not flagged as having been in contact with an infected person, but in fact were). false positives are likely when the received signal strength does not decrease sufficiently quickly with distance, and false negatives when the received signal strength decreases too quickly. our data suggests that there may be significant potential for both types of error in common, realworld situations. false positives are of concern since they mean that people may be led to unnecessarily self-isolate with associated disruption and perhaps also leading to a loss of confidence in the contact tracing app if the error rate is too high. false negatives are of concern since they directly reduce the effectiveness of contact tracing for disease control, namely they mean that people in contact with an infected person may inadvertently spread the infection further.regrettably, after a first moment of appreciation and praise of the citizens for healthcare personnel facing covid 19 pandemia, numerous episodes of actions taken against them on the issue of their legal liability followed. impelling is to start an argumentation on this problem that aims to establish a shared conduct in dealing with them. the authors propose a basis for discussion on which to begin a constructive debate.covid-19: the wrong target for healthcare liability claims.regrettably, in the complex setting of the current coronavirus pandemic, an incoercible succession of events, revolving around the question of the professional liability of healthcare personnel, with the typical peculiarities of emergency situations, is emerging [1] . as a matter of fact, after an initial, choral and unquestioning appreciation and praise of the citizens for healthcare operators [2] , numerous episodes of actions taken against them on the issue of their legal liability followed [3] . this has prompted the medical scientific societies and trade unions to take a defensive stance, and loudly call for the healthcare system as a whole to safeguard its interests. they have asked for targeted political actions to issue clear rules, and not only about the implementation of "quarantine" measures [4] . but the exceptional nature of the present emergency cannot hide the fact that individual health operators are responsible for their own work behavior, making it difficult to build a national normative "barrier" (criminal and civil) to protect them [1] . the scenario that has come true can undeniably be defined in insurance terms as "catastrophic", and, as such, necessitates organizational measures (at all health facilities) to identify appropriate standards of care, competencies, compliance with shift-scheduling rules, tracking of communications and activities, and the postponement of non-covid-19 services provisions, based on a proper definition of the guaranteed minimum levels of patient care. many stakeholders (i.e. some politicians, economists, citizens, etc.) do not appear to have fully understood what a global pandemic crisis means, and what efforts are being made to contain this new emergency situation. this is partly due to the paucity or absence of authoritative and shared scientific grounds (i.e. guidelines), also at an international level, for dealing with the disease caused by covid-19 virus, which is still scarcely known [5] . soon, it will be possible to predict that this situation will generate a marked increase in the insurance claims that the various health organizations and insurance companies will struggle to cope with. demands for financial compensation will include not only the diseases caused by covid-19, but also other health conditions, with important repercussions of the covid-19 emergency on the management of all other patients and also on the availability of personal protective equipment (ppe), which have necessitated a fast supply to numerous urgent demands. the present "catastrophic" situation undeniably imposes the need to take irreducible risks that cannot be assessed by local "technical" body delegated to act as a centralized hub. otherwise, to bring forward the technical assessment, that is usually one of the fundamental parts of the criminal and civil trial, it would be not only complicated to organize and unavoidably self-referential for the sole decision-maker, but it would also be unacceptable for cultural and legal reasons. there would be, indeed, no chance of a crossexamination, and the rightful role of the judge/court in arriving at an autonomous synthesis would be lacking. the most realistic option might be to establish an ad hoc fund for all claims for financial damages coronavirusemergency related, that could award lump-sum payments for claims considered worthy of compensation, and thus contain the numbers of lawsuits. in such cases, it would be recommended to appeal for mediation. trained mediators could be more effective in finding an agreement between the parties. another workable solution could be to emphasize by law that the pandemic is characterized by technical-scientific difficulty and/or novelty inasmuch as it is an emergency -a condition that almost always renders even the easiest tasks difficult to accomplish. in these cases, similarly as in mass disasters, once the emergency has elapsed, responsibility can be recognized only for those who have clearly allowed an avoidable event to occur. the main problems in this setting will ineluctably gradually shift the focus of liability evaluations from the physician's conduct to the handling of the various levels of management (primarily technical and organizational), that have to suggest appropriate risk parameters to the political decision-makers. perhaps, the world of politics has lost the ability to choose the right experts based on the grounds of their merits, those able to guide government strategies at their best [6] . the real problem is to ascertain the liability of top managers in the health administration, those appointed to handle public health emergencies, though with unclear margins of autonomy. the lack, or late adoption, of clear and cogent directives applicable everywhere also does not exempt all the intermediate-level institutions from their obligation to take independent actions, if necessary, dictated by common sense and/or trustworthy experts [7] . different countries have a specific technical support framework (stsf) for political and administrative decision-makers on a local level, which, for instance, advises health facilities and hospitals on matters of infectious diseases. leveraging on the emergency as an excuse for failing to activate and consult the stsf, either urgently or according to the established protocols, and even after its involvement had been specifically requested by other parties, certainly has all the features of a culpable omission and, therefore, of a liability. in the same way, the disregard for bottom-up recommendations made by the stsf's experts, made it necessary to deal with problems that their suggestions would have enabled to be managed differently. these seem to be the issues most likely to be the focus of discussion in the future.below are a few examples of clinical and care activity management areas susceptible to the recommendations and coordination of a stsf. inside hospitals:1) the opening of spaces sars-cov-2 patients dedicated outside infectious diseases departments, with the related problems of: a) structural adequacy (who assessed them and based on what expertise?); b) the use of dedicated medical and paramedical personnel (whole teams established ex abrupto; who was responsible for the infection's propagation to personnel and patients?); c) the distribution of personnel expert on matters of infectious diseases who could serve as tutors for other workgroups; 2) responsibility for exposure to the risk of infection, with the need for constant monitoring of the rates of detection of new positive cases, in-hospital exposure for patients previously tested negative for covid-19, the timely identification of clusters, the management of personnel testing positive for the virus and their contacts, and the corresponding quarantine measures, which often take on a different meaning when applied to the general population or to public health personnel; 3) workflows of follow-up tests for personnel in all areas based on the risk of transmission within teams and to the patients; 4) responsibility for managing tests (turn-around-time to get results, materials procurement, prioritizing different requests, suspected cases, tests on patients, personnel, and other potentially exposed individuals), and the demand for other diagnostic services (who is in charge and whose responsibility is it?). outside hospitals:1) long-term care facilities: in a setting where specialist expertise is not widespread, the role of bodies responsible for controlling the spread of infections, with the aid of specialized individuals, becomes essential in disseminating appropriate organization and control measures. in this setting, any responsibility for delays and omissions certainly cannot be attributed to the managers of these territorial facilities. responsibilities have therefore to be ascribed to the competent public health bodies and control authorities from the moment they are informed; 2) general practitioners: specific training and support for the management and control of their professional exposure should be carefully coordinated at top management level, and translated into timely action. all these problems will demand an "economically sustainable" response, that will affect the budgeting of health organizations and insurance companies alike. at the time of writing, the situation may still not be entirely clear. it will take a while to find solutions for all the problems in the longer term. it will be essential to strike the correct balance between the rights of damaged individuals and the proper safeguarding of health-care professionals in a frame that considers the responsibilities of the whole health system. this system should be submitted to a necessary, and not selfreferential auditing process.c h a p t e r 1 2thomas n. tully, jr.this chapter, on mice and rats, contains information on the companion species that is useful for veterinarians treating the animals or providing information to the owners. although similarities exist for mice and rats-in care, husbandry, diagnostic testing, and treatment-emphasis will be on the differences between the species.mice may be maintained as pets because of their size and playful nature. although playful, mice can be aggressive to cagemates and owners. the aggressive nature often manifests as barbering and/or fi ghting with cagemates and biting their owners. any potential owner should be educated on the aggressive nature of these small dynamos. domestic mice (mus musculus) and the african pygmy mouse (baiomys spp.) are commonly sold for pets and are available in several varieties. the mice varieties sold in pet stores include white, black, or tan colored, satin hair coat (shiny), pied or spotted, and longhaired 1,2 (figure 12-1) . the size and ability of mice to escape quickly from the grasp of a human handler make these animals, as pets, better suited for older individuals. the timid nature of mice predispose these animals to biting if handled roughly, which commonly occurs with a young owner. mice are nocturnal animals and may be a disturbance at night if maintained in a bedroom. female mice produce less odor than males and therefore may be more desirable as pets. as mentioned earlier, male mice are territorial, and if placed with other male mice, may fi ght. advantages of having mice as pets include their size, ability to be a good companion animal for the educated (regarding mouse behavior) owner, and adorable appearance.mice also rarely become infected with bacterial diseases, and their life span is approximately 2 years (box 12-1).the integument of mice is commonly associated with a number of disease presentations. a hair coat that has not been adequately maintained is often the fi rst clinical sign associated with disease. mice are fastidious with their grooming and, when healthy, maintain a very tidy hair coat. common problems associated with a hair coat that is not maintained include general illness, parasitism (internal and external), aggression by cagemates as a result of psychological trauma, and infectious dermatitis.neoplasia is a disease condition that affects mice. there are some mouse strains in which mouse mammary tumor viruses have been identifi ed that have a neoplasia incidence as high as 70%. 3 tumor viruses, as well as a very short life span (up to 2 years), predispose these animals to cancer. mammary adenocarcinomas and fi brosarcomas are the most common tumors that affect mouse mammary tissue. 4 unfortunately, by the time many of these tumors are diagnosed, the malignant masses are large and ulcerated. 4 fibrosarcomas may be hormonally induced, and the incidence of this disease process can be reduced through an ovariectomy at an early age. the small size of the female mouse often makes the ovariectomy surgery challenging for the veterinary surgeon.although relatively uncommon, urethral obstruction can occur in male mice as a result of preputial and/or bulbourethral gland infections. 4 male mice suffering from an urethral obstruction may have a mutilated penis, a sign often associated with the disease process.mice are continuous, polyestrous rodents that should be bred in polygamous or monogamous setups because of the males' aggressive territoriality behavior. 2 when breeding mice that have been housed in a polygamous ratio, there may be one male with two to six females. 2 females are removed from a polygamous cage before parturition, whereas the monogamous pair is maintained together with the young until weaning. 2 mice can chew out of enclosures; therefore, it is important that the housing be "mouse proof." if an animal escapes, the best way to capture the pet is to place food in the center of the room. once it has been determined in which room the animal is staying, then it should be sealed and measures taken to look for the pet. because mice are nocturnal animals, capture at night in a dark room with a fl ashlight may work best. this technique will work for capture of other small rodents and pocket pets too.mice are maintained in environments that are similar to other small rodents but require a thorough cleaning of their cage more often because of their malodorous urine. ventilation is essential for small rodent housing to prevent irritation of the respiratory tract from ammonia vapors generated by urine. the recommended housing unit for mice is 12-15″ × 12-15″ × 6″ (length × width × height) for each adult mouse; females and young require 2 to 3 times the space listed. 2 the major considerations for selecting an enclosure for mice is that it be resistant to their escape and easy to clean. an open screen top of the enclosure is recommended for proper ventilation. available rodent cages that fi t this criterion are wire or metal mesh, plastic, and plexiglas. if the plastic tube housing systems are used, there should be routine cleaning of the sections using hot water and a mild detergent. owners should be informed of the small distance required for a mouse to escape and their ability to chew through plastic. an owner must always monitor the cage for possible escape avenues, especially if the animal has a predilection for modifying the cage opening through chewing. it is very important to provide cage toys and exercise opportunities for mice. the enclosure should be large enough to house not only food and water containers but also cage toys and an exercise wheel (figure 12-2 ). although not a cage toy, a hide box, in some form, should also be included for the psychological well-being of the animal. this hide box can be manufactured or a small cardboard container that has one end cut out. mice like to hide and also sleep during the day. this piece of cage furniture will enable the mouse to sleep undisturbed during the daylight hours.mice, especially males, have odiferous urine. to prevent the buildup of urine and fecal material in the cage, commercially available paper rodent bedding or hardwood shavings should be used as a cage substrate. although softwood (pine) and cedar shavings are available, the volatile oils that radiate from these substrates are irritating to small animals. these irritating compounds can cause dermal and respiratory infl ammation, often leading to secondary bacterial infections.cardboard tissue tubes can be placed in a mouse enclosure; mice like to chew and run through these items. because many fabrics have strong thread and elastic, it is not recommended to put clothes items in enclosures with animals that chew. often mice will shred the clothing items, exposing thread and elastic that can become entangled around an extremity; this can lead to necrosis distal to the stricture. it is recommended to change the substrate within the enclosure at least twice a week-more often if there is a problem with odor or excessive excreta.temperature, humidity, and lighting within the enclosure should follow what is commonly maintained with the ambient conditions within the house. if the animals are housed outside or in an outbuilding, the temperature range should be 65° f to 85° f and humidity 30% to 70%, although the recommended humidity is on the higher end of the range provided. 2 mice, especially males, are extremely territorial animals. if mice are housed alone, it is better to keep them separate, as introduction of new animals will often lead to aggression and fi ghting. to prevent aggression, fi ghting, and psychologically induced adverse behavior (e.g., barbering), a single mouse is recommended as a companion animal. for those who intend to breed the animals, enclosures with a single pair is necessary for reproductive success.because mice are commonly used as laboratory animals in investigations of human disease processes, much research literature is available on the recommended nutritional requirements of these animals. the benefi t of these dietary studies is the availability of commercially produced diets that provide the recommended daily nutritional requirements of the mouse. the problem that most owners face is the multitude of dietary products available for mice and the lack of knowledge regarding which food to buy. most new mouse owners think that rodents eat seed-based diets. although mice will happily eat seed, seed-based diets are lacking in a number of the nutritional requirements needed to maintain long-term health. commercial rodent biscuits or pellets with more than 14% protein are the recommended diets for mice. 2 the commercial rodent biscuits or pellets are the only food mice need to obtain their required nutrients (figure 12-3) . again, seed-based diets are not recommended, nor is a signifi cant supplementation of fruits, nuts, vegetables, cheese, or other human foods (e.g., peanut butter). if a treat is to be given, yogurt or dried fruit treats manufactured specifi cally for rodents and/or mice should be provided 2 to 3 times a week. for younger mice, less than 3 weeks old, softer pellets are needed because babies start eating pellets and drinking water at 2 to 3 weeks of age. 2 a sipper bottle, placed on the outside of the cage, is easy to maintain and does not take any space within the enclosure. if the cage is plastic or plexiglas, modifi cations will be needed to attach the sipper bottle on the outside of the cage. most sipper bottles come with attachment hardware to attach to wire cages ( figure  12 -4). fresh bottled water is recommended for mice, although chlorinated tap water is acceptable. the water should be checked on a daily basis and clean water supplied at least every 2 days, if not every day.quarantining an animal is important when a new animal is being introduced into a setting in which there is an established group. as with other animals, a 30-day quarantine period is recommended, along with a physical examination and fecal parasite check. unfortunately, there is no time period that will screen 100% against potential infectious agents, and with mice, time is critical because their life span and reproductive time frame are so short. the animals should be quarantined in conditions similar to those in which they will be permanently maintained. providing adequate food and water will make for a smooth transition. it is imperative that the owner screen the new animal for diseases and watch for any signs of illness. the most common sign of clinical illness is a rough hair coat. the lack of grooming is most often related to the animal feeling depressed or sick, thereby not having the energy to perform routine behaviors. if a number of animals are being quarantined, sacrifi cing an apparently diseased animal is the most effi cient way to determine a rapid defi nitive diagnosis. if it is a single or an expensive animal, routine diagnostic testing will be required.to maintain oversight of breeding animals' health and reduce the exposure of young animals to infectious disease and parasites, routine screening of representative animals within the colony is recommended. in very large colonies, special caging (e.g., fi lter), food, and water may be necessary to prevent exposure to disease organisms. 2before a veterinarian examines a mouse, the examination table should be disinfected with either a dilute sodium hypochlorite or chlorhexidine solution. the examiner should always wash his or her hands and, if necessary, wear examination gloves to capture and restrain the patient. the diffi culty with using latex gloves when examining a mouse is the small size of the patient and its ability to twist and turn. the only way to restrain some mouse patients is without gloves. if gloves are not worn, the examiner's hands must be washed thoroughly after the examination is completed.to catch a mouse, the tail should be grabbed with the thumb and forefi nger, allowing the mouse to hold on to an object with their front feet (figure 12-5 ). when the mouse securely attaches itself to an object, the opposite hand then grabs the dorsal skin in the cervical region while keeping the tail in a fi rm grasp.if one is unable to adequately restrain a mouse while the animal is conscious, inhalant anesthesia may be used for sedation purposes. the animal should be placed in a small induction chamber and isofl urane gas permeated into the closed space. once the animal has stopped moving, the enclosure top is removed and a nose cone placed on the anesthesia tube and placed on the patient's face. a syringe case can be modifi ed as a nose cone for small rodents, including mice. once the physical examination is complete, the nose cone is removed, allowing the patient to breath oxygen from the anesthesia unit.obtaining a detailed history of the mouse patient is very important, as it is with other animal patients that are brought to a veterinarian's offi ce. it is important to get as much information from the owner as possible, even if it is a routine health examination.typical background information required includes how long the mouse been owned, where it was acquired, how often it is handled, and what the character of the feces and urine is. husbandry questions should focus on the animal's housing and whether it is allowed to roam unobserved; cage location; type, size, and material of the cage; cage substrate, furniture, and toys; and the frequency with which the cage is cleaned and what disinfectant is used. when investigating the diet, the veterinarian should ask not only if pellets are fed and in what quantity, but also what the animal is eating and what the primary diet is. supplemental offerings and frequency of feeding are important data for the case work-up. the veterinarian should fi nd out about the water supply, how often the water is changed, and how much the animal drinks on a daily basis.because there are transmissible diseases among animals, the fi nal questions should center on the other pets in the household, if new animals have been added to the family, and if the animals are housed together. a description of any previous problems and a complete chronological description of the presenting problem are needed to complete the history form.before the animal is restrained, an observation should be made on the attitude, activity, and posture of the animal. the next step is to weigh the mouse in a basket on a digital gram scale. if possible, temperature, respiration, and pulse should be measured and any abnormalities in rate and/or character noted. the veterinarian should start the physical examination at the head, looking for any abnormalities. eyes, ears, and nares are observed, looking for discharge or infl ammation. the oral cavity is diffi cult to examine in mice because of the small opening and tendency for the buccal mucosa to encroach toward the middle of the mouth. a small speculum (e.g., modifi ed paper clip) or an otoscope may be used to examine the oral cavity and cheek teeth. mucous membranes help determine hydration status using capillary refi ll time and moisture. body condition and abdominal palpation are important information that should be obtained. lymph nodes and limbs are palpated before checking the nails and plantar surface of each foot. the patient should have a normal posture, be aware of its surroundings, and move properly. any problems should be noted in the record. finally, a dermatologic exam considers hair coat quality, alopecia, external parasites, and any skin abnormalities. all abnormal fi ndings are written in the record for case review, differential diagnoses determination, diagnostic testing, and treatment considerations.most of the common problems noted during the physical examination of mice involve the skin and hair coat. as mentioned previously, an unkempt hair coat may point toward generalized illness or external parasitism. abrasive lesions or pustules on the skin can be signs of external parasites or infectious dermatitis. if external parasites are a problem, the mouse may be uncontrollably scratching. hair loss may be associated with barbering, either cagemate or self-induced, or with infection (e.g., ringworm). although not common, trichophyton mentagrophytes will cause hair loss in mice, from the face, head, and neck. 4 mice will commonly present with tumors and abscesses. the entire body of the mouse should be palpated for any evidence of masses. if a mass is identifi ed, a fi ne needle aspirate is recommended for basic diagnostic evaluation. with most fi ne needle aspirate samples, the clinical pathology results are not very rewarding. if a diagnosis cannot be obtained through cytologic examination, a biopsy of the lesion is required, and if possible, an excisional biopsy is the procedure of choice.as with many rodents, respiratory disease is commonly identifi ed in mice. mice may have presenting symptoms of dyspnea, sneezing, coughing, chattering, and sniffl ing if they have a respiratory infection. in cases where respiratory signs are observed, anesthetizing the animal to perform the physical examination is not recommended, and handling should be kept to a minimum. the two most common respiratory disease conditions in mice are sendai virus and mycoplasma pulmonis. 4 these two organisms are very diffi cult to identify through routine diagnostic measures, and obtaining samples significantly stresses the patient. if the animal is being examined for placement into a colony or breeding environment, sacrifi ce to identify the disease condition is recommended. if the animal is an individual companion animal, doxycycline treatment should be initiated. although treatment with doxycycline will not clear the organism from the animal, it will reduce clinical disease and improve the quality of life. the treated animal should always be considered a carrier of these respiratory diseases if a defi nitive diagnosis cannot be obtained.male mice that are licking and/or mutilating their penis may be suffering from a urethral obstruction. infection of accessory sex glands, young males with aggressive breeding activity, urolithiasis, and trauma may initiate this self-induced trauma to the penis. 4 pasteurella pneumotropica is often isolated from accessory sex gland infections as well as subdermal abscesses. 4 treatment for this organism may aid in the recovery of a mouse affected by urethral obstruction.diarrhea in mice is rare, but endoparasite examinations should be performed if the animal has diarrhea. although pinworms are considered nonpathogenic in mice, syphacia obvelata and aspiculuris tetraptera may cause rectal prolapse due to straining in immunosuppressed individuals. 5 as with other animals, a tape test is the best way to identify these parasites. a tape test follows a procedure of pressing the sticky side of the tape against the rectum and perianal area and then examining the tape under a microscope for eggs and parasites. 5as with other pocket pets, blood collection from mice can be quite diffi cult. approximately 0.5 to 0.7 ml/100 g body weight can be safely removed from a nonanemic healthy mouse. 2 the mouse patient should always be anesthetized for blood collection procedures. usually inducing the animals in a closed chamber and maintaining the patients in a mask will allow the technician plenty of time to collect the blood sample. a small, 25-, 26-, or 30-gauge needle, usually placed on a 1-ml syringe, is recommended for collecting the blood. recommended blood collection sites in a mouse are a warmed ventral tail vein or the tip of the tail. 2 box 12-2 describes the technique used for retroorbital bleeding in mice. the retroorbital bleeding technique is commonly used in laboratory animal settings and is easily performed by an experienced veterinarian or veterinary technician. 5 on smaller rodents, the saphenous vein or lateral vein of the tarsus may be used for multiple blood collections without the use of anesthesia. the patient must be properly immobilized in a restraint tube (35-ml syringe) with the leg extended and the skin held tight on the medial aspect of the thigh using the thumb and forefi nger. 2 the taut skin on the lateral aspect of the thigh allows exposure of the saphenous vein. a 23-gauge needle is used to puncture the vein, and blood is collected in a microhematocrit tube as it fl ows from the vessel. 5 blood samples obtained from nail and ear clips are not considered appropriate diagnostic samples. cardiac puncture is recommended only in terminal cases and when the animal is maintained under general anesthesia because of possible complications involving the lungs and heart vessels. reference ranges for complete blood counts and serum biochemistry panels for mice are listed in boxes 12-3 and 12-4. 1,2marrow samples may be obtained from the ilium, tibia, sternum, femur, or the bones of the proximal one third of the tail. 5 preparation of the samples is consistent with that of other mammalian patients.standard rodent cages can be used without substrate to collect urine and feces when the patient is hospitalized. after placing a rodent in a zip-lock bag, urination frequently occurs and the sample can be collected. 4 in a similar manner, urine can be collected over a disinfected stainless steel examination table.the urine is voided while the animal is restrained and can be collected in a capillary tube for evaluation on urine reagent strips. 1 urinalysis reference values for mice are listed in box 12-5.under most practice settings, the size of a mouse patient limits imaging capabilities to radiographs. restraint is essential for quality diagnostic images and is even more important when patients weigh as little as 40 g. to obtain adequate restraint and prevent movement of the mouse patient during radiographic evaluation, sedation is required. as with all diagnostic box 12-2 retroorbital blood collection for mice from procedures involving avian and exotic animals, an evaluation of the patient is required to determine its ability to withstand the stress associated with the assessment. if it is determined that the patient cannot withstand sedation, then it should be stabilized until it is deemed healthy enough for diagnostic imaging evaluation. sedating the mouse using an induction chamber and isofl urane anesthetic, as described for restraint, is necessary to obtain diagnostic fi lms. high-speed, 300-ma machines with fi ne or detail-intensifying screens should be adequate for most small exotic mammal images. with mice, dental x-ray units that can focus at short distances may be advantageous for both isolation of focal anatomy and full body radiographs in extremely small patients. for extreme detail in small exotic mammal medicine, using a traditional radiography unit, the min r mammography system (eastman kodak) with min r single-intensifying screen cassettes, in conjunction with min r single-emulsion fi lm, has been recommended. 1 digital radiography is bringing a new dimension to radiograph evaluations and detail. the secret to success in either traditional or digital radiographic imaging is to restrict patient movement during exposure. two views, ventrodorsal and lateral, are recommend for mice patients. again, because of a mouse patient's size, whole body radiographs are commonly obtained during the radiographic evaluation, even using dental radiographic equipment.for the mouse patient in which microbiological testing is recommended, standard collection techniques used for other animals is appropriate. the diffi culty when culturing mice is acquiring a representative sample of the suspect area that will provide diagnostic information. sick mice often are extremely stressed when being examined or when diagnostic samples are being collected. it is also important to know what the common disease conditions are and the common etiologies associated with those clinical signs. with the most common respiratory conditions in mice, one is sendai virus and the other a mycoplasma sp. both sendai virus and mycoplasma spp. will not be isolated using standard aerobic or anaerobic culture techniques. if in doubt on collecting, preserving, and/or shipping a microbiological sample, the diagnostic laboratory must be contacted for full instructions as they relate to mouse submissions.routine fecal parasite evaluations should be performed on small rodents when they are brought to the veterinary clinic for a health examination or an abnormal stool. common protozoal organisms can be detected using a direct fecal examination, and mouse pinworms are commonly diagnosed using the sticky side of clear cellophane tape to make an impression of the perianal area. the anal tape test will aid in diagnosing syphacia spp. the sticky surface will pick up any of the banana-shaped pinworm eggs that can be observed under a microscope.diagnosis of ectoparasites in small rodents is similar to that in other species listed in this text. the pelage tape test is performed by pressing clear cellophane tape against the pelt of a mouse, dorsally and ventrally, from the nose to the base of the tail. myobia spp. and myocoptes spp. can be diagnosed using the pelage tape test. a skin scraping of the affected area may also help in identifying ectoparasites. diagnosis of intestinal parasites can be made by fi nding individual eggs during fecal examination or whole worms within the lumen of the small intestine during necropsy. 6 even though most of the diagnostic testing is performed through pathologic examination for mice, there are serologic tests available that can be run on a minimum of 50 μl of undiluted serum. sound diagnostics, inc. (woodinville, washington) provides serologic testing on a number of common mouse diseases, including ectromelia virus, mouse hepatitis virus, mouse parvovirus, mouse minute virus, rotavirus, theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus, pneumonia virus of mice, reovirus 3, sendai virus, mycoplasma pulmonis, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, and mouse adenovirus. the serologic tests are done using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) and, when indicated, are confi rmed by indirect fl uorescent antibody testing. many of the diseases for which there are available serologic tests are benefi cial in maintaining disease-free animals in laboratory settings or large breeding facilities. in cases of unknown disease conditions for the individual pet mouse, there are panels available that test for multiple diseases from a single serum sample. it is very important for the veterinary clinician to understand both the signifi cance of any test that is being promoted for mice and how the results are interpreted.bacterial infections associated with dermatitis lesions and subcutaneous abscesses in mice are commonly caused by staphylococcus aureus, pasteurella pneumotropica, and streptococcus pyogens. 4 acute and chronic respiratory infections may be caused by sendai virus or mycoplasma pulmonis. 4 acute respiratory infections usually are associated with sendai virus; adults live while neonates often die. chronic respiratory infection, with clinical signs being pneumonia, suppurative rhinitis, and occasionally otitis media, may be the result of a mycoplasma pulmonis infection. 4 both infections should be treated using supportive care, whereas mycoplasmosis can be treated with enrofl oxacin in combination with doxycycline hyclate for 7 days. 7 p. pneumotropica has been associated with urethral obstruction caused by infl ammation and swelling related to infection of accessory sex glands. 4 although uncommon, trichophyton mentagrophytes (ringworm) can cause alopecia of the face, head, and neck of mice. 4 in addition to the disease organisms mentioned in this chapter (which are the most common disease organisms identifi ed in pet mice), there are other bacterial, fungal, and viral organisms that can cause disease in mice. proper diagnostic protocol should always be followed to identify the causal agent. once the cause is identifi ed, the proper treatment can be initiated and control measures implemented to prevent other animals' exposure to the disease.numerous parasites have been identifi ed in mice. hymenolepis nana (dwarf tapeworm) and cysticercus fasciolaris (the larval stage of the cat tapeworm) can be isolated from these small rodents. 5 the dwarf tapeworm is often found in young mice that are dead or have severe gastroenteritis resulting in diarrhea. diagnosis of the dwarf tapeworm can be made following either a fecal fl otation exam or necropsy, when the adults may be found in the small intestine. treatment for the dwarf tapeworm is with praziquantel.the mouse pinworm (syphacia obvelata) is a commensal oxyurid nematode that feeds on bacteria that inhabit the intestinal tract of mice. 6 although these nematodes are nonpathogenic in most cases, an overwhelming number of them can cause severe irritation of the terminal gastrointestinal tract. these nematode parasites can be diagnosed using transparent tape and applying it to the rectal area. after removing the tape from the affected rectal area, it is placed on a slide and the ova may be viewed under a microscope. ivermectin and fenbendazole have been used effectively in treating this parasite in mice. 6 giardia muris is a common protozoal parasite affecting mice. 5 this organism can be seen using a direct fecal examination of an affected patient's fecal material. metronidazole is the treatment of choice for giardia spp. infections in small rodents.myobia musculi, myocoptes musculinis, radfordia affi nis, and psorergates simplex are fur mites that can cause severe selfmutilation and hair loss in mice. 6 polyplax serrata (house mouse louse) can cause anemia, pruritus, dermatitis, and death in severely infested mice. 6 diagnosis of ectoparasites in mice is similar to that in other companion animal species (e.g., skin scraping, examining hair samples for nits). treatment of ectoparasites can be accomplished with ivermectin and a topical miticide. as with other rodent species, there has been an increasing ectoparasite resistance to ivermectin treatment.because most rodent diets are manufactured in the form of pellets or small biscuits that provide all recommended nutrients, there are few nutritional disease problems diagnosed in pet mice. if mice are fed an all-seed diet, there could be nutritionally related consequences. a lack of vitamin a could result in roughened hair coat or skin lesions. a breakdown of the protective epithelial lining of the gastrointestinal and/or respiratory tract could predispose the mouse to secondary bacterial infections affecting those body systems. nutritional defi ciencies may also result in poor reproductive activity.it is important to provide an adequate supply of fresh water and appropriate rodent food on a daily basis. following these basic nutritional instructions should provide a nutritional basis for mice to live healthy lives.the average life span of a mouse is 2 years old. this short life span and aging process increase the prevalence of tumors in these small rodents. if an animal is over 18 months of age, neoplastic disease should be considered as a differential diagnosis, especially if an asymmetrical mass is present. the most common tumors diagnosed in mice are mammary adenocarcinomas and fi broadenomas. 4 other tumor types are identifi ed in mice, and if possible, the suspect tissue should be completely excised. representative tissue sections should be submitted for histopathological evaluation. although there are treatment options available for mice that have been diagnosed with neoplasia (e.g., radiation, chemotherapy), its small size does not allow it to withstand the stress and negative side effects of these healing modalities. in mice, the recommended treatment for neoplasia is removal of the affected tissue, if possible, to increase its quality of life.the most common disease in mice colonies is barbering. barbering is defi ned as the dominant mouse nibbling off the whiskers and hair around the face of the subservient cagemates. 5 the hair clipping is very close to the skin without causing skin lesions. this behavior is noted often among female mice, whereas male mice are more likely to fi ght.mice may injure themselves on cage furniture or poorly designed cages and sustain abrasions on the face or nose. individual animals may show stereotypic behavior that results in abrasions and/or alopecia. enrichment furniture and toys may help alleviate this initial cause of dermatologic abnormality.the size of mice contributes to the diffi culty in properly administering therapeutic medications. the scruff of the neck or caudal fl ank are the subcutaneous sites that may be utilized to administer medication, fl uids, or both. 2 the semitendinosus, triceps, and epaxial muscles are commonly used for intramuscular injections, whereas intraperitoneal injections are used in extremely small animal species, including mice. 2 intraosseous catheters are much easier to place in mice than are intravenous catheters. the tibial plateau and the greater trochanter are the sites of choice for intraosseous catheter placement in mice. 5 although there are many methods that may be used to administer medication in small mammals, oral treatment using a dropper or tuberculin syringe is the easiest to administer and the least stressful for the patient. medication can be added to the food or water, but often the patient is anorexic or the medicated food or water is not palatable, in which case, the patient does not receive the treatment.although a relatively diffi cult procedure in mice, gastric gavage can be performed using a bulbed stainless steel feeding needle or fl exible red rubber feeding tube. the length of the tube is premeasured, externally from the nares to the last rib, and marked. a water-based lubricant is applied to the feeding tube before it is inserted through the intradermal space toward the back of the oral cavity. 2 the tube should advance without diffi culty until the premeasured mark is reached. restraint of mice for this procedure is accomplished by pinching the dorsal neck skin fold and holding the body with the remaining free fi ngers. both oral medication and nutritional supplementation can be administered through an oral gastric feeding tube.medication dosages for mice can be found in a number of formularies. before administration of any therapeutic agent, the dosage should be checked twice and calculations thoroughly evaluated to make sure they are correct. because mice are very small patients, any overdose of medication can have adverse consequences on the patient's recovery.inducing and maintaining mouse patients under anesthesia can be very challenging. with the widespread use of isofl urane anesthesia in small animal practices, the previous problems associated with methoxyfl urane and halothane anesthetic agents has been overcome. there are still concerns and differences in anesthetic protocol because of these animals' small size, but in general, isofl urane is a safe agent when used on a relatively healthy surgical candidate. although there are doses of injectable agents for sedation, the small size of the mouse makes it diffi cult to respond to anesthetic crises that may appear during a diagnostic or surgical procedure. therefore, inhalant anesthetic agents (e.g., isofl urane, sevofl urane) are recommended for anesthetizing mouse patients.an induction chamber is used to induce the patients, and then they are maintained under gas anesthesia using a face mask. it may be possible to intubate a larger rodent, but it is very diffi cult in mice; under most conditions, a modifi ed syringe case face mask is used. 5 to guard against aspiration of stomach contents in a patient that is not intubated, the veterinary surgeon should place the head and neck in a position slightly higher than the body.box 12-6 provides basic guidelines for proper techniques used in surgical preparation and surgical assistance in small mammals, including mice. 9 premedication and sedation doses for mice and rats are listed in surgical procedures that are performed on mouse patients require similar techniques to those used with larger animals. veterinarians should follow the same protocol but remember that the surgical fi eld is smaller and patient manipulation more delicate with patients that weigh less than 50 g. zoonotic diseases associated with mice maintained as pets are rare. possibly the most commonly reported zoonotic condition associated with mice is an allergic reaction to their dander and urine. as with all animals, it is important that a handler wash his or her hands after interacting with a mouse. salmonella spp. may colonize the intestinal tract of small mammals, including mice. 7 contact with the feces or anus of a mouse may expose the handler to this enteric pathogen. washing hands after handling a mouse will help prevent exposure to possible pathogenic organisms a mouse may carry. one can monitor the individual mouse and mice colonies for subclinical carriers of zoonotic organisms by culturing the terminal intestinal tract. mice are carriers of two potentially deadly viruses: the hantaan disease virus and an arenavirus that causes lymphocytic choriomeningitis (lcm) in humans. 7 mice that are propagated for sale in the pet trade are rarely if ever exposed to the hantaan disease virus. 7 lymphocytic choriomeningitisinfected mice generally show no clinical signs, although weight loss, photophobia, tremors, and convulsions may occur. 7 humans are exposed to lcm through contaminated feces, urine, or a bite wound. disease signs in humans infected with lcm are fl u-like (e.g., malaise, headaches, fever, myalgia, arthritis). 7 fatal aseptic meningitis or meningoencephalitis in humans infected with lcm is rare.hymenolepis spp. are cestodes found in mice that can infect humans if contaminated feces are ingested. 7 rarely identifi ed in pet mice, giardia spp. are protozoan parasites that can cause severe gastroenteritis in humans. because feces have to be ingested for someone to be exposed, it is more common for children to become infected with zoonotic intestinal parasites than for adults. using proper sanitary practices after handling mice helps reduce exposure to zoonotic intestinal parasites and other potentially transmissible diseases. although there are diseases listed in this zoonotic section that can be transmitted from mice to humans, the occurrence of this happening is extremely rare when commercially bred mice are purchased at reputable pet stores.rats, like mice, are common laboratory animals and are propagated for commercial sale in the pet trade and for use as reptile food. the life expectancy of a rat is 2 to 3 years. unlike mice, rats have excellent pet characteristics that include a charming personable disposition and extreme intelligence (figure 12-6 ). the common rat species maintained as a companion animal is rattus norvegicus, with the white rat and hooded rat being the most common variations. although rats have an excellent temperament for companionship, they can infl ict a serious bite if provoked. also, as with other animal species, humans can be allergic to their hair, skin dander, and urine and salivary proteins. 2 rats are not as territorial as other rodent species and are very social.the integument of rats is commonly associated with a number of presenting symptoms of disease. as with mice, a rat's hair coat that has not been adequately maintained is often the fi rst clinical sign associated with disease. rats are fastidious with their grooming and, when healthy, maintain a very tidy hair coat. common problems associated with a hair coat that is not maintained include general illness, parasitism (internal and external), aggression by cagemates as a result of psychological trauma, and infectious dermatitis. staphylococcus aureus infections initiated by self-trauma due to a fur mite infestation will manifest as ulcerative dermatitis. 4 the most common tumor in rats is a mammary-associated fi broadenoma. 4 fibroadenomas rarely metastasize but are locally invasive and can grow to a large size. a coronavirus is the etiologic agent behind sialodacryoadenitis which results in infl ammation and swelling of the cervical salivary glands. 4 the most common disease presentations in rats involve the respiratory system. the three major pathogens that infect rat respiratory systems are mycoplasma pulmonis, streptococcus pneumoniae, and corynebacterium kutcheri. 5 respiratory disease in rats often produces "red tears" and a red nasal discharge. this red staining around the eyes and nose is not blood but porphyrins produced by an irritated harderian gland located behind each eye. the red staining at the nasal opening is due to the drainage of the porphyrins via the nasolacrimal duct.renal disease may present in older males in the form of chronic progressive nephrosis. 4 on necropsy, kidneys in affected animals are enlarged, appear pale, and have a pitted mottled surface. 4 rats are continuous, polyestrous rodents that should be bred in polygamous or monogamous systems. 2 when breeding rats that are housed in a polygamous ratio, it is recommended to have one male with two to six females. 2 females are removed from a polygamous cage on day 16 of gestation, whereas the monogamous pair is maintained together with the young until weaning. 2 baseline rat physical information is listed in box 12-7.rats, like mice, can chew out of enclosures; therefore, it is important that the housing be "rat proof" regarding the animal's ability to chew through the substance and escape into the house. rats are maintained in environments that are similar to those of other small rodents, but rats do not produce the quantities of odiferous urine associated with other rodents. for rats, large wire cages with easy-to-remove plastic bottoms are the optimal enclosure (figure 12-7) . the recommended housing unit size for rats is 15-20″ × 15-20″ × 7-10″ (length × width × height) for each adult rat, with females and young requiring 2 to 3 times the space listed. 2 rats like to climb ramps and rope for exercise, so a cage that is taller than the listed requirements would be better suited for most singly housed animals. the major considerations for selecting an enclosure for rats, as with mice, are that it is resistant to their escape and easy to clean. an open screen top on the enclosure is recommended for proper ventilation. available rodent cages that fi t this criterion are wire or metal mesh, plastic, and plexiglas. if the plastic tube housing systems are used, there should be routine cleaning of the sections using hot water and a mild detergent. an owner must always monitor the cage for possible escape avenues, especially if the animaladult male 450-520 g adult female 250-320 g birth weight 5-6 grectal body temperature 99°-101° f normal heart rate 250-450 beats/min normal respiratory rate 70-115 breaths/mindaily food consumption 10 g/100 g body weight daily water consumption 10-12 ml/100 g body weight has a predilection for modifying the cage opening through chewing. it is very important to provide cage toys and exercise opportunities for rats; therefore, the enclosure should be large enough to house not only food and water containers but also cage toys and an exercise wheel. although not a cage toy, a hide box, in some form, should also be included, for the psychological well-being of the animal. this hide box can be a manufactured one or a small cardboard container that has one end cut out. rats like to hide and also sleep during the day. by providing this piece of cage furniture or deep enough substrate for the rat to burrow, it will be able to sleep undisturbed during the daylight hours.to prevent the buildup of urine and fecal material in the cage, commercially available paper rodent bedding or hardwood shavings should be used as a cage substrate (figure 12-8) .although softwood (pine) and cedar shavings are available, the volatile oils that radiate from these substrates are irritating to small animals, especially because they are in very close contact with the material. these irritating compounds can cause dermal and respiratory infl ammation, often leading to secondary bacterial infections.cardboard tissue tubes can be placed in a rat enclosure for chewing and play. clothes items are not recommended in cages with animals that chew. rats will shred the clothing items, exposing thread and elastic material that can become entangled around a rat's extremity, leading to necrosis distal to the stricture. it is recommended to change the substrate within the enclosure at least twice a week and more often if there is a problem with odor or excessive excreta.temperature, humidity, and lighting within the enclosure should follow what is commonly maintained with the ambient conditions within the house. for animals housed outside or in an outbuilding, the temperature range should be 65° f to 85° f. 2 the preferred light cycle for rats is 12 hours of light alternating with 12 hours of darkness. 2 there have been a number of studies investigating the recommended nutritional requirements of rats. these studies have taken place because of the fact that rats are one of the most commonly used laboratory animals when investigating human disease processes. the benefi t of these dietary studies is the availability of commercially produced diets that provide the recommended daily nutritional requirements of the rat. the problem that most owners face is the multitude of dietary products available for rats, and owners often buy seed-based diets. like mice, rats will happily eat seed although seed-based diets are lacking in a number of the nutritional requirements needed to maintain long-term health. commercial rodent biscuits or pellets with 20% to 27% protein are the recommended diets for rats. the commercial rodent biscuits or pellets are the only food rats need to obtain their required nutrients. again, seed-based diets are not recommended, nor is a signifi cant supplementation of fruits, nuts, vegetables, cheese, or other human foods (e.g., peanut butter). if a treat is to be given, yogurt or dried fruit treats manufactured specifi cally for rodents and/or rats should be provided 2 to 3 times a week (figure 12-9) . for younger rats, less than 3 weeks old, softer pellets are needed because babies start eating pellets and drinking water at 2 to 3 weeks of age. 2 a sipper bottle, placed on the outside of the cage is easy to maintain and does not take up space within the enclosure. if the cage is plastic or plexiglas, modifi cations will be needed to attach the sipper bottle on the outside of the cage. most sipper bottles come with attachment hardware to attach to wire cages. fresh bottled water is recommended for rats, although chlorinated tap water can also be used. the water should be checked on a daily basis and clean water supplied at least every 2 days, if not every day. quarantining an animal is important for the pet owner who is introducing a new animal into a setting in which there is an established group. as with other animals a 30-day quarantine period is recommended, along with a physical examination and fecal parasite check. unfortunately, there is no time period that will screen 100% against potential infectious agents, and with rats, time is critical because their life span and repro ductive time frame is so short. quarantining the introduced animals in conditions similar to those in which they will be maintained permanently, reduction of handling, and providing adequate food and water will make for a smooth transition. it is imperative that the owner screen the new animal for diseases and watch for any signs of illness. all rats that are captive, either as pets or in a breeding setup, should have no access to insects, wild rodents, or other animals. the most common sign of clinical illness is an unkempt hair coat. the lack of grooming is most often related to the animal feeling depressed or sick and thereby not having the energy to perform routine behaviors. if a number of animals are being quarantined, sacrifi cing an apparently diseased animal is the most effi cient way to determine a rapid defi nitive diagnosis. if it is a single or an expensive animal, routine diagnostic testing will be required.to maintain oversight of a breeding animal's health and reduce the exposure of young animals to infectious disease and parasites, routine screening of representative animals within the colony is recommended. in very large colonies, special caging (e.g., fi lter), food, and water may be necessary to maintain disease control. 1before examining a rat, the examination table should be disinfected with either a dilute sodium hypochlorite or chlorhexidine solution. the examiner should always wash his or her hands and, if necessary, put on gloves before the capture and restraint of the patient. the diffi culty with using latex gloves when examining a rat is the small size of the patient and its ability to twist and turn. some rat patients can be restrained only if the examiner is not wearing gloves. if gloves are not worn, the examiner must thoroughly wash his or her hands, as with all cases, after the examination is completed.to restrain a rat, the animal should be picked up with one hand being placed over the back and rib cage, restraining the head with the thumb and forefi nger directly behind the jaws. the other hand is grasping the tail, stabilizing the animal (figure 12-10) . the skin on the dorsal cervical region may also be used, as with other rodents, to pick up the rat. a plastic sandwich bag can be modifi ed as a restraint device for rats and small rodents. the rat's head is placed toward a bottom corner and the sides folded over the animal's back to limit movement.if one is unable to adequately restrain a rat while the animal is conscious, an inhalant anesthetic may be used for sedation purposes. the animal should be placed in a small induction chamber and isofl urane gas permeated into the closed space (figure 12-11) . once the animal has stopped moving, the enclosure top is removed and a nose cone placed on the anesthesia tube and placed on the patient's face. a syringe case can be modifi ed as a nose cone for small rodents. after the physical examination is completed, the nose cone is removed and the patient is allowed to recover, breathing oxygen from the anesthesia unit.injectable agents are another form of sedation used with rats for examination and diagnostic sample collection purposes (see table 12 -2). a thorough assessment of the patient is necessary before using injectable drugs for sedation and anesthesia because of the inability of veterinarians or technicians to rapidly manipulate the effects of these treatments. obtaining a detailed history for the rat patient is very important. it is imperative to get as much information from the owner as possible as it relates to the patient's presenting problem, even if it is routine health examination.typical background information required for the rat patient includes how long the owner has had the animal, where it was acquired, how often it is handled, and the appearance of the feces and urine. husbandry questions should focus on where the animal is housed, whether it is allowed to roam unobserved, where its cage is located; type, size, and material of the cage; cage substrate, furniture, and toys; how often the cage is cleaned and what disinfectant is used. when investigating the diet it is important to ask not only if pellets are fed and in what quantity, but also what the animal is eating and what its primary diet is. supplemental offerings and frequency of feeding are very important data for the case work-up. the technician should fi nd out about the water supply, how often the water is changed, and how much the animal drinks on a daily basis.because there are transmissible diseases among animals, the fi nal questions should center on other pets in the household, if new animals have been added to the family, or if the animals are housed together. a description of any previous problems and a complete chronological description of the presenting problem are needed to complete the history form.before restraining the animal, an observation should be made on its attitude, activity, and posture. the next step is to weigh the rat in a basket on a digital gram scale. if possible, temperature, respiration, and pulse should be measured and any abnormalities in rate and/or character noted. the physical examination starts at the head where the veterinarian should look for any abnormalities. eyes, ears, and nares are observed for signs of discharge or infl ammation. the oral cavity is diffi cult to examine in rats because of the small opening and tendency for the buccal mucosa to encroach toward the middle of the mouth. rat incisors have a tendency to overgrow, so examination of the front teeth for normal occlusion and length is essential. a small speculum (e.g., modifi ed paper clip) or an otoscope may be used to examine the oral cavity and cheek teeth. mucous membranes help determine hydration status using capillary refi ll time and moisture. body condition should be examined and abdominal palpation performed. lymph nodes and limbs are palpated before checking the nails and plantar surface of each foot. the patient should have a normal posture, be aware of its surroundings, and move properly. any problems should be noted in the record. finally, a dermatologic exam considers hair coat quality, alopecia, external parasites, or any skin abnormalities. all abnormal fi ndings are written in the record for case review, differential diagnoses determination, diagnostic testing, and treatment considerations.respiratory disease is often the primary complaint offered by owners when presenting a sick rat to the veterinary hospital. bacterial and viral pathogens can infect rats and are easily spread within breeding colonies because most of the organisms are transmitted by subclinical carriers. ocular and nasal discharge is often observed in combination with dark red pigment. this pigment may be mistaken for blood by owners but actually is porphyrins produced by the harderian glands located behind the eyes. the irritation of the harderian glands causes the excessive production of porphyrins, which are secreted around the eye and down the nasolacrimal duct to the nose.rats have incisors that grow continuously. the continuous growth is not a problem for animals with normal occlusion. if the incisors do not line up, then there is a condition that leads to overgrowth of these teeth. the upper incisors will curve around, and if they are not cut, they will lodge in the dorsal aspect of the oral cavity. the ventral incisors will fl are out from the oral cavity.a common tumor found in older intact female rats is the mammary tumor. mammary tumors can be large and extensive. rat mammary tissue extends, on their ventrum, from the inguinal area to the thoracic inlet and up to their dorsal lateral body wall. the most common subcutaneous mammary tumor in the rat is a fi broadenoma (figure 12-12) . 4 removing the ovaries at an early age reduces the incidence of the hormonally infl uenced tumor later in a female rat's life.swelling of the cervical salivary gland is caused by a virus. the etiologic agent of this condition is a coronavirus, sialodacryoadenitis virus, resulting in upper respiratory infl ammation and the previously mentioned swelling of the cervical salivary and lacrimal gland. 4 there is no treatment for this highly contagious viral disease.external and internal parasites may affect rats in the form of a rough hair coat or dermal lesions. rats that are pruritic may cause abrasions or scratches that become infected with staphylococcus aureus bacteria, leading to secondary ulcerative dermatitis. 4 routine parasite examinations are necessary so that the veterinarian can identify parasitic infestations and administer treatment.rats can also present with neurologic, gastrointestinal, and urinary disease signs. a detailed history and examination will help direct the clinician toward a differential diagnosis list in which the appropriate diagnostic tests can be submitted to obtain a defi nitive diagnosis.as with other pocket pets, blood collection from rats can be quite diffi cult. approximately 0.5 to 0.7 ml/100 g body weight can be safely removed from a nonanemic healthy rat. 2 a rat patient should always be anesthetized for blood collection procedures, to reduce patient stress and movement. usually inducing the animals in a closed chamber and maintaining the patients in a mask will allow the technician plenty of time to collect the blood sample.using a warmed ventral tail vein, 0.5 ml can be collected through a 23-gauge butterfl y needle. 2 to collect from the tail vein, warm the distal two-thirds of the ventral aspect of the tail in a container of warm water for approximately 15 minutes. 2 the tail vein can be observed more clearly in the distal aspect of the tail. a 22-to 25-gauge butterfl y needle is used, and free fl owing blood can be collected directly into the microtainer tubes. 2 a tape bandage should be placed on the injection site to aid in hemostasis.the easiest way to collect blood from many small mammals, including rats, is from the anterior vena cava. with the rat under general anesthesia, a 25-gauge, 1-inch needle attached to a 3-ml syringe is directed toward the umbilicus from the right side of the manubrium. 2 box 12-8 describes the technique used for retroorbital bleeding in rats and is not recommended for companion animals. the retroorbital bleeding technique is commonly used in laboratory animal settings and is easily performed by an experienced veterinarian or veterinary technician.as with smaller rodents, the saphenous vein or lateral vein of the tarsus may be used for multiple blood collections without the use of an anesthetic. the patient must be properly immobilized in a restraint tube (35-ml syringe) with the leg extended and the skin on the medial aspect of the thigh held tightly between the handler's thumb and forefi nger. the taut skin on the lateral aspect of the thigh allows exposure of the saphenous vein. a 23-gauge needle is used to puncture the vein, and blood is collected in a microhematocrit tube as it fl ows from the vessel. 2 blood samples obtained from nail and ear clips are not considered appropriate diagnostic samples. cardiac puncture is recommended only in terminal cases and when the animal is maintained under general anesthesia because of possible complications involving the lungs and heart vessels.the collection of samples for diagnostic testing in rats is similar to that in other rodents. the reference ranges for complete blood counts and serum biochemistry panels are listed in boxes 12-9 and 12-10.marrow samples may be obtained from the ilium, tibia, sternum, femur, or the bones of the proximal one third of the tail. 5 preparation of the samples is consistent with that of other mammalian patients. standard rodent cages can be used without substrate to collect urine and feces when the patient is hospitalized. by placing a rodent in a ziplock bag, urination frequently occurs and the sample can be collected. in a similar manner the urine in a rat can be collected over a disinfected stainless steel examination table. 1 the urine is voided while the animal is restrained and can be collected in a capillary tube for evaluation on urine reagent strips. 1 urinalysis reference values for rats are listed in box 12-11.under most practice settings, the size of a rat patient limits imaging capabilities to radiographs. restraint is essential for quality diagnostic images. to obtain adequate restraint and prevent movement of the patient during radiographic evaluation, sedation is required. as with all diagnostic procedures involving avian and exotic animals, an evaluation of the patient is required to determine its ability to withstand the stress associated with the assessment. if it is determined that the patient cannot withstand sedation, then it should be stabilized until it is deemed healthy enough for diagnostic imaging evaluation.a rat can be sedated in an induction chamber following a technique similar to that described for mice. because rats are larger than mice, they are easier to intubate. using a special otoscope adapter, exposure is enhanced for endotracheal tube placement. high-speed, 300-ma machines with fi ne or detail-intensifying screens should be adequate for most small exotic mammal images. dental x-ray units that can focus at short distances may be advantageous for both isolation of focal anatomy and full body radiographs in extremely small patients, including rats. for extreme detail in small exotic mammal medicine, using a traditional radiography unit, the min r mammography system (eastman kodak) with min r singleintensifying screen cassettes in conjunction with min r singleemulsion fi lm has been recommended. 1 digital radiography is bringing a new dimension to radiograph evaluations and detail. the secret to success with either traditional or digital radiographic imaging is to restrict patient movement during exposure. 2 two views, ventrodorsal and lateral, are recommend for rat patients. if there are rotational problems with the rat patient, a dorsoventral view may provide better imaging quality. 2 the patient should be taped to the cassette or positioning board with white cloth tape or masking tape. taping the rat to the cassette or positioning board will aid in image consistency with that particular patient and among similar animals. in the lateral views, the dependent legs should be positioned cranial to the contralateral limbs. 1 again, as with mice, whole body radiographs are commonly obtained for rat patients during the radiographic evaluation. normal radiographic appearance of the rat patient is described in box 12-12.for the rat patient in which microbiological testing is recommended, standard collection techniques used for other animals are appropriate. with the most common respiratory conditions in rats being viral and bacterial organisms, it is important to try and aid the diagnostic laboratory in organism isolation through listing the potential pathogens. as always, if in doubt on collecting, preserving, and/or shipping a microbiological sample, the diagnostic laboratory should be contacted for full instructions regarding rat submissions.parasitology routine fecal parasite evaluations should be performed on small rodents when they are brought to the veterinary clinic for a health examination or an abnormal stool. common protozoal organisms can be detected using a direct fecal examination. an anal tape test is useful for identifying syphacia spp. in rats. diagnosis of ectoparasites in small rodents is similar to that in other species listed in this text. a skin scraping of the affected area or a pelage tape test (to identify radfordia spp.) will usually yield the parasite. diagnosis of intestinal parasites can be made by fi nding individual eggs in a fecal fl otation of a macerated fecal pellet and in the lumen of the small intestine during necropsy. staphylococcus aureus is the most common cause of ulcerative dermatitis in rats. 4 this organism is ubiquitous in most rat colonies and survives on the animals' skin. unless there is a break in the skin, there is no infection or disease caused by the organism. in cases where there is a fur mite (radfordia ensifera) infestation, rats become pruritic, developing lesions that seed the s. aureus organism. 4 the ulcerative dermatitis can be treated with an appropriate antibiotic through both systemic and topical application, cleaning the affected areas, and clipping the toe nails of the rear feet.mycoplasma pulmonis, streptococcus pneumoniae, corynebacterium kutscheri, sendai virus, and cilia-associated respiratory bacillus have been isolated and identifi ed as infectious agents causing rat respiratory disease. 4 with the respiratory pathogens, clinical signs can vary from mild dyspnea to severe pneumonia and death. rats with mycoplasmosis are treated in much the same way as infected mice.sialodacryoadenitis virus is a highly contagious disease that causes rhinitis and infl ammation of the cervical salivary and lacrimal glands. 4 there is no treatment for this viral disease, and supportive care is recommended for the affected patient.there are other infectious diseases that can infect rats, as evidenced by the available serologic tests (e.g., kilham's rat virus, pneumonia virus of mice, rat parvovirus, rat coronavirus, toolan's h-1 virus, theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus, mouse adenovirus, reovirus 3). these infectious diseases are diagnosed less commonly than those previously identifi ed. even so, veterinarians should be aware of the infectious disease organisms to which rat patients may be exposed and aware that tests are available for antemortem diagnosis.specifi c intestinal parasites identifi ed in rats include the dwarf tapeworm (hymenolepis nana), pinworms (syphacia muris), nematodes (specifi cally trichosomoides crassicauda), and giardia muris. 5 diagnosis of intestinal parasites is important for the implementation of the appropriate treatment plan. pinworms are diagnosed through the anal tape test, protozoan parasites (e.g., giardia muris) through a direct fecal exam, and cestodes and nematodes from fecal fl otation on macerated fecal pellets. 5 once the parasite has been identifi ed, proper treatment can be initiated and environmental recommendations applied to prevent exposure of other animals and reexposure of the patient being treated.rats do not appear as susceptible to ectoparasites as mice, but the following have been identifi ed: ornithonyssus bacoti (tropical rat mite), radfordia ensifera (rat fur mite), demodex nanus (demodex), polyplax spinulosa (the spined rat louse), and fl eas. 5 diagnosis and treatments are similar to those recommended for mice although the dosages and duration differ.treatment of ectoparasites can be accomplished with ivermectin and a topical miticide. as with other rodent species, there has been an increasing ectoparasite resistance to ivermectin treatment.because most rodent diets are manufactured in the form of pellets or small biscuits that provide all recommended nutrients, there are few nutritional disease problems diagnosed in pet rats. it is also important to provide an adequate supply of fresh water and appropriate rodent food on a daily basis. if rats are fed an all-seed diet, there could be nutrition-related consequences. a lack of vitamin a could result in roughened hair coat or skin lesions. a breakdown of the protective epithelial lining of the gastrointestinal and/or respiratory tract could predispose the rat to secondary bacterial infections affecting those body systems. 2 nutritional defi ciencies may also result in poor reproductive activity. vitamins b complex, c, and e plus selenium are recommended for treatment of female rats diagnosed with pregnancy toxemia. 2 rats, if fed a high quantity of human food, will develop dental plaque on the cheek teeth. 8 proper diet, primarily rodent biscuits or pellets, will reduce the formation and buildup of dental plaque. 8 if left unattended, the excess plaque may lead to gum disease and dental caries. if caries develop within cheek teeth, the recommended treatment is removal of the affected teeth. 8rats are susceptible to tumors, most likely because of their short life span and physiologic predisposition. the most common subcutaneous tumor in rats is the fi broadenoma of the mammary tissue. 4 the mammary tumors can reach very large sizes and affect both males and females. to reduce the incidence of fi broadenomas, ovariohysterectomies are advocated at an early age in female animals. whereas mammary tumors in mice are almost always malignant, rat mammary tumors are usually localized and respond to surgical resection. 4rats have continuously growing incisors. under normal anatomic conditions, the incisors maintain their length by grinding on their occlusive surface. if the position of the incisors is compromised, malocclusion will occur, causing overgrowth of their front teeth. the teeth, if left untrimmed, can cause trauma to the dorsal surface of the oral cavity (upper incisors) and the lower teeth extending outside of the mouth. in severe cases the teeth may adversely affect the animal's ability to eat. the teeth can be trimmed with a high-speed motor tool (e.g., dremel ® ) with a cutting disk attachment.a common disease in older male rats is chronic progressive nephrosis; the disease can also affect females. 4 the protein level in the urine commonly exceeds 10 mg/day and progressively increases as the animal ages. 4 the pathophysiology of chronic progressive nephrosis involves glomerulosclerosis with tubulointerstitial disease primarily affecting the convoluted proximal tubule. 4 the progression of the disease process may be slowed through a low-protein diet and anabolic steroid therapy. 4 therapeutics fluid therapy can be given to rats through intramuscular, subcutaneous, intraperitoneal, and intravenous routes. using a 25-gauge needle, a volume of up to 0.2 ml of fl uid can be injected into the quadriceps muscle. 2 up to 5 ml of fl uid can be injected under the loose skin covering the neck or lateral body wall. 2 intraperitoneal fl uids should be administered while the rat is properly restrained to restrict movement. with one of the rat's hindlimbs extended, a 25-gauge needle is inserted into the center of the caudal quadrant of the abdomen, following the line of the extended leg. 2 up to 5 ml of fl uids can be given via the intraperitoneal route. 2 the most diffi cult method of providing fl uids is intravenously to the lateral tail vein. to access the tail vein, warming the tail to dilate the vessel in warm water for approximately 15 minutes is required to aid in visualization. 2 the older the animal is, the more diffi cult it is to see the vessel through the tail skin.although there are many methods that may be used to administer medication in small mammals, oral treatment with a dropper or tuberculin syringe is the easiest for the veterinarian and least stressful to the patient. medication can be added to the food or water, but often the patient is anorexic or the medicated food/water is not palatable, in which case, the patient does not receive treatment.both oral medication and nutritional supplementation can be administered through an oral gastric feeding tube to rat patients. the techniques described earlier for mice can also be applied to rats.medication dosages for rats can be found in a number of formularies. before administration of any therapeutic agent, the dosage should be checked twice and calculations thoroughly evaluated to make sure they are correct.the same surgical and anesthetic techniques described for mice can be used for rats (see box 12-6). dosages for rat injectable anesthetic and sedative agents and analgesic treatment can be found in tables 12-1 and 12-2.rats are larger than mice and can be intubated using a modifi ed otoscope head (figure 12-13) . when using inhalant anesthesia, an intubated animal can be ventilated and there is less risk of aspiration from fl uid that enters the oral cavity.surgical procedures that are performed on rat patients use similar techniques utilized on larger animals. veterinary surgeons should follow the same protocols but remember that the surgical fi eld is small and patient manipulation is delicate. the most common surgical procedures performed on rats are castration, ovariohysterectomy, and tumor (especially mammary tumor) removal.occurrences of humans becoming infected with zoonotic diseases associated with pet rats are uncommon. as with mice, an the first pneumonia case of unknown cause was found close to a seafood market in wuhan, the capital city of hubei province, china, on december 8, 2019. several clusters of patients with similar pneumonia were reported through late december 2019. the pneumonia was later identified to be caused by a new coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, or sars-cov-2) (zhu et al. 2020), later named coronavirus disease 2019 by the world health organization (who). 1 while the seafood market was closed on january 1, 2020, a massive outflow of travelers during the chinese spring festival travel rush (chunyun) in mid-january 2 led to the rapid spread of covid-19 throughout china and to other countries. the first confirmed case outside wuhan in china was reported in shenzhen on january 19 ). as of april 5, over 1.2 million confirmed cases were reported in at least 200 countries or territories. 3 two fundamental strategies have been taken globally, one focused on mitigating but not necessarily stopping the virus spread and the other relying on more stringent measures to suppress and reverse the growth trajectories. while most western countries initially implemented the former strategy, more and more of them (including most european countries and the usa) have since shifted towards the more stringent suppression strategy, and some other countries such as china, singapore, and south korea have adopted the latter strategy from the beginning. in particular, china has rolled out one of the most stringent public health strategies. that strategy involves city lockdowns and mandatory quarantines to ban or restrict traffic since january 23, social distance-encouraging strategies since january 28, and a centralized treatment and isolation strategy since february 2.this study estimates how the number of daily newly confirmed covid-19 cases in a city is influenced by the number of new covid-19 cases in the same city, nearby cities, and wuhan during the preceding 2 weeks using the data on confirmed covid-19 case counts in china from january 19 to february 29. by comparing the estimates before and after february 2, we examine whether the comprehensive set of policies at the national scale delays the spread of covid-19. besides, we estimate the impacts of social distancing measures in reducing the transmission rate utilizing the closed management of communities and family outdoor restrictions policies that were gradually rolled out across different cities.as covid-19 evolves into a global pandemic and mitigating strategies are faced with growing pressure to flatten the curve of virus transmissions, more and more nations are considering implementing stringent suppression measures. therefore, examining the factors that influence the transmission of covid-19 and the effectiveness of the large-scale mandatory quarantine and social distancing measures in china not only adds to our understanding of the containment of covid-19 but also provides insights into future prevention work against similar infectious diseases.in a linear equation of the current number of new cases on the number of new cases in the past, the unobserved determinants of new infections may be serially correlated for two reasons. first, the number of people infected by a disease usually first increases, reaches a peak, and then drops. second, there are persistent, unobservable variables, such as clusters that generate large numbers of infections, people's living habits, and government policies. serial correlations in errors give rise to correlations between the lagged numbers of cases and the error term, rendering the ordinary least square (ols) estimator biased. combining insights in adda (2016) , the existing knowledge of the incubation period of covid-19 (world health organization 2020b) , and data on weather conditions that affect the transmission rates of covid-19 (lowen and steel 2014; wang et al. 2020b ), we construct instrumental variables for the number of new covid-19 cases during the preceding 2 weeks. weather characteristics in the previous third and fourth weeks do not directly affect the number of new covid-19 cases after controlling for the number of new covid-19 cases and weather conditions in the preceding first and second weeks. therefore, our estimated impacts have causal interpretations and reflect population transmission rates.meanwhile, we estimate the mediating effects of socioeconomic factors on the transmission of covid-19 in china. these factors include population flow out of wuhan, the distance between cities, gdp per capita, the number of doctors, and contemporaneous weather conditions. we examine whether population flows from the origin of the covid-19 outbreak, which is a major city and an important transportation hub in central china, can explain the spread of the virus using data on real-time travel intensity between cities that have recently become available for research. realizing the urgency of forestalling widespread community transmissions in areas that had not seen many infections, in late january, many chinese cities implemented public health measures that encourage social distancing. we also examine the impacts of these measures on curtailing the spread of the virus.we find that transmission rates were lower in february than in january, and cities outside hubei province had lower transmission rates. preventing the transmission rates in non-hubei cities from increasing to the level observed in late january in hubei caused the largest reduction in the number of infections. apart from the policies implemented nationwide, the additional social distancing policies imposed in some cities in late january further helped reduce the number of infections. by mid february, the spread of the virus was contained in china. while many socioeconomic factors moderated the spread of the virus, the actual population flow from the source posed a higher risk to destinations than other factors such as geographic proximity and similarity in economic conditions.our analysis contributes to the existing literature in three aspects. first, our analysis is connected to the economics and epidemiological literature on the determinants of the spread of infectious diseases and prevention of such spread. existing studies find that reductions in population flow zhang et al. 2020; fang et al. 2020 ) and interpersonal contact from holiday school closings (adda 2016) , reactive school closures (litvinova et al. 2019) , public transportation strikes (godzinski and suarez castillo 2019), strategic targeting of travelers from high-incidence locations (milusheva 2017) , and paid sick leave to keep contagious workers at home (barmby and larguem 2009; pichler and ziebarth 2017) can mitigate the prevalence of disease transmissions. in addition, studies show viruses spread faster during economic booms (adda 2016) , increases in employment are associated with increased incidence of influenza (markowitz et al. 2019) , and growth in trade can significantly increase the spread of influenza (adda 2016) and hiv (oster 2012) . vaccination (maurer 2009; white 2019) and sunlight exposure (slusky and zeckhauser 2018) are also found effective in reducing the spread of influenza.second, our paper adds to the epidemiological studies on the basic reproduction number (r 0 ) of covid-19, i.e., the average number of cases directly generated by one case in a population where all individuals are susceptible to infection. given the short time period since the beginning of the covid-19 outbreak, research is urgently needed to assess the dynamics of transmissions and the implications for how the covid-19 outbreak will evolve (wu et al. 2020b, c) . liu et al. (2020) identify 12 studies that estimated the basic reproductive number in the wide range of 1.4 to 6.5 (with a mean of 3.28 and a median of 2.79) for wuhan, hubei, china, or overseas during january 1 through january 28, 2020. 4 our r 0 estimate relies on spatially disaggregated data during an extended period (until february 29, 2020) to mitigate potential biases, and the instrumental variable approach we use isolates the causal effect of virus transmissions and imposes fewer restrictions on the relationship between the unobserved determinants of new cases and the number of cases in the past. simultaneously considering a more comprehensive set of factors in the model that may influence virus spread, we find that one case generates 2.992 more cases within 2 weeks (1.876 if cities in hubei province are excluded) in the sub-sample from january 19 to february 1. in the sub-sample from february 2 to february 29, the transmission rates fall to 1.243 (0.614 excluding hubei province). our estimate of r 0 for the period in late january 2020 that overlaps with existing studies falls well within the range of the estimated r 0 in the emerging covid-19 literature .third, our study contributes to the assessments of public health measures aiming at reducing virus transmissions and mortality. through a set of policy simulations, we report initial evidence on the number of avoided infections through the end of february 2020 for cities outside hubei province. specifically, the stringent health policies at the national and provincial levels reduced the transmission rate and resulted in 1,408,479 (95% ci, 815,585 to 2,001,373) fewer infections and poten-tially 56,339 fewer deaths. 5 in contrast, the effects of the wuhan lockdown and local non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) are considerably smaller. as a result of the wuhan lockdown, closed management of communities, and family outdoor restrictions, 31,071 (95% ci, 8296 to 53,845), 3803 (95% ci, 1142 to 6465), and 2703 (95% ci, 654 to 4751) fewer cases were avoided, respectively. these three policies may respectively avoid 1,243 deaths, 152 deaths, and 108 deaths. making some additional assumptions, such as the value of statistical life and lost productive time, these estimates may provide the basis for more rigorous cost-benefit analysis regarding relevant public health measures. this paper is organized as follows. section 2 introduces the empirical model. section 3 discusses our data and the construction of key variables. section 4 presents the results. section 5 documents the public health measures implemented in china, whose impacts are quantified in a series of counterfactual exercises. section 6 concludes. the appendix contains additional details on the instrumental variables, data quality, and the computation of counterfactuals.our analysis sample includes 304 prefecture-level cities in china. we exclude wuhan, the capital city of hubei province, from our analysis for two reasons. first, the epidemic patterns in wuhan are significantly different from those in other cities. some confirmed cases in wuhan contracted the virus through direct exposure to huanan seafood wholesale market, which is the most probable origin of the virus 6 . in other cities, infections arise from human-to-human transmissions. second, covid-19 cases were still pneumonia of previously unknown virus infections in people's perception until early january so that wuhan's health care system became overwhelmed as the number of new confirmed cases increased exponentially since mid-january. this may have caused severe delay and measurement errors in the number of cases reported in wuhan, and to a lesser extent, in other cities in hubei province. to alleviate this concern, we also conduct analyses excluding all cities in hubei province from our sample. 5 we assume a case fatality rate of 4%, the same as china's current average level. of course, the eventual case fatality rate may be different from the current value, and it depends on many key factors, such as the preparedness of health care systems and the demographic structure of the population outside hubei province in comparison to china as a whole. also importantly, among patients who have died from covid-19, the time from symptom onset to outcome ranges from 2 to 8 weeks (world health organization 2020b), which is partially beyond the time window of this analysis. therefore, we defer more rigorous estimates about avoided fatality to future studies. 6 document the exposure history of the first 425 cases. it is suspected that the initial cases were linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market in wuhan.to model the spread of the virus, we consider within-city spread and between-city transmissions simultaneously (adda 2016 where c is a city other than wuhan, and y ct is the number of new confirmed cases of covid-19 in city c on date t. regarding between-city transmissions, d cr is the log of the distance between cities c and r, and r =c d −1 cr y rt is the inverse distance weighted sum of new infections in other cities. considering that covid-19 epidemic originated from one city (wuhan) and that most of the early cases outside wuhan can be traced to previous contacts with persons in wuhan, we also include the number of new confirmed cases in wuhan (z t ) to model how the virus spreads to other cities from its source. we may include lagged y ct , y rt , and z t up to 14 days based on the estimates of the durations of the infectious period and the incubation period in the literature 7 . x ct includes contemporaneous weather controls, city, and day fixed effects 8 . ct is the error term. standard errors are clustered by province.to make it easier to interpret the coefficients, we assume that the transmission dynamics (α within,s , α between,s , ρ s ) are the same within s = 1, · · · , 7 and s = 8, · · · , 14, respectively, but can be different across weeks. specifically, we take averages of lagged y ct , y rt , and z t by week, asȳ τ ct = 1 7 7 s=1 y ct−7(τ −1)−s , y τ rt = 1 7 7 s=1 y rt−7(τ −1)−s , andz τ t = 1 7 7 s=1 z t−7(τ −1)−s , in which τ denotes the preceding first or second week. our main model is(1) we also consider more parsimonious model specifications, such as the model that only considers within-city transmissions,7 the covid-19 epidemic is still ongoing at the time of writing, and the estimates are revised from time to time in the literature as new data become available. the current estimates include the following. the incubation period is estimated to be between 2 and 10 days (world health organization 2020a), 5.2 days , or 3 days (median, guan et al. (2020) ). the average infectious period is estimated to be 1.4 days (wu et al. 2020a there are several reasons thatȳ τ ct ,ȳ τ rt , andz τ t may be correlated with the error term ct . the unobserved determinants of new infections such as local residents' and government's preparedness are likely correlated over time, which causes correlations between the error term and the lagged dependent variables. as noted by the world health organization (2020b), most cases that were locally generated outside hubei occurred in households or clusters. the fact that big clusters give rise to a large number of cases within a short period of time may still be compatible with a general low rate of community transmissions, especially when measures such as social distancing are implemented. therefore, the coefficients are estimated by two-stage least squares in order to obtain consistent estimates on the transmission rates in the population.in eq. 2, the instrumental variables include averages of daily maximum temperature, total precipitation, average wind speed, and the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, for city c in the preceding third and fourth weeks. detailed discussion of the selection of weather characteristics as instruments is in section 3.2. the timeline of key variables are displayed in fig. 1 . the primary assumption on the instrumental variables is that weather conditions before 2 weeks do not affect the likelihood that a person susceptible to the virus contracts the disease, conditional on weather conditions and the number of infectious people within the 2-week window. on the other hand, they affect the number of other persons who have become infectious within the 2-week window, because they may have contracted the virus earlier than 2 weeks. these weather variables are exogenous to the error term and another objective of this paper is to quantify the effect of various socioeconomic factors in mediating the transmission rates of the virus, which may identify potential behavioral and socioeconomic risk factors for infections. for within-city transmissions, we consider the effects of local public health measures (see section 5 for details) and the mediating effects of population density, level of economic development, number of doctors, and environmental factors such as temperature, wind, and precipitation. for between-city transmissions, apart from proximity measures based on geographic distance, we also consider similarity in population density and the level of economic development. to measure the spread of the virus from wuhan, we also include the number of people traveling from wuhan. the full empirical model is as follows:whereh kτ ct includes dummies for local public health measures and the mediating factors for local transmissions.m kτ crt andm kτ c,wuhan,t are the mediating factors for between-city transmissions and imported cases from wuhan.january 19, 2020, is the first day that covid-19 cases were reported outside of wuhan, so we collect the daily number of new cases of covid-19 for 305 cities from january 19 to february 29. all these data are reported by 32 provincial-level health commissions in china 10 . figure 2 shows the time patterns of daily confirmed new cases in wuhan, in hubei province outside wuhan, and in non-hubei provinces of mainland china. because hubei province started to include clinically diagnosed cases into new confirmed cases on february 12, we notice a spike in the number of new cases in wuhan and other cities in hubei province on this day (fig. 2) . the common effects of such changes in case definitions on other cities can be absorbed by time fixed effects. as robustness checks, we re-estimate models a and b without the cities in hubei province. in addition, since the number of clinically diagnosed cases at the city level was reported for the days of february 12, 13, and 14, we recalculated the daily number of new cases for the 3 days by removing the clinically diagnosed cases from our data and re-estimate models a and b. our main findings still hold (appendix b). regarding the explanatory variables, we calculate the number of new cases of covid-19 in the preceding first and second weeks for each city on each day. to estimate the impacts of new covid-19 cases in other cities, we first calculate the geographic distance between a city and all other cities using the latitudes and longitudes of the centroids of each city and then calculate the weighted sum of the number since the covid-19 outbreak started from wuhan, we also calculate the weighted number of covid-19 new cases in wuhan using the inverse of log distance as the weight. furthermore, to explore the mediating impact of population flow from wuhan, we collect the daily population flow index from baidu that proxies for the total intensity of migration from wuhan to other cities 11 . figure 3 plots the baidu index of population flow out of wuhan and compares its values this year with those in 2019. we then interact the flow index with the share that a destination city takes (fig. 4) to construct a measure on the population flow from wuhan to a destination city. other mediating variables include population density, gdp per capita, and the number of doctors at the city level, which we collect from the most recent china city statistical yearbook. table 1 presents the summary statistics of these variables. on average, gdp per capita and population density are larger in cities outside hubei province than those in hubei. compared with cities in hubei province, cities outside hubei have more doctors.we rely on meteorological data to construct instrumental variables for the endogenous variables. the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) provides average, maximum, and minimum temperatures, air pressure, average and maximum wind speeds, precipitation, snowfall amount, and dew point for 362 weather stations at the daily level in china. to merge the meteorological variables with the number of new cases of covid-19, we first calculate daily weather variables for each city on each day from 2019 december to 2020 february from station-level weather records following the inverse distance weighting method. specifically, for each city, we draw a circle of 100 km from the city's centroid and calculate the weighted average daily weather variables using stations within the 100-km circle 12 . we use the inverse of the distance between the city's centroid and each station as the weight. second, we match the daily weather variables to the number of new cases of covid-19 based on city name and date.the transmission rate of covid-19 may be affected by many environmental factors. human-to-human transmission of covid-19 is mostly through droplets and contacts (national health commission of the prc 2020). weather conditions such as rainfall, wind speed, and temperature may shape infections via their influences on social activities and virus transmissions. for instance, increased precipitation 11 baidu migration (https://qianxi.baidu.com). 12 the 100-km circle is consistent with the existing literature. most studies on the socioeconomic impacts of climate change have found that estimation results are insensitive to the choice of the cutoff distance (zhang et al. 2017) . transmissions. in addition, increased rainfall and lower temperature may also reduce social activities. newly confirmed covid-19 cases typically arise from contracting the virus within 2 weeks in the past (e.g., world health organization 2020b). the extent of human-to-human transmission is determined by the number of people who have already contracted the virus and the environmental conditions within the next 2 weeks. conditional on the number of people who are infectious and environmental conditions in the previous first and second weeks, it is plausible that weather conditions further in the past, i.e., in the previous third and fourth weeks, should not directly affect the number of current new cases. based on the existing literature, we select weather characteristics as the instrumental variables, which include daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and the interaction between precipitation and wind speed. we then regress the endogenous variables on the instrumental variables, contemporaneous weather controls, city, date, and city by week fixed effects. table 2 shows that f-tests on the coefficients of the instrumental variables all reject joint insignificance, which confirms that overall the selected instrumental variables are not weak. the coefficients of the first stage regressions are reported in table 9 in the appendix. this table reports the f -tests on the joint significance of the coefficients on the instrumental variables (iv) that are excluded from the estimation equations. our iv include weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, during the preceding third and fourth weeks, and the averages of these variables in other cities weighted by the inverse of log distance. for each f statistic, the variable in the corresponding row is the dependent variable, and the time window in the corresponding column indicates the time span of the sample. each regression also includes 1-and 2-week lags of these weather variables, weekly averages of new infections in the preceding first and second weeks in wuhan which are interacted with the inverse log distance or the population flow, and city, date and city by week fixed effects. coefficients on the instrumental variables for the full sample are reported in table 15 in the appendix we also need additional weather variables to instrument the adoption of public health measures at the city level. since there is no theoretical guidance from the existing literature, we implement the cluster-lasso method of belloni et al. (2016) and ahrens et al. (2019) to select weather characteristics that have good predictive power. details are displayed in appendix a.our sample starts from january 19, when the first covid-19 case was reported outside wuhan. the sample spans 6 weeks in total and ends on february 29. we divide the whole sample into two sub-samples (january 19 to february 1, and february 2 to february 29) and estimate the model using the whole sample and two sub-samples, respectively. in the first 2 weeks, covid-19 infections quickly spread throughout china with every province reporting at least one confirmed case, and the number of cases also increased at an increasing speed (fig. 2 ). it is also during these 2 weeks that the chinese government took actions swiftly to curtail the virus transmission. on january 20, covid-19 was classified as a class b statutory infectious disease and treated as a class a statutory infectious disease. the city of wuhan was placed under lockdown on january 23; roads were closed, and residents were not allowed to leave the city. many other cities also imposed public policies ranging from canceling public events and stopping public transportation to limiting how often residents could leave home. by comparing the dynamics of virus transmissions in these two sub-samples, we can infer the effectiveness of these public health measures.in this section, we will mostly rely on model a to interpret the results, which estimates the effects of the average number of new cases in the preceding first and second week, respectively, and therefore enables us to examine the transmission dynamics at different time lags. as a robustness check, we also consider a simpler lag structure to describe the transmission dynamics. in model b, we estimate the effects of the average number of new cases in the past 14 days instead of using two separate lag variables. table 3 reports the estimation results of the ols and iv regressions of eq. 2, in which only within-city transmission is considered. after controlling for time-invariant city fixed effects and time effects that are common to all cities, on average, one new infection leads to 1.142 more cases in the next week, but 0.824 fewer cases 1 week later. the negative effect can be attributed to the fact that both local authorities and residents would have taken more protective measures in response to a higher perceived risk of contracting the virus given more time. information disclosure on newly confirmed cases at the daily level by official media and information dissemination on social media throughout china may have promoted more timely actions by the public, resulting in slower virus transmissions. we then compare the transmission rates in different time windows. in the first sub-sample, one new infection leads to 2.135 the dependent variable is the number of daily new cases. the endogenous explanatory variables include the average numbers of new confirmed cases in the own city in the preceding first and second weeks (model a) and the average number in the preceding 14 days (model b). weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, and the inverse log distance weighted sum of each of these variables in other cities, during the preceding third and fourth weeks, are used as instrumental variables in the iv regressions. weather controls include contemporaneous weather variables in the preceding first and second weeks. standard errors in parentheses are clustered by provinces. *** p <0.01,more cases within a week, implying a fast growth in the number of cases. however, in the second sub-sample, the effect decreases to 1.077, suggesting that public health measures imposed in late january were effective in limiting a further spread of the virus. similar patterns are also observed in model b.many cases were also reported in other cities in hubei province apart from wuhan, where six of them reported over 1000 cumulative cases by february 15 13 . their overstretched health care system exacerbates the concern over delayed reporting of confirmed cases in these cities. to mitigate the effect of such potential measurement errors on our estimates, we re-estimate (2) excluding all cities in hubei province. the bottom panel of table 3 reports these estimates. comparing the iv estimates in columns (4) and (6) between the upper and lower panels, we find that the transmission rates are lower in cities outside hubei. in the january 19-february 1 sub-sample, one new case leads to 1.483 more cases in the following week, and this is reduced to 0.903 in the february 2-february 29 sub-sample. we also find a similar pattern when comparing the estimates from model b.people may contract the virus from interaction with the infected people who live in the same city or other cities. in eq. 1, we consider the effects of the number of new infections in other cities and in the epicenter of the epidemic (wuhan), respectively, using inverse log distance as weights. in addition, geographic proximity may not fully describe the level of social interactions between residents in wuhan and other cities since the lockdown in wuhan on january 23 significantly reduced the population flow from wuhan to other cities. to alleviate this concern, we also use a measure of the size of population flow from wuhan to a destination city, which is constructed by multiplying the daily migration index on the population flow out of wuhan (fig 3) with the share of the flow that a destination city receives provided by baidu (fig. 4) . for days before january 25, we use the average destination shares between january 10 and january 24. for days on or after january 24, we use the average destination shares between january 25 and february 23 14 . table 4 reports the estimates from iv regressions of eq. 1, and table 5 reports the results from the same regressions excluding hubei province. column (4) of table 4 indicates that in the first sub-sample, one new case leads to 2.456 more cases within 1 week, and the effect is not statistically significant between 1 and 2 weeks. column (6) suggests that in the second sub-sample, one new case leads to 1.127 more cases within 1 week, and the effect is not statistically significant between 1 and 2 weeks. the comparison of the coefficients on own city between different sub-samples indicates that the responses of the government and the public have effectively decreased the risk of additional infections. comparing table 4 with table 3 , we find that although the number of new cases in the preceding second week turns insignificant (3) table 6 . each estimation sample contains 14 days with the starting date indicated on the horizontal axis and smaller in magnitude, coefficients on the number of new cases in the preceding first week are not sensitive to the inclusion of terms on between-city transmissions. as a robustness test, table 5 reports the estimation results excluding the cities in hubei province. column (4) of table 5 indicates that in the first sub-sample, one new case leads to 1.194 more cases within a week, while in the second sub-sample, one new case only leads to 0.899 more cases within a week. besides, in the second subsample, one new case results in 0.250 fewer new infections between 1 and 2 weeks, which is larger in magnitude and more significant than the estimate (−0.171) when cities in hubei province are included for estimation (column (6) of table 4 ).the time varying patterns in local transmissions are evident using the rolling window analysis (fig. 5) . the upper left panel displays the estimated coefficients on local transmissions for various 14-day sub-samples with the starting date labelled on the horizontal axis. after a slight increase in the local transmission rates, one case generally leads to fewer and fewer additional cases a few days after january 19. besides, the transmission rate displays a slight increase beginning around february 4, which corresponds to the return travels and work resumption after chinese spring festival, but eventually decreases at around february 12. such decrease may be partly attributed to the social distancing strategies at the city level, so we examine the impacts of relevant policies in section 5. moreover, the transmission rates in cities outside hubei province have been kept at low levels throughout the whole sample period (columns (4) and (6) of table 5 ). these results suggest that the policies adopted at the national and provincial levels soon after january 19 prevented cities outside hubei from becoming new hotspots of infections. overall, the spread of the virus has been effectively contained by mid february, particularly for cities outside hubei province.in the epidemiology literature, the estimates on the basic reproduction number of covid-19 are approximately within the wide range of 1.4 ∼ 6.5 ). its value depends on the estimation method used, underlying assumptions of modeling, time period covered, geographic regions (with varying preparedness of health care systems), and factors considered in the models that affect disease transmissions (such as the behavior of the susceptible and infected population). intuitively, it can be interpreted as measuring the expected number of new cases that are generated by one existing case. it is of interest to note that our estimates are within this range. based on the results from model b in tables 4 and 5 , one case leads to 2.992 more cases in the same city in the next 14 days (1.876 if cities in hubei province are excluded). in the second sub-sample (february 2-february 29), these numbers are reduced to 1.243 and 0.614, respectively, suggesting that factors such as public health measures and people's behavior may play an important role in containing the transmission of covid-19.while our basic reproduction number estimate (r 0 ) is within the range of estimates in the literature and is close to its median, five features may distinguish our estimates from some of the existing epidemiological estimates. first, our instrumental variable approach helps isolate the causal effect of virus transmissions from other confounded factors; second, our estimate is based on an extended time period of the covid-19 pandemic (until the end of february 2020) that may mitigate potential biases in the literature that relies on a shorter sampling period within 1-28 january 2020; third, our modeling makes minimum assumptions of virus transmissions, such as imposing fewer restrictions on the relationship between the unobserved determinants of new cases and the number of cases in the past; fourth, our model simultaneously considers comprehensive factors that may affect virus transmissions, including multiple policy instruments (such as closed management of communities and shelter-at-home order), population flow, within-and between-city transmissions, economic and demographic conditions, weather patterns, and preparedness of health care system. fifth, our study uses spatially disaggregated data that cover china (except its hubei province), while some other studies examine wuhan city, hubei province, china as a whole, or overseas.regarding the between-city transmission from wuhan, we observe that the population flow better explains the contagion effect than geographic proximity (table 4 ). in the first sub-sample, one new case in wuhan leads to more cases in other cities receiving more population flows from wuhan within 1 week. interestingly, in the second sub-sample, population flow from wuhan significantly decreases the transmission rate within 1 week, suggesting that people have been taking more cautious measures from high covid-19 risk areas; however, more arrivals from wuhan in the preceding second week can still be a risk. a back of the envelope calculation indicates that one new case in wuhan leads to 0.064 (0.050) more cases in the destination city per 10,000 travelers from wuhan within 1 (2) week between january 19 and february 1 (february 2 and february 29) 15 . note that while the effect is statistically significant, it should be interpreted in context. it was estimated that 15,000,000 people would travel out of wuhan during the lunar new year holiday 16 . if all had gone to one city, this would have directly generated about 171 cases within 2 weeks. the risk of infection is likely very low for most travelers except for few who have previous contacts with sources of infection, and person-specific history of past contacts may be an essential predictor for infection risk, in addition to the total number of population flows 17 .a city may also be affected by infections in nearby cities apart from spillovers from wuhan. we find that the coefficients that represent the infectious effects from nearby cities are generally small and not statistically significant (table 4 ), implying that few cities outside wuhan are themselves exporting infections. this is consistent with the findings in the world health organization (2020b) that other than cases that are imported from hubei, additional human-to-human transmissions are limited for cities outside hubei. restricting to cities outside hubei province, the results are similar (table 5 ), except that the transmission from wuhan is not significant in the first half sample.we also investigate the mediating impacts of some socioeconomic and environmental characteristics on the transmission rates (3). to ease the comparison between different moderators, we consider the mediating impacts on the influence of the average number of new cases in the past 2 weeks. regarding own-city transmissions, we examine the mediating effects of population density, gdp per capita, number of doctors, and average temperature, wind speed, precipitation, and a dummy variable of adverse weather conditions. regarding between-city transmissions, we consider the mediating effects of distance, difference in population density, and difference in gdp per capita since cities that are similar in density or economic development level may be more closely linked. we also include a measure of population flows from wuhan. table 6 reports the estimation results of the iv regressions. to ease the comparison across various moderators, for the mediating variables of within-city transmissions that are significant at 10%, we compute the changes in the variables so that the effect of new confirmed infections in the past 14 days on current new confirmed cases is reduced by 1 (columns (2) and (4)). 15 it is estimated that 14,925,000 people traveled out of wuhan in 2019 during the lunar new year holiday (http://www.whtv.com.cn/p/17571.html). the sum of baidu's migration index for population flow out of wuhan during the 40 days around the 2019 lunar new year is 203.3, which means one index unit represents 0.000013621 travelers. the destination share is in percentage. with one more case in wuhan, the effect on a city receiving 10,000 travelers from wuhan is 0.00471 × 0.000013621 × 100 × 10000 = 0.064. 16 http://www.whtv.com.cn/p/17571.html 17 from mid february, individual specific health codes such as alipay health code and wechat health code are being used in many cities to aid quarantine efforts. the dependent variable is the number of daily new confirmed cases. the sample excludes cities in hubei province. columns (2) and (4) report the changes in the mediating variables that are needed to reduce the impact of new confirmed cases in the preceding 2 weeks by 1, using estimates with significance levels of at least 0.1 in columns (1) and (3), respectively. the endogenous variables include the average numbers of new cases in the own city and nearby cities in the preceding 14 days and their interactions with the mediating variables. weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, and the inverse log distance weighted sum of these variables in neighboring cities, during the preceding third and fourth weeks, are used as instrumental variables in the iv regressions. additional instrumental variables are constructed by interacting them with the mediating variables. weather controls include these variables in the preceding first and second weeks. standard errors in parentheses are clustered by provinces *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1in the early phase of the epidemic (january 19 to february 1), cities with more medical resources, which are measured by the number of doctors, have lower transmission rates. one standard deviation increase in the number of doctors reduces the transmission rate by 0.12. cities with higher gdp per capita have higher transmission rates, which can be ascribed to the increased social interactions as economic activities increase 18 . in the second sub-sample, these effects become insignificant probably because public health measures and inter-city resource sharing take effects. in fact, cities with higher population density have lower transmission rates in the second sub-sample. regarding the environmental factors, we notice different significant mediating variables across the first and second sub-samples. the transmission rates are lower with adverse weather conditions, lower temperature, or less rain. further research is needed to identify clear mechanisms. in addition, population flow from wuhan still poses a risk of new infections for other cities even after we account for the above mediating effects on own-city transmission. this effect is robust to the inclusion of the proximity measures based on economic similarity and geographic proximity between wuhan and other cities. nevertheless, we do not find much evidence on between-city transmissions among cities other than wuhan.as the 2002-2004 sars outbreak has shown, non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) or public health measures may decrease or effectively stop the transmission of covid-19 even without vaccines. although the effectiveness of a single intervention strategy can be limited, multiple interventions together may generate substantial impacts on containing the spread of the virus. figure 6 depicts the timeline for a series of policies enacted at the national, provincial, and city levels in china since january 19. after the official confirmation of human-to-human transmission by the chinese authorities on january 20, china has adopted a variety of npis to contain the covid-19 outbreak. at the national level, covid-19 was classified as a statutory class b infectious disease on january 20, and prevention and control measures for class a infectious diseases have been taken. government agencies across the country were mobilized. the joint prevention and control mechanism of the state council was established on january 20, and the central leadership group for epidemic response was established on january 25. on january 23, national healthcare security administration announced that expenses related to covid-19 treatments would be covered by the medical insurance and the government if necessary, in order that all covid-19 cases could be hospitalized 19 . at the provincial level, 30 provinces declared level i responses to major public health emergencies from january 23 to 25, and all provinces had declared level i responses by january 29 20 . level i responses in china are designed for the highest state of emergencies. measures taken include enhanced isolation and contact tracing of cases, suspension of public transport, cancelling public events, closing schools and entertainment venues, and establishment of health checkpoints (tian et al. 2020) . these policies together represent population-wide social distancing and case isolation (ferguson et al. 2020) .early detection of covid-19 importation and prevention of onward transmission are crucial to all areas at risk of importation from areas with active transmissions (gilbert et al. 2020) . to contain the virus at the epicenter, wuhan was placed under lockdown with traffic ban for all residents starting on january 23. the lockdown is not expected to be lifted until april 8. local buses, subways, and ferries ceased operation. ridehailing services were prohibited, and only a limited number of taxis were allowed on road by january 24. residents are not permitted to leave the city. departure flights and trains were canceled at the city airport and train stations. checkpoints were set up at highway entrances to prevent cars from leaving the city. since january 22, it became mandatory to wear masks at work or in public places. 19 there was insufficient hospital capacity in hubei (and wuhan in particular) in late january. most patients in wuhan were hospitalized and isolated around mid february with the completion of new hospitals, makeshift health facilities, and increased testing capacity. see section 5.1 for details. 20 we should note that the summary of china's policy responses here is not a comprehensive list. other entities have also made efforts to help curtail the spread of covid-19. for example, on january 27, the state grid corporation of china declared that it would continue supplying electricity to resident users even if payment was not received on time. school and universities were closed already because of lunar new year holidays. in addition, all cities in hubei province implemented the lockdown policy, and most hubei cities had also adopted measures commensurate with class a infectious diseases by january 28 21 . residents in those areas were strongly encouraged to stay at home and not to attend any activity involving public gathering.health facilities in wuhan had been extremely overstretched with shortage in medical supplies and high rates of nosocomial infections until february 2 when (1) two new hospitals, i.e., huoshenshan and leishenshan, were built to treat patients of covid-19 with severe symptoms, and (2) 14 makeshift health facilities were converted to isolate patients with mild symptoms and to quarantine people suspected of contracting covid-19, patients with fever symptoms, and close contacts of confirmed patients. this centralized treatment and isolation strategy since february 2 has substantially reduced transmission and incident cases.however, stringent public health measures within hubei province enforced after the massive lockdown may have little to do with virus transmissions out of hubei province due to the complete travel ban since january 23.quarantine measures have been implemented in other provinces that aim at restricting population mobility across cities and reducing the risk of importing infections 22 . seven cities in zhejiang, henan, heilongjiang, and fujian provinces had adopted the partial shutdown strategy by february 4 (fang et al. 2020) 23 . in wenzhou, most public transportation was shut down, and traffic leaving the city was banned temporarily. on january 21, the ministry of transport of china launched level 2 responses to emergencies in order to cooperate with the national health commission in preventing the virus spread. on january 23, the ministry of transport of china, civil aviation administration of china, and china state railway group company, ltd. (csrgc) declared to waive the change fees for flight, train, bus, and ferry tickets that were bought before january 24. later, the csrgc extended the fee waiver policy to train tickets that were bought before february 6. by february 2, all railway stations in china had started to monitor body temperature of travelers when they enter and exit the station. across the whole country, transportation departments set up 14,000 health checkpoints at bus and ferry terminals, at service centers and toll gates on highways, monitoring the body temperature of passengers and controlling the inflow of population (world health organization 2020b). recent visitors to high covid-19 risk areas are required to self-quarantine for 14 days at home or in designated facilities. on february 2, china's exit and entry administration temporarily suspended the approval and issuance of the travel permits to hong kong and macau.on january 23, wuhan municipal administration of culture and tourism ordered all tour groups to cancel travels to wuhan. on january 27, the ministry of education of china postponed start of the spring semester in 2020, and on february 7, it further announced that students were not allowed to return to school campus without approvals from school.recent studies suggest that there is a large proportion of asymptomatic or mildsymptomatic cases, who can also spread the virus (dong et al. 2020; mizumoto et al. 2020; nishiura et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020a ). thus, maintaining social distance is of crucial importance in order to curtail the local transmission of the virus.the period from january 24 to 31, 2020, is the traditional chinese spring festival holiday, when families are supposed to get together so that inter-city travel is usually much less. people were frequently reminded by official media (via tv news and phone messages) and social media to stay at home and avoid gathering activities. on january 26, china state council extended this holiday to february 2 to delay people's return travel and curtail the virus spread. nevertheless, economic activities are still supposed to resume after the spring festival, bringing people back to workplaces, which may increase the risk of virus spread. to help local residents keep social distance and decrease the risk of virus transmissions, many cities started to implement the "closed management of communities" and "family outdoor restrictions" policies since late january (table 7) , encouraging residents to restrict nonessential travels. from january 28 to february 20, more than 250 prefecture-level cities in china implemented "closed management of communities," which typically includes (1) keeping only one entrance for each community, (2) allowing only community residents to enter and exit the community, (3) checking body temperature for each entrant, (4) testing and quarantining cases that exhibit fever immediately, and (5) tracing and quarantining close contacts of suspicious cases. meanwhile, residents who had symptoms of fever or dry cough were required to report to the community and were quarantined and treated in special medical facilities. furthermore, local governments of 127 cities also imposed more stringent "family outdoor restrictions"-residents are confined or strongly encouraged to stay at home with limited exceptions, e.g., only one person in each family may go out for shopping for necessities once every 2 days 24 . exit permits were usually distributed to each family in advance and recollected when residents reenter the community. contacts of those patients were also traced and quarantined. table 7 summarizes the number of cities that had imposed "closed management of communities" or "family outdoor restrictions" by different dates in february.in order to help inform evidence-based covid-19 control measures, we examine the effect of these local quarantine measures in reducing the virus transmission rates. dummy variables for the presence of closed management of communities or family outdoor restrictions are created, and they are interacted with the number of infections in the preceding 2 weeks.several factors may contribute to the containment of the epidemic. the transmission dynamics may change during the course of this epidemic because of improved medical treatments, more effective case isolation and contact tracing, increased public awareness, etc. therefore, we have split the sample into two sub-samples, and the estimated coefficients can be different across the sub-samples (section 4). npis such as closed management of communities, city lockdowns, and restrictions on population flow out of areas with high infection risks may also directly affect the transmission rates. while many public health measures are implemented nationwide, spatial variations exist in the adoption of two types of measures: closed management of communities (denoted by closed management) and family outdoor restrictions (denoted by stay at home), which allow us to quantify the effect of these npis on the transmission dynamics.because most of these local npis are adopted in february and our earlier results indicate that the transmission of covid-19 declines during late january, we restrict the analysis sample to february 2-february 29. we also exclude cities in hubei province, which modified the case definition related to clinically diagnosed cases on february 12 and changed the case definition related to reduced backlogs from increased capacity of molecular diagnostic tests on february 20. these modifications coincide with the adoption of local npis and can significantly affect the observed dynamics of confirmed cases. the adoption of closed management or stay at home is likely affected by the severity of the epidemic and correlated with the unobservables. additional weather controls that have a good predictive power for these npis are selected as the instrumental variables based on the method of belloni et al. (2016) . details are displayed in appendix a. the estimation results of ols and iv regressions are reported in table 8 .effects of local non-pharmaceutical interventions the sample is from february 2 to february 29, excluding cities in hubei province. the dependent variable is the number of daily new confirmed cases. the instrumental variables include weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, wind speed, precipitation, and the interaction between wind speed and precipitation, in the preceding third and fourth weeks, and the inverse log distance weighted averages of these variables in other cities. additional instrumental variables are constructed by interacting these excluded instruments with variables that predict the adoption of closed management of communities or family outdoor restrictions (table 17 ). the weather controls include weather characteristics in the preceding first and second weeks. standard errors in parentheses are clustered by provinces. *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05,we find that closed management and stay at home significantly decrease the transmission rates. as a result of closed management of communities, one infection will generate 0.244 (95% ci, −0.366 ∼ −0.123) fewer new infections in the first week. the effect in the second week is also negative though not statistically significant. family outdoor restrictions (stay at home) are more restrictive than closing communities to visitors and reduce additional infections from one infection by 0.278 (95% ci, −0.435 ∼ −0.121) in the first week. the effect in the second week is not statistically significant. to interpret the magnitude of the effect, it is noted that the reproduction number of sars-cov-2 is estimated to be around 1.4 ∼ 6.5 as of january 28, 2020 .many cities implement both policies. however, it is not conclusive to ascertain the effect of further imposing family outdoor restrictions in cities that have adopted closed management of communities. when both policies are included in the model, the ols coefficients (column (5)) indicate that closed management reduces the transmission rate by 0.547 (95% ci, −0.824 ∼ −0.270) in the first week, and by 0.259 (95% ci, −0.485 ∼ −0.032) in the second week, while the additional benefit from stay at home is marginally significant in the second week (−0.124, 95% ci, −0.272 ∼ 0.023). the iv estimates indicate that closed management reduces the transmission rate in the first week by 0.193 (95% ci, −0.411 ∼ 0.025), while the effect in the second week and the effects of stay at home are not statistically significant. additional research that examines the decision process of health authorities or documents the local differences in the actual implementation of the policies may offer insights into the relative merits of the policies.we further assess the effects of npis by conducting a series of counterfactual exercises. after estimating (3) by 2sls, we obtain the residuals. then, the changes in y ct are predicted for counterfactual changes in the transmission dynamics (i.e., coefficients α k within,τ ) and the impositions of npis (i.e.,h kτ ct , and the lockdown of wuhanm kτ c,wuhan,t ). in scenario a, no cities adopted family outdoor restrictions (stay at home). similarly, in scenario b, no cities implemented closed management of communities. we use the estimates in columns (2) and (4) of table 8 to conduct the counterfactual analyses for scenarios a and b, respectively. in scenario c, we assume that the index of population flows out of wuhan after the wuhan lockdown (january 23) took the value that was observed in 2019 for the same lunar calendar date (fig. 3) , which would be plausible had there been no lockdown around wuhan. it is also likely that in the absence of lockdown but with the epidemic, more people would leave wuhan compared with last year (fang et al. 2020) , and the effect would then be larger. in scenario d, we assume that the within-city transmission dynamics were the same as those observed between january 19 and february 1, i.e., the coefficient of 1-week lag own-city infections was 2.456 and the coefficient of 2-week lag own-city infections was −1.633 (column (4) of table 4 ), which may happen if the transmission rates in cities outside hubei increased in the same way as those observed for cities in hubei. appendix c contains the technical details on the computation of counterfactuals.in fig. 7 , we report the differences between the predicted number of daily new cases in the counterfactual scenarios and the actual data, for cities outside hubei province. we also report the predicted cumulative effect in each scenario at the bottom of the corresponding panel in fig. 7 . had the transmission rates in cities outside hubei province increased to the level observed in late january, by february 29, there would be 1,408,479 (95% ci, 815, 585 ∼ 2, 001, 373) more cases (scenario d). assuming a fatality rate of 4%, there would be 56,339 more deaths. the magnitude of the effect from wuhan lockdown and local npis is considerably smaller. as a result of wuhan lockdown, 31,071 (95% ci, 8296 ∼ 53, 845) fewer cases would be reported for cities outside hubei by february 29 (scenario c). closed management of communities and family outdoor restrictions would reduce the number of cases by 3803 (95% ci, 1142 ∼ 6465; or 15.78 per city with the policy) and 2703 (95% ci, 654 ∼ 4751; or 21.98 per city with the policy), respectively. these estimates, combined with additional assumptions on the value of statistical life, lost time from work, etc., may contribute to cost-benefit analyses of relevant public health measures.our counterfactual simulations indicate that suppressing local virus transmissions so that transmission rates are kept well below those observed in hubei in late january is crucial in forestalling large numbers of infections for cities outside hubei. our retrospective analysis of the data from china complements the simulation study fig. 7 counterfactual policy simulations. this figure displays the daily differences between the total predicted number and the actual number of daily new covid-19 cases for each of the four counterfactual scenarios for cities outside hubei province in mainland china. the spike on february 12 in scenario c is due to a sharp increase in daily case counts in wuhan resulting from changes in case definitions in hubei province (see appendix b for details) of ferguson et al. (2020) . our estimates indicate that suppressing local transmission rates at low levels might have avoided one million or more infections in china. chinazzi et al. (2020) also find that reducing local transmission rates is necessary for effective containment of covid-19. the public health policies announced by the national and provincial authorities in the last 2 weeks in january may have played a determinant role (tian et al. 2020) in keeping local transmission rates in cities outside hubei at low levels throughout january and february. among the measures implemented following provincial level i responses, shen et al. (2020) highlight the importance of contact tracing and isolation of close contacts before onset of symptoms in preventing a resurgence of infections once the covid-19 suppression measures are relaxed. we also find that travel restrictions on high-risk areas (the lockdown in wuhan), and to a lesser extent, closed management of communities and family outdoor restrictions, further reduce the number of cases. it should be noted that these factors may overlap in the real world. in the absence of the lockdown in wuhan, the health care systems in cities outside hubei could face much more pressure, and local transmissions may have been much higher. in china, the arrival of the covid-19 epidemic coincided with the lunar new year for many cities. had the outbreak started at a different time, the effects and costs of these policies would likely be different.this paper examines the transmission dynamics of the coronavirus disease 2019 in china, considering both within-and between-city transmissions. our sample is from january 19 to february 29 and covers key episodes such as the initial spread of the virus across china, the peak of infections in terms of domestic case counts, and the gradual containment of the virus in china. changes in weather conditions induce exogenous variations in past infection rates, which allow us to identify the causal impact of past infections on new cases. the estimates suggest that the infectious effect of the existing cases is mostly observed within 1 week and people's responses can break the chain of infections. comparing estimates in two sub-samples, we observe that the spread of covid-19 has been effectively contained by mid february, especially for cities outside hubei province. data on real-time population flows between cities have become available in recent years. we show that this new source of data is valuable in explaining between-city transmissions of covid-19, even after controlling for traditional measures of geographic and economic proximity.by april 5 of 2020, covid-19 infections have been reported in more than 200 countries or territories and more than 64,700 people have died. behind the grim statistics, more and more national and local governments are implementing countermeasures. cross border travel restrictions are imposed in order to reduce the risk of case importation. in areas with risks of community transmissions, public health measures such as social distancing, mandatory quarantine, and city lockdown are implemented. in a series of counterfactual simulations, we find that based on the experience in china, preventing sustained community transmissions from taking hold in the first place has the largest impact, followed by restricting population flows from areas with high risks of infections. local public health measures such as closed management of communities and family outdoor restrictions can further reduce the number of infections.a key limitation of the paper is that we are not able to disentangle the effects from each of the stringent measures taken, as within this 6-week sampling period, china enforced such a large number of densely timed policies to contain the virus spreading, often simultaneously in many cities. a second limitation is that shortly after the starting date of the official data release for confirmed infected cases throughout china, i.e., january 19, 2020, many stringent measures were implemented, which prevents researchers to compare the post treatment sub-sample with a pre treatment subsample during which no strict policies were enforced. key knowledge gaps remain in the understanding of the epidemiological characteristics of covid-19, such as individual risk factors for contracting the virus and infections from asymptotic cases. data on the demographics and exposure history for those who have shown symptoms as well as those who have not will help facilitate these research. adjustment in covid-19 case definitions in hubei province in february. section a contains details on the computation of the counterfactuals.weather conditions affect disease transmissions either directly if the virus can more easily survive and spread in certain environment, or indirectly by changing human behavior. table 9 reports results of the first stage of the iv regressions (table 4 ) using the full sample. in columns (1) and (2), the dependent variables are the numbers of newly confirmed covid-19 cases in the own city in the preceding first and second weeks, respectively. in columns (3) and (4), the dependent variables are the sum of inverse log distance weighted numbers of newly confirmed covid-19 cases in other cities in the preceding first and second weeks, respectively. these are the endogenous variables in the iv regressions. the weather variables in the preceding first and second weeks are included in the control variables. the weather variables in the preceding third and fourth weeks are the excluded instruments, and their coefficients are reported in the table. because the variables are averages in 7-day moving windows, the error term may be serially correlated, and we include city by week fixed effects. also included in the control variables are the average numbers of new cases in wuhan in the preceding first and second weeks, interacted with the inverse log distance or the population flow.because the spread of the virus depends on both the number of infectious people and the weather conditions, the coefficients in the first stage regressions do not have structural interpretations. the wald tests on the joint significance of the excluded instruments are conducted and their f statistics are reported. the excluded instruments have good predictive power.the implementation of local public health measures is likely correlated with the extent of the virus spread, so weather conditions that affect virus transmissions may also affect the likelihood that the policy is adopted. the influence of weather conditions on policy adoption may be complicated, so we use the cluster-lasso method of belloni et al. (2016) to select the weather variables that have good predictive power on the adoption of closed management of communities or family outdoor restrictions. let d ct be the dummy variable of the adoption of the local public health measure, i.e., d ct = 1 if the policy is in place in city c at day t. q ct is a vector of candidate weather variables, including weekly averages of daily mean temperature, maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point, stationlevel pressure, sea-level pressure, visibility, wind speed, maximum wind speed, snow depth, precipitation, dummy for adverse weather conditions, squared terms of these variables, and interactions among them. first, city and day fixed effects are removed. d ct = d ct − 1 n c d ct − 1 t t d ct + 1 nt ct d ct andq ct is defined similarly. the cluster-lasso method solves the following minimization problem: 1 nt ct d ct −q ct b 2 + λ nt k φ k |b k |. (ahrens et al. 2019) , which implements the cluster-lasso method of belloni et al. (2016) . city and date fixed effects are included. candidate variables include weekly averages of daily mean temperature, maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point, station-level pressure, sea-level pressure, visibility, wind speed, maximum wind speed, snow depth, precipitation, dummy for adverse weather conditions, squared terms of these variables, and interactions among them λ and φ are penalty parameters. a larger penalty value forces more coefficients to zero. the penalty parameters are picked using the theoretical result of belloni et al. (2016) . the estimation uses the stata package by ahrens et al. (2019) . table 10 lists the selected weather variables, which are used as the instruments in table 8 . the dependent variable is the number of daily new cases. the endogenous explanatory variables include the average numbers of new confirmed cases in the own city and nearby cities in the preceding first and second weeks (model a) and averages in the preceding 14 days (model b). weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, and the inverse log distance weighted sum of these variables in other cities, during the preceding third and fourth weeks, are used as instrumental variables in the iv regressions. weather controls include contemporaneous weather variables in the preceding first and second weeks. standard errors in parentheses are clustered by provinces. *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1measles virus is a pleomorphic, enveloped, negative-sense, single-stranded rna virus of family paramyxoviridae of approximately 100 nm to 300 nm in diameter [2] . measles virus causes mild to severe illness during seasonal outbreaks in endemic areas and intermittent outbreaks in nonendemic area [10] . measles virus codes for six structural and two nonstructural proteins (fig. 5 .1b) [11] . hemagglutinin (h) and fusion (f) glycoproteins project from the viral surface and facilitate viral binding to cellular receptors and fusion with the host cell membrane, respectively. matrix (m) protein underlies the envelope providing structure. the inner nucleocapsid is composed of rna coated by nucleoprotein (n), bound by the polymerase complex which includes the large (l) polymerase protein, and phosphoprotein (p), a polymerase cofactor. the remaining nonstructural proteins include c and v.coronaviruses are spherical, enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded rna viruses of family coronaviridae of approximately 120 nm in diameter [12] . coronaviruses are the causative agents of an estimated 30% of upper and lower respiratory tract infections in humans resulting in rhinitis, pharyngitis, sinusitis, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia [13] . while coronaviruses are often associated with mild disease (e.g., hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), a lineage b betacoronavirus, and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), a lineage c betacoronavirus, are associated with severe and potentially fatal respiratory infection [14, 15] . sars-and mers-cov transcribe 12 and 9 subgenomic rnas, respectively, which encode for the spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleocapsid (n) structural proteins (fig. 5 .1c) [14] . s, e, and m are all integrated into the hostderived lipid envelope, and s facilitates host cell attachment to angiotensinconverting enzyme (ace)-2 receptors for sars-cov and dipeptidyl peptidase (dpp)-4 receptors for mers-cov [16, 17] . the n protein encapsidates the viral genome to form the helical nucleocapsid. the viral replicase-transcriptase complex is made up of 16 nonstructural proteins (nsp1-16) including a unique proofreading exoribonuclease that reduces the accumulation of genome mutations [12] .poxviruses are oval-to-brick-shaped double-stranded dna viruses of family poxviridae that range in size from 200 to 400 nm [2] . viruses within genus orthopoxvirus that cause human disease include cowpox virus (cpxv), monkeypox virus (mpxv), vaccinia virus (vacv), and variola virus (varv), the etiologic agent of smallpox [18] .poxviruses contain a biconcave viral core where the dna genome, dnadependent rna polymerase, and enzymes necessary for particle uncoating reside ( fig. 5.1d ) [19] . this nucleosome is surrounded by a core membrane that is flanked by two proteinaceous lateral bodies. a single lipid membrane surrounds the cellassociated form of the mature virion (mv). a second host-derived lipid envelope covers the extracellular virion (ev) [2, 19] . poxvirus genomes are comprised of a large, linear double-stranded viral dna genome that encodes ~200 genes. highly conserved structural genes are predominantly found in the middle of the genome, whereas variable virulence factor genes that function in immune evasion, virulence, and viral pathogenesis are found at the termini of the genome [20] .wild aquatic birds are natural reservoirs for nearly all influenza a virus subtypes, which spread to domestic avian species and mammals, including humans [5] . h17n10 and h18n11 subtypes are exceptions in that they have only been isolated from bats [6, 7] . certain h5 and h7 subtypes are highly pathogenic to domestic poultry when transmitted from wild birds, known as highly pathogenic avian influenza (hpai) viruses [21] . hpai viruses cause spillover infections in humans that may be severe or fatal. examples include outbreaks of h5n1 and h7n9 hpai viruses in asia with high case fatality among humans, although limited human-tohuman transmission [22, 23] has been reported. hpai virus adaptations might lead to sustained human-to-human transmission, and so poultry outbreaks are managed by flock depopulation [24] . influenza a subtypes isolated in swine include h1 to h5, h9, and n1 and n2. subtypes that spillover into humans cause mild to severe illness and are known as swine "variant" viruses [25] .currently circulating seasonal influenza a subtypes h1n1 and h3n2 and influenza b viruses, yamagata or victoria lineage, cause annual epidemics during fall through spring in temperate regions and infections throughout the year in the tropics [26] . antigenic drift of h and n surface glycoproteins drives annual epidemics. from 2017 to 2018, seasonal influenza caused approximately 49 million illnesses, 1 million hospitalizations, and 79,000 deaths in the united states alone [27] . when two or more influenza a viruses infect a common host, such as a bird or pig, individual gene segments may recombine to form a novel virus, known as antigenic shift. influenza pandemics occur when novel viruses emerge into an immunologically naïve population and become adapted for sustained human-to-human spread. the 1918 "spanish" influenza pandemic was the most severe on record, resulting in an estimated 50 million deaths [28] . less severe pandemics occurred in 1957, 1968, and 2009 . in an effort to improve preparedness and response to seasonal, pandemic, and zoonotic influenza, the world health organization (who) conducts global surveillance of influenza a and b isolates (fig. 5 .2a) [29] . measles is pathogenic for humans and nonhuman primates, although sustained transmission occurs only among humans raising potential for global elimination [30] . historically, measles infected an estimated 90% of children by age 5 years, resulting in approximately 2 million global deaths each year [10] . with the introduction of the measles vaccine in 1963 and advances in global vaccination programs, measles cases and mortality have drastically declined (fig. 5.2b ). by 2017, 85% of children worldwide had received at least one dose of the measles vaccine by age 1 year, and during 2000-2017, global measles mortality decreased by 80%, preventing an estimated 21 million deaths [31] . of the 24 known measles genotypes, only five were detected in circulation during 2016-2017. despite these gains, measles remains endemic in many regions of the world including africa, western pacific, south east asia, and europe, and measles has resurged in previously low-incidence areas (e.g., regions within europe and the americas) with epidemics attributable to importation of cases and suboptimal immunization coverage [32] [33] [34] . an estimated 93% population immunity is required to prevent measles transmission within communities, a prerequisite for global elimination [35] .chinese horseshoe bats are the putative reservoir for sars-cov, and dromedary camels are thought to be the reservoir for mers-cov [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] . animal-to-human transmission likely occurs following direct contact with intermediate hosts [38, 44] . during the 2003-2004 sars epidemic, 8096 cases and 774 deaths were reported from 26 countries with no cases reported since ( fig. 5 .2c) [45] . human-to-human transmission of sars-cov occurred primarily in healthcare settings with healthcare workers comprising 22% and >40% of reported cases in china and canada, respectively [45] . mers was first reported in saudi arabia in 2012 with >2000 cases and >800 deaths reported from 27 countries through 2018 [46] . while most cases have been reported from the arabian peninsula, an imported case to south korea in 2015 resulted in a large outbreak in multiple healthcare facilities [47] . mers transmission occurs primarily in healthcare facilities and to a lesser degree within households [48, 49] .while the only known reservoir for varv is humans, it has been postulated that the virus emerged from an ancestral rodent-borne poxvirus more than 10,000 years ago [18, 50] . numerous smallpox epidemics have occurred throughout recorded history including more than 300 million fatalities during the twentieth century alone [51] [52] [53] . smallpox was eventually eradicated following the implementation of the smallpox eradication program by the who from 1966 to 1980 ( fig. 5 .2d) which was facilitated by the absence of a zoonotic reservoir for varv [51] .influenza viruses are transmitted by large respiratory droplets by coughing, sneezing, or talking or through contact with infected surfaces [54] . influenza viruses bind to sugar moieties on the surface of airway epithelial cells where early viral replication, propagation, and shedding occur during an average 1-2 days of incubation period [55] [56] [57] . peak viral replication typically occurs within 4 days of symptom onset and resolves within 7-10 days, lasting longer in children and immunocompromised hosts [58] [59] [60] . on average one person infects -one to two additional people; however, this reproductive number (r 0 ) varies by viral strain and social and environmental factors [61] . viral infection impairs the airway mucosal barrier and disrupts the alveolar-capillary membrane contributing to leakage of fluid and inflammatory cells into the alveolar space which impairs gas exchange resulting in hypoxemia [62, 63] . bacterial coinfection often complicates severe cases contributing to respiratory failure and death, with staphylococcus aureus and streptococcus species as predominant copathogens [64] . seasonal influenza virus infection is largely limited to the respiratory tract; however, h5 and h7 hpai viruses have a polybasic cleave site within the hemagglutinin allowing for replication outside of the respiratory tract [65, 66] . infection with one strain of influenza does not confer complete immunity to other strains or subtypes [67] .measles is among the most highly contagious respiratory infections, spread by exposure to large respiratory droplets through coughing, sneezing, or talking; by indirect contact with infected surfaces; or by small infectious droplets that can remain suspended in air for up to 2 hours [10, 68] . respiratory tract dendritic cells, lymphocytes, and alveolar macrophages are early targets of infection where during an average 8-to 12-day incubation period measles replicates and spreads to local lymphatics and respiratory epithelium and then disseminates in blood via infected lymphocytes to epithelial and endothelial cells in most organs [69] [70] [71] . the infectious period begins with fever onset and extends for several days after rash appears [72] . the estimated r 0 of measles is 9-18 dependent upon host susceptibility and social and environmental factors [73] . measles infects and disrupts tissues throughout the body; however, severe disease is primarily due to lower respiratory tract and neurological complications [72] . natural measles infection confers lifelong immunity, and passive transfer of maternal antibodies protects newborns during the early postnatal period [74] . individuals who recover from measles infection are at increased risk of secondary infection [75, 76] .sars-cov is transmitted by large respiratory droplets and by contact with infected surfaces. epidemiologic data also support small droplet airborne transmission of sars-cov although the estimated r 0 of 0.86-1.83 argues against this being a predominate route of spread [77, 78] . sars-cov binds to angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace)-2 receptors on respiratory epithelial cells, pneumocytes, and alveolar macrophages resulting in diffuse alveolar damage and respiratory failure [79, 80] . sars is a systemic infection with viremia detected in most cases affecting multiple cell types and organs [81, 82] . acute kidney injury is multifactorial with evidence of acute tubule necrosis, vasculitis, and glomerular fibrosis, and central nervous system manifestations are at least in part attributable to direct infection of neurons resulting in edema and degeneration [83] . mers-cov is transmitted by large respiratory droplets and by contact with infected surfaces with an estimated r0 of <1 to >1 outside of versus within healthcare settings, respectively [84] . mers-cov binds dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) on respiratory epithelial cells and pneumocytes where it undergoes productive replication during a 2-14 days incubation period [16] . viral shedding from the lower respiratory tract may persist for weeks [85, 86] . viremia, while not documented in all cases, is associated with severe disease and productive infection of dcs, and macrophages is thought to facilitate immune dysregulation [87, 88] . dpp4 is broadly expressed on cells outside of the lung; however, few autopsy data are available to define viral distribution [16, 89] .varv is transmitted primarily by large respiratory droplets and to a lesser degree through contact with contaminated objects such as scabs, bedding, or clothing or by airborne small respiratory droplets [90, 91] . varv is thought to replicate in airway epithelium and spread to regional lymph nodes [92, 93] . varv replicates within lymph nodes and disseminates via the bloodstream seeding distant sights including skin, spleen, bone marrow, liver, kidney, and other organs [94] . fever manifests following an average 12 days incubation, and rash follows fever by 3-4 days, concurrent with high-level viral shedding from oropharyngeal secretions [95, 96] . the estimated r 0 of smallpox is between 3.5 and 6 [97] . high-level viremia is detected more often with hemorrhagic compared with ordinary type smallpox, although exact mechanisms of organ failure observed in fatal case are not well defined [98] [99] [100] [101] .influenza infection manifests as acute onset of fever, chills, malaise, headache, and myalgias following an average 1-2 days asymptomatic incubation period [9] . most infections are self-limited resolving within 1-2 weeks. upper or lower airway complications include otitis media, sinusitis, bronchitis, and pneumonia with or without bacterial coinfection [63, 64, 102] . risk factors for severe infection include age >65 years or <5 years; pregnancy; preexisting respiratory, cardiac, neurologic, or metabolic conditions; immunosuppression; and obesity. progressive lethargy and shortness of breath, typically within 5 days of symptom onset, suggest development of lower respiratory tract complications which may rapidly progress to respiratory failure and death in severe cases [64] . pneumonia due to influenza infection alone versus influenza and bacterial coinfection cannot be reliably distinguished by clinical or radiological grounds, and so a high index of suspicion is needed. influenza complications outside of the respiratory tract include exacerbation of underlying heart disease including ischemic heart disease and heart failure, myocarditis, encephalopathy, and encephalitis [103] .measles infection manifests by acute onset fever, coryza, conjunctivitis, and cough [10] . small white papules, koplik spots, appear on the buccal mucosa within 3 days of fever onset, followed by development of diffuse maculopapular rash 1 or 2 days later. diarrhea commonly begins shortly following rash onset and may result in dehydration. symptoms typically resolve within 7 days of fever onset in self-limited illness. groups at increased risk for measles complications include malnourished infants and those with vitamin a deficiency, adults >20 years old, and immunocompromised individuals [72] . respiratory complications include otitis media, laryngotracheobronchitis (croup), and pneumonia. pneumonia, often complicated by bacterial coinfection, is the most common severe complication of measles contributing to respiratory failure and death [72, 104] . predominant bacterial copathogens include streptococcus pneumonia, staphylococcus aureus, and haemophilus influenzae.three rare but severe neurologic complications occur [105] . acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (adem) is a demyelinating autoimmune process that occurs within weeks of acute illness in approximately 1 in 1000 cases. adem is characterized by fevers, seizures, and neurologic deficits. measles inclusion body encephalitis is a progressive lethal brain infection occurring within months of acute illness primarily among individuals with impaired cellular immunity. subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (sspe) occurs 5-10 years following initial infection resulting in seizures and cognitive and motor decline resulting in death. sspe affects an estimated 1 in 10,000 infants under 1 year of age and is attributed to host responses to defective viral particle production in the brain.following an average 5-day incubation period, sars-cov infection presents with fevers, chills, dry cough, headache, malaise, and dyspnea commonly followed by watery diarrhea [106] [107] [108] . age >60 years and pregnancy are associated with severe disease manifested by progressive respiratory failure within 2 weeks of illness onset [108, 109] . common laboratory features of sars included lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia, abnormal coagulation parameters, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase, alanine aminotransferase, and creatine kinase levels [110] [111] [112] . acute kidney injury and proteinuria were observed in 7% and 84% of patients, respectively [113] .initial symptoms of mers-cov infection include fever, chills, cough, shortness of breath, myalgia, and malaise following a mean incubation period of 5 days [114] . gastrointestinal symptoms, including vomiting and diarrhea, occur in onethird of patients [115] [116] [117] [118] . the median times from symptom onset to hospitalization, icu admission, and death are 4, 5, and 12 days, respectively [118] . mers patients present with a rapidly progressing pneumonia requiring mechanical ventilation and additional organ support with the first week of illness [109] . severe disease has been linked to comorbidities including diabetes mellitus (68%), chronic renal disease (49%), hypertension (34%), chronic cardiac disease (28%), chronic pulmonary disease (26%), and obesity (17%) [114] . the median age of those with confirmed mers is 50 years with a male-to-female ratio of 3.3:1 [114] . laboratory abnormalities include lymphopenia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, elevated serum creatinine levels consistent with acute kidney injury, and elevated liver enzymes [114, 115, 117, 119, 120] . high lactate levels and consumptive coagulopathy have also been reported [119, 121] . chest radiographic abnormalities are due to viral pneumonitis with or without secondary bacterial pneumonia, and acute kidney injury occurs in up to 43% of patients [114, 119, 120, [122] [123] [124] .as the smallpox disease course was related to the clinical presentation of disease, rao proposed a clinical classification system [125] that was later adopted by the who in 1972 [51] . ordinary type smallpox was the most common clinical type of smallpox. the incubation period was 7-19 days and was followed by fever onset (38.5-40.5 °c), headaches, backaches, vomiting, and diarrhea [51] . lesions first appeared on mucous membranes (including the tongue, palate, and pharynx) ~1 day prior to macular rash development, where lesions began on the face followed by proximal regions of the extremities, the trunk, and the distal extremities. lesion development followed a centrifugal dispersion pattern, typically most dense on the face, with papules appearing within 2 days of macular rash development. papules became vesicular ~2-4 days later followed by a pustular stage (5-7 days postrash) that peaked ~10 days postrash. pustule resolution quickly followed and was accompanied by lesion flattening, fluid reabsorption, hardening, and scab formation (14-21 days postrash). rao proposed for ordinary type smallpox to be further subdivided based on the macular rash pattern [125] . these included discrete ordinarytype smallpox, characterized by discrete skin lesions; confluent ordinary-type smallpox, where pustular skin lesions were confluent on the face and extremities; and semiconfluent ordinary-type smallpox, where skin lesions were confluent on the face but disparate over the rest of the body. modified-type smallpox, where lesions were less numerous than in ordinary-type smallpox, was primarily associated with vaccinated individuals and had an accelerated nonfatal disease course [125] . flattype and hemorrhagic-type smallpox were the most lethal forms of the disease but were also very rare (~7% and 3% of patients, respectively) [51] . flat-type smallpox had high cfrs in both unvaccinated and vaccinated patients (97% and 67%, respectively). hemorrhagic-type smallpox was nearly 100% fatal in both vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals, and death normally came prior to macular rash development. the clinical symptoms of flat-type smallpox were more severe during the prodromal period and did not subside. skin lesions were flat and often black or dark purple. respiratory complications were common and patients were febrile throughout disease. death typically occurred 8-12 days post-fever onset. hemorrhagic-type smallpox could be divided into early and late hemorrhagic-type smallpox. the early form was characterized by hemorrhage (primarily subconjunctival) early in the disease course. generalized erythema, petechiae, and ecchymosis within 2 days of fever and flat matter lesions formed across the entire body surface. lesions turned purple by day 4 with death by day 6 as a result of cardiac and pulmonary complications. in the late form, hemorrhages occurred following rash development and death followed between 8 and 10 days post-fever onset.in healthcare settings, patients under evaluation for influenza should be isolated, and standard, droplet, and contact precautions should be implemented [126] . traditional antigen-based rapid diagnostic assays (rdas) for influenza lack sensitivity and cannot be relied upon to rule out infection [26] . newer antigen-based rdas that employ a digital scan of the test strip, and molecular assays that employ isothermal amplification technology have improved sensitivity and specificity that more closely approximates highly sensitive and specific reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr)-based assays [127] . acceptable sample types for influenza testing include nasopharyngeal swab or wash and bronchoalveolar lavage specimens. individuals suspected of zoonotic influenza infection should have case evaluation and specimen testing coordinated through local or state public health authorities.measles should be considered in patients without preexisting immunity and a compatible febrile rash illness. travel to a region with ongoing measles transmission or exposure to other individuals with a febrile rash illness should raise suspicion. patients under evaluation for measles require isolation and implementation of standard, airborne, and contact precautions. local or state health authorities should be contacted within 24 hours to assist with confirmatory testing, case finding, and infection control. measles is typically confirmed by measles-specific igm serology or detection of measles rna in a nasopharyngeal, throat, or urine specimen by rt-pcr [10] . a fourfold or greater rise in measles igg titers between acute and convalescent samples tested 2 or more weeks apart can assist with diagnostic uncertainty. virus can also be cultured from respiratory, blood, and urine specimens in appropriate public health laboratories.while sars is no longer circulating, mers should be suspected in individuals with a compatible febrile illness and an epidemiological risk factor [128] . risk factors include travel to the arabian peninsula or contact with a confirmed or suspected case within 14 days of symptom onset. patients under evaluation for mers require isolation and implementation of standard, airborne, and contact precautions.confirmatory testing and infection control should be coordinated through local or state health authorities. mers may be confirmed in designated public health laboratories by rt-pcr testing of lower respiratory tract specimens [129] . multiple other specimen types including upper respiratory tract samples, serum, and stool should also be collected for testing. serologic testing can be used to evaluate for suspected infection among individuals no longer shedding virus [129, 130] .smallpox has not been observed in over 40 years; however, concerns remain for use as a bioweapon. major and minor criteria have been established to assist clinicians in recognition of smallpox [131] . individuals under evaluation should be isolated, and standard, airborne, and contact precautions should be implemented. local or state health authorities should be contacted to assist with confirmatory testing and public health interventions. pcr identification of variola dna or isolation of the virus from a clinical specimen is required to confirm a diagnosis in specialized highcontainment laboratories.annual seasonal influenza vaccination is recommended in the united states for all individuals aged 6 months or older and has been associated with decreased risk of pneumonia and death, particularly among high-risk groups [132] [133] [134] . seasonal influenza vaccination does not provide protection against novel strains. consequently, efforts are underway to develop a vaccine that would protect against most or all influenza strains [135] . three classes of drugs are licensed for the treatment of influenza in the united states [136] . adamantanes, including amantadine and rimantadine, are not currently recommended given resistance of circulating seasonal strains. baloxavir morboxil, a cap-dependent endonuclease inhibitor, was recently approved for the treatment of uncomplicated influenza [137] . neuraminidase inhibitors (nai) include oral oseltamivir, inhaled zanamivir, and intravenous peramivir. prophylactic use of nais is recommended in unvaccinated individuals with risk factors for severe disease and during institutional outbreaks to limit spread. therapeutic use is recommended for individuals with suspected or confirmed influenza that have developed or are at high risk for influenza complications [26] . influenza complications, including respiratory and multiorgan failure, are managed with supportive care. bacterial coinfection should be considered and empirically treated early pending results of microbiologic testing among severe cases.measles can be effectively prevented through vaccination, typically given in combination with vaccines for rubella (mr), mumps (mmr), or varicella (mmr-v). who recommends the first dose of measles vaccine be administered at 9 or 12 months of age in high and low prevalence settings, respectively [138] . a second dose should be administered after a minimum of 4-week interval. nonimmune individuals that have been exposed to measles should receive post-exposure prophylaxis with mmr or immunoglobulin within 72 hours or 6 days, respectively, although not concurrently [139] . clinical management of patients with measles consists of fluid, electrolyte, and nutritional support and early recognition and treatment of bacterial coinfection [10] . two doses of vitamin a in children under 2 years have been associated with reduced risk of pneumonia and death [140] . who recommends administering 200,000 iu of vitamin a daily for 2 days in children aged 1 year and older, with reduced dosing in younger infants [141] .there are currently no licensed therapeutics or vaccines for sars or mers. consequently, supportive care is the mainstay of treatment [142] . renal replacement therapy is frequently required in severe illness [119, 143, 144] . empiric antibiotics are often administered given potential for secondary bacterial infection. ribavirin and pegylated interferon alpha 2b have been administered to mers patients, although effectiveness data is lacking [144] . aerosol-generating procedures including endotracheal intubation are associated with increased risk of healthcare worker infection necessitating strict adherence to infection control measures, including use of eye protection in addition to standard, airborne, and contact precautions [145] .while routine smallpox vaccination ceased at the end of the smallpox eradication program, it is still employed for those at increased risk for exposure. first-generation vaccines comprise a significant proportion of both the us national and global vaccine stockpiles [146] . however, first-generation vaccines carry high risk of adverse events due to use of replication-competent vacv and potential manufacturing contaminants. second-generation smallpox vaccines have reduced concerns for contaminants and are expected to have similar protective efficacy as first-generation vaccines. acam2000® has garnered us food and drug administration licensure for vaccination of those at high risk for orthopoxvirus exposure and is part of the us strategic national stockpile [147] . acam2000® and the lister-derived vaccines rivm and elstree-bn also contribute to the global stockpile. imvamune (mva), a third-generation vaccine, is licensed in europe and canada and is part of the us national stockpile. passive immunization with vig has been employed to treat complications of vaccinations [148, 149] . there has also been increasing interest in the development and licensure of small molecule antivirals for treatment of orthopoxvirus infections. cmx001 (brincidofovir), a dna synthesis inhibitor, has demonstrated protection against lethal varv in nonhuman primates [150] and has been granted ophan drug designation while also being included in the us strategic national stockpile. st-246 (tecovirimat), which inhibits viral egress, has potent (ic50 < 0.010 μm) and selective (cc50 > 40 mm) inhibitory activities against multiple orthopoxvirues [151] , is the only antipoxvirus therapeutic that has been granted approval in the us and has been added to the strategic national stockpile.the outbreak of the 2019-novel-coronavirus-disease (covid- 19) caused by severe-acute-respiratory-syndrome-coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) emerging from wuhan in december 2019 has been arousing great global health concern, with many unknowns regarding the transmission dynamics and spectrum of illness to be answered. 1 -3 sars-cov-2 has rapidly spread to many places outside wuhan, where imported cases with ascertained covid-19 among travelers returning from wuhan without direct exposure to any wet-markets or wild-animals have been reported. 2 -4 current epidemiologic data indicate that human-to-human transmission of sars-cov-2 has been rapidly occurring. 2 , 5 , 6 the great number of covid-19 infections may be attributable to the late identification of sources-of-infection and the ability of the host to shed the infection while asymptomatic. 1 , 7 while a study 8 suggests that transmission may occur during the incubation-period, the validity was questioned by science because the evidence was not directly obtained from the infectious-patient, who actually had developed symptoms, which were controlled by a fever-lowering agent, before disease transmission to others. 9 published reports 2 , 10 , 11 focused on hospitalized older patients in wuhan, many of whom had a history of exposure to the huanan-seafood-wholesale-market, and suggested that covid-19 mainly affected older adults with frequent chronic comorbidities, and that many of them developed severe pneumonia, for whom organ dysfunction and failure and death can occur. however, the characteristics and infectivity of covid-19 among youngsters have been rarely reported, and information on sars-cov-2-negative close-contacts, patients with mild infections, or those with infections outside wuhan remains limited.we collected and analyzed detailed data from a cluster of youngsters aged 16-23 years with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 in hefei, china, originating from a 22-year-old youngster (patient-index) returning from wuhan who rapidly transmitted covid-19 to seven other youngsters of similar ages without recent travel to wuhan, where rapid transmission had occurred during the incubation-period of illness in patient-index. we also identified all the sars-cov-2-negative close-contacts of patient-index, and further compared them with the sars-cov-2-positive patients. we carefully examined the infectivity and transmission dynamics by obtaining valid information directly from the patients and contacts themselves. we are herein describing the demographic, epidemiological, clinical, radiological, and laboratory features, management, and outcomes of the cluster of youngsters with covid-19 and also the sars-cov-2-negative close-contacts.on january 23, 2020, we initially enrolled a 22-year-old male (patient-index/1) returning from wuhan who initially presented to feidong people's hospital (hospital-1; the eastern branch of first affiliated hospital of anhui medical university ) in hefei, with fever, productive cough, myalgia, and lung infiltrates on chest-computed-tomography (ct)-scan. he was suspected to be infected with covid-19. we immediately formed an expert investigation-team prospectively following-up and tracing all the contacts.subsequently, from january 25 through 27, seven young symptomatic close-contacts of patient-index (his cousin and six classmates) also presented to hospital ( table 1 ; fig. s1 ) for management of relevant manifestations and assessment of heath-conditions after having learned about the covid-19 outbreak in wuhan and the human-to-human-transmission. all the eight patients tested positive for sars-cov-2 using realtime-reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction (rrt-pcr), confirming covid-19. starting from january 27, the other contacts of patient-index were admitted to hospital-1 for quarantine (nine; contacts-1-9) if residing in feidong, a county > 400 kilometers northeast of wuhan, or directly isolated at home and home-visited by local healthcare-authorities if living in other parts of hefei (two), and they all tested negative for sars-cov-2. this study was approved by the ethics committee of hospital 1. informed consent was obtained from all patients and contacts.we prospectively collected information on the demographic, epidemiological, clinical, radiological, and laboratory characteristics and management and outcomes for all the eight youngsters with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 and the nine admitted sars-cov-2-negative contacts of patient-index. all data were collected into a standardized and customized data-collection form, and validated by a trained team of physician-scientists. at least two investigators independently reviewed the collected information to double-check the data and verify the accuracy. follow-up was until february 20.we directly communicated with and interviewed all sars-cov-2-positive patients and sars-cov-2-negative contacts themselves, and their family-members, relatives, classmates, friends, and healthcare-workers when necessary, to collect and ascertain all medical-history, epidemiological (exposure-history, timelines of events, close-contact identification, etc.), and symptom data, which were cross-checked with information from multiple sources. we determined exposure-histories during the three months before illness-onset or hospital-admission, including the dates, time, frequencies, and patterns of contacts with any person who had fever, respiratory-symptoms, or other relevant symptoms, with any wildanimals, or with any relevant environments such as any wetmarkets or medical-institutes. information on history of travel to wuhan and direct contact with people returning from wuhan within three months before symptom-onset or hospital-admission was also included.the definitions and management of all suspected and ascertained covid-19 cases enrolled were according to the world health organization (who) guidance 12 and the new coronavirus pneumonia prevention and control program by the china national health commission, 13 and pathogen examinations are detailed in supplementary methods .the incubation-period was defined as days from infection/exposure to illness-onset was estimated. the serial-interval was defined as the time delay between illness-onset dates in successive cases in a transmission-chain.continuous variables were shown as median (range), and categorical variables as count (percentage). blood laboratoryexamination findings were illustrated using boxplots, assessed regarding whether the measurements were outside the referencerange, and compared between sars-cov-2-positive patients and sars-cov-2-negative contacts using the mann-whitney-wilcoxontest for unpaired samples. considering the potential type-i-error, the findings should be interpreted as exploratory.a two-sided p -value of < 0.05 was considered statisticallysignificant. statistical-analyses were performed using the r 3.6.2 software ( https://www.r-project.org/ ). 2020, four days before the "lockdown" of wuhan, and arrived at his hometown in feidong in the afternoon for the china spring-festival ( fig. 1 ). in the evening on january 19, he went to visit (talk and have supper with) his cousin, a 16-year-old otherwisehealthy female (patient-2) and his uncle (contact-1; later excluded from infection), in their apartment for about 0.5 hours without airconditioning or wearing a mask. further exposure and contact details are shown in supplementary results and table s1 .at noon on january 20, he met and ate hotpot with a female (contact-2; later excluded from infection), sitting face-to-face for about one hour, and went shopping together afterwards. the following day on january 21, he took part in a classmate-get-together in feidong where he had dinner in a restaurant-room with airconditioning and also windows open at about 11:30-14:00 and afterwards sang karaoke in a confined-room at about 14:00-16:30 with air-conditioning and with some fruits shared, with 15 of his previous classmates whose hometowns are all in hefei. further details on the get-together are shown in supplementary results, table s1, and figs. s1 and s4. afterwards, he had supper with a 22year-old otherwise-healthy male (patient-4) while the others went right back home. nobody found him unhealthy that day. he reported that he was totally asymptomatic and well before and on january 21. among his classmates he contacted, six (patients-3-8) were later confirmed with covid-19, and the person who first ex-perienced any relevant symptoms was patients-4 and 8 (both on january 22).patient-index reported that the very first symptom that he experienced was itchy eyes at noon on january 22 (fig. s1 ). in the afternoon, he felt dizzy with a fever of 37.5 °c developed (measured by himself), and he (starting to wear a mask) attended a local outpatient-clinic in feidong and was prescribed amoxicillin capsules, paracetamol and amantadine compound capsules, and ambroxol dispersible-tablets, after taking which his temperature returned to normal (36.5 °c). on the same day, he also developed mild nasal-congestion and rhinorrhea, both lasting 2 days. on january 23, his body temperature was normal in the morning but rose again to 37.5 °c at noon, which was again temporarily controlled by the drugs; however, in the evening he had fever again. on the same day before the onset of fever, patient-2 went to visit patient-index, and brought him some home-made food. they ate and chatted together in his room which was tightly confined with no doors or windows open and without air-conditioning for about 0.5 h. patient-2 later became infected. having learned about the covid-19 emergence in wuhan and the possible humanto-human-transmission from internet at noon on january 22, he decided to go to hospital-1 for further assessment and management in the evening on january 23. virus-rna detection using respiratory-samples taken on january 26 and 27 both revealed positive results on rrt-pcr assays, confirming the sars-cov-2 infection ( fig. 1 ). assays to detect other pathogens were all negative. further descriptions of the disease-course and management of patient-index are detailed in supplementary results . tracing of the contacts of patient-index started immediately after his admission to hospital. before illness onset, he closely contacted 22 people (15 classmates and seven family-members). 16 of the contacts were admitted to hospital under isolation: seven (patients-2-8) developed covid-19-relavent symptoms, and were later identified to have laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2-infection, and nine (contacts-1-9) tested negative for sars-cov-2 and had normal ct-scan findings, and were discharged to home-isolation 4-5 days after admission. the other six contacts were quarantined and isolated at home, and closely watched by healthcare-workers; they all tested negative for sars-cov-2.none of the contacts had visited any wet-markets or hospitals, contacted any wild-animals, or eaten any game-meat within three months (tables s1). none of them had resided in, traveled to, or passed wuhan, other cities in hubei, or any region where sars-cov-2-transmission was known to be occurring within three months. they reported no contacts with any individual recently returning from such a region, with anyone having any suspicious symptoms (e.g., fever, cough, or other respiratory or relevant digestive symptoms), or with anybody later developing relevant symptoms or confirmed with covid-19 except patient-index within three months (this was ascertained by an investigation by the healthcare-authority in hefei). they did not have any infected family-members or members having visited wuhan. none of the contacts had any symptom of illness during exposure.patients-2-8 were admitted to hospital under isolation 1-3 days after the admission of patient-index on february 25-27. the respiratory-samples of all patients tested positive for sars-cov-2 for at least two times. five of the classmates patient-index contacted in the get-together initially tested positive for sars-cov-2 on january 26, and another classmate and patient-index's cousin initially on january 27. we did not find any evidence of co-infection with other known respiratory viral, bacterial, or fungal pathogens in any of the patients on microbiological-testing.of all the eight infected youngsters, the median-age was 22 years (range, 16-23; table 1 ), and six were male. three were company-employees, four university-students, and patient-2 a senior-high-school-student. three were overweight. patients-4 and 8 were current-smokers. three had mild comorbidities (patients-5 and 7, chronic gastritis; patient 6, fatty-liver). while patient-3 initially reported no coexisting medical-conditions, his blood-pressure was measured to be 150/94 mm hg on admission. they all immediately wore masks and paid special attention to hand-hygiene after illness-onset.the median incubation-period for patients-3-8 was two days (range, 1-4; table 1 ). the median serial-interval in the youngcluster was one day (range, 0-4; patients-4 and 8 had symptom onset on the same day as patient-index). among the eight youngsters with covid-19, the median duration from illness-onset to first-hospital-admission was two days (range, 1-3). the median interval between illness-onset and second positive-test for sars-cov-2 which ascertained the covid-19 diagnosis was four days (range, [2] [3] [4] [5] .the presentations of the eight young-patients are shown in table 2 and fig. s2 . because manifestations acquired after hospitalization may be influenced by the hospital-environment and drug-use, we primarily describe those developed before or on admission. we did not identify any patients asymptomatic on admission but testing positive for sars-cov-2. all patients had mild clinical-conditions, and developed ≥2 symptoms and/or signs before or on admission. most youngsters (seven) developed fever (except patient-6). the median body-temperature on admission was 37.5 °c (range, 37.0-38.2), and the median highest temperature during disease-course was 38.5 °c (range, 37.1-38.9). none had a high fever (temperature > 39 °c). the fever of patients-index, 2, and 5 showed an intermittent pattern, and patients-3-5 experienced chills. four patients had productive-cough, and patients-6 and 7 had dry-cough. five patients had both fever and cough. four youngsters experienced fatigue, and three myalgia. patients-2 and 7 reported experiencing no upper-respiratory-tract-infection symptoms (sore-throat, nasal-congestion, rhinorrhea, and/or sneezing), while five youngsters had more than two such symptoms. patient-7 reported shortness of breath for two days on admission. none of the youngsters developed dyspnea, or chest-discomfort or pain. three patients had headache, and patient-index reported dizziness. eye-discomfort was noted in patients-index and 3, and backache in patient-3. two patients had anorexia, and three nausea, but vomiting did not develop in any of them before or on admission. only patient-8 developed diarrhea, and patient-5 reported abdominal-discomfort. nobody only presented with digestive-symptoms. patient-2, the youngest patient (16 years), had only two presentations on admission: intermittent fever for two days and headache for one day, while the others reported 4-11 symptoms. the symptoms on illness onset are described in supplementary results.on admission, abnormalities in chest-ct-images suggesting viral-pneumonia were detected in six (all males; 22-23 years) of the eight youngsters confirmed with covid-19 ( table 2 ; fig. 1 ). none of the conditions were severe. of the six pneumonia-patients, five had unilateral-involvement, and patient-8 had bilateralpneumonia on admission; four had involvement of the lowerlobe, and the other two of the middle-lobe. of the five patients with unilateral-disease, pneumonia was located in the right-lung in four patients, and in the left-lung in patient-3. the typicalfindings on chest-ct-scan, multifocal-mottling, patchy-shadows, and/or ground-glass-opacities, 2 which were mostly around the peripheral-parts of the lungs and which were compatible with abnormalities seen in viral-pneumonia, were detected in the pneumonia-patients on admission. patient-index's pneumonia progressed to bilateral-pneumonia two days after the initial scan. for the youngest patient (patient-2; 16 years), while no abnormalities were detected the next day after illness-onset, a few infiltrates were noticed in the lower-lob of left-lung six days later.the blood-routine tests of the seven youngsters with available information on admission showed leucopenia and substantial neutropenia in patients-2 and 4 ( table 3 ). patient-8 had increased neutrophils, but decreased lymphocytes. patient-7 also had lymphopenia. patients-1 and 3 had both red-blood-cell count and hemoglobin above the normal-range. patient-2 had slightly shortened prothrombin-time, while patient-4 showed mildly extended activated-partial-thromboplastin-time, and patient-8 slightly increased international-normalized-ratio. patient-3 had elevation of creatine-kinase and lactate-dehydrogenase reaching the upperlimit of reference-range. regarding the infection-index, procalcitonin was above the normal-range in patient-4. patient-1 had an elevated level of c-reactive-protein. most patients had normal serum levels of procalcitonin on admission (five of six youngsters with available information).while testing negative for sars-cov-2, contacts-1-9 also showed some changes in blood-examinations ( table 4 ; supplementary results ). when comparing the laboratory-findings between patients-1-5 ascertained with covid-19 with contacts-1-9 with negative sars-cov-2-tests (fig. s3) , all of whom were initially admitted to hospital-1, lymphocyte-count on admission was lower in the sars-cov patients (p = 0.016). plasma-concentrations of c-reactive-protein were markedly higher in sars-cov-2-positive patients (p = 0.016). management and outcomes of the eight youngsters with laboratory-confirmed covid-19, and description of all the other contacts are detailed in supplementary results .currently, our understanding of the spectrum and naturalhistory of sars-cov-2-infection remains limited. we herein provide an assessment of the infectivity, transmission dynamics, and other characteristics of a cluster of eight young-patients aged 16-23 years confirmed with sars-cov-2 on rrt-pcr originating from patient-index returning from wuhan who rapidly transmitted covid-19 when totally asymptomatic, and compare them to the other nine close-contacts of patient-index testing negative for sars-cov-2. the disease was transmitted outside wuhan and all patients were diagnosed and managed in hefei. the young patients admitted with covid-19 had fast illness-onset and symptoms somehow resembling a common-cold, which were much milder than those of older hospitalized adults with covid-19 as recentlyreported. 1 , 2 , 10 while patchy-shadows and ground-glass-opacity on ct-scan were common, they were much less severe than the older patients. 2 , 10 not all patients had radiological-changes indicating viral-pneumonia on admission.notably, our findings provide valid evidence demonstrating efficient local human-to-human-transmission with strong infectivity of sars-cov-2 within this cluster of youngsters during the incubation-period and asymptomatic-phase of covid-19. sars-cov-2 tested positive in six of the 15 young classmates patient-index contacted in the get-together when he was totally asymptomatic, with the minimal exposure-duration of only two hours. the attack-rate is high (40%). the symptoms of patients-4 and 8 developed on the same day as that of patient-index. we carefully had interviews directly with both patient-index himself and all the other contacts to confirm the absence of any symptoms of patient-index before and during the contacts, thus ascertaining the transmission during asymptomatic-phase. we may need to pay special attention to preventing covid-19 transmission from people looking asymptomatic but with exposure-history. the incubationperiod and serial-interval in this young cluster were much shorter than previously-reported for majorly older patients at the earlier stage of the epidemic. 1 infected-youngsters may act as important sources-of-infection. notably, patient-6 remained afebrile throughout the diseasecourse. these cryptic cases of walking-sars-cov-2-infection might act as potential sources to propagate the epidemic. since it is difficult to differentiate and screen patients during the incubationperiod, further studies on the popularity of this transmissionpattern and the epidemiological-significance of cases with null or mild symptoms are warranted, which would help make relevant control-measures to prevent the future spread of infection. it may be needed to commit sufficient resources to examination in outpatient-clinics and emergency-departments for proactive caseidentification, both as part of the containment-strategy in locations without local-spread yet and to permit earlier clinical-management of infected-individuals.the most likely transmission-scenario is that patient-index acquired the sars-cov-2-infection in wuhan, and then transmitted the virus to patient-2 after two contacts and patients-3-8 during get-together on january 21 after returning to feidong on january 19. patient-2 more likely acquired the infection during the second contact on january 23 with an incubation-period of three days rather than on january 19, since contacts-1 and 2, with whom patient-index had close-contacts in the evening on january 19 and on january 20, respectively, did not develop the infection. these indicate the relatively weak infectivity up till january 20, and the possibility of dynamic changes in infectivity, which possibly became strong enough to enable the disease to affect others sometime on january 20 or 21, still during the incubation-period of patient-index. further studies on the diverse infectivity during different stages of disease and the corresponding time-points are warranted.almost half of the previously-reported cases were in adults aged ≥60 years. 1 younger patients were thought to be less likely infected. 1 few reports exist on younger patients aged 15-25 years. delays from illness-onset to admission were generally short in these eight youngsters with covid-19 in our study, with five hospitalized within two days of illness-onset. the symptoms of these youngsters were all mild and largely-nonspecific, which may be hardly clinically-distinguishable from many other common infectious-diseases, particularly in winter.the first three most common symptoms on illness-onset were fever, cough, and sore-throat. none initially presented with a digestive-symptom. on admission, half or more of the youngsters with covid-19 presented with fever, cough, sputum-production, nasal-congestion, and fatigue, which are much milder than previous reports including majorly older hospitalized-patients with frequent comorbidities, who may have lower immune-function than younger people. 2 , 10 fever developed in seven of the eight youngsters, with six having fever on illness-onset. three youngsters developed one or more digestive-manifestations before or on admission, which are more frequent than the previous report on older hospitalized-patients. 2 , 10 patient-8 developed diarrhea before admission. about 11% of sars-cov 14 and 30% of mers-cov patients 15 also had diarrhea. none of the abovementioned symptoms was present in all youngsters. notably, two youngsters presented with eye-discomfort on admission (one had itchy-eyes as the very initial symptom) and one with backache at illness-onset, which appears to not have been observed in older patients. 2 , 10 for the six youngsters showing pneumonia on admission, multifocal ground-glass opacities typical of viral-pneumonia on chest-ct-scans were frequently seen, while their lung-involvement was much milder and more local and limited than older patients. 2 , 10 unlike older patients typically having bilateral-pneumonia, 2 , 10 the pneumonia youngsters mostly had showed unilateral lunginvolvement on admission.regarding laboratory-examinations, two patients had leucopenia. the absolute neutrophil-counts were reduced in the same two patients, while they were elevated in another patient. furthermore, lymphopenia occurred in two patients, and two youngsters had both elevated red-blood-cell-count and hemoglobin level. these changes were not consistent with the previous report on older patients with more severe conditions. 10 these may suggest diverse immune-status against the virus. neutrophilia may be related to cytokine-storm induced by sars-cov-2 invasion. compared with sars-cov-2-negative contacts, sars-cov-2-positive patients had fewer lymphocytes and higher fibrinogen and c-reactive-protein levels. these suggest that sars-cov-2-infection may be associated with deficiency in immune-function and activation of coagulation, which could have been related to inflammatory-response.as of february 20, 2020, none of the eight young patients had dyspnea, developed any severe clinical-conditions, complications, or adverse-outcomes, were admitted to an intensive-care-unit, required machine-ventilation, or died, which is largely different from the findings in older patients. 2 , 3 , 10 they mostly remained stable during hospitalization. these suggest that age, comorbidity, and symptoms on illness-onset or admission may be important prognostic factors.our study has some limitations. first, the case number is limited, which necessitates the cautious interpretation of the generalizability of our findings. collection of data for a larger cohort would help to enable a more comprehensive understanding of covid-19 among youngsters. second, the route of transmission was not totally clear. while the most likely one was via droplets or aerosol or airborne, we did not collect urine or fecal samples, which prevented us from analyzing whether covid-19 could be transmitted through the fecal-oral pathway. third, the relative-risk of infection among youngsters compared to older individuals and the association of timing or mode of manifestations and ct and laboratory findings with disease-course, outcomes, and spread need to be further evaluated. fourth, the serum of patients and contacts was not obtained to evaluate possible viremia. respiratory-tract samples were used to diagnose covid-19 through rrt-pcr according to the guidelines, 1 , 16-19 and they have a higher positive rate than blood and other samples and are more clinically and epidemiologically relevant. 20 there could have been transient viremia in the sars-cov-2-negative contacts, which was not captured on admission. the corresponding epidemiological and clinical significances need to be further clarified.we provide valid evidence supporting efficient asymptomatic human-to-human transmission of sars-cov-2 showing strong infectivity based on a cluster of youngsters aged 16-23 years in a local community setting outside wuhan. covid-19 was rapidly transmitted by the index patient during the (late) incubationperiod to other seven youngsters, demonstrating strong infectivity. the symptoms of the youngsters with covid-19 had fast-onset, and were generally mild, nonspecific, atypical, and diverse.none reported.drs lei huang, xiuwen zhang, xinyue zhang, and zhijian wei contributed equally to this article. lh, xwz, cyz, and amx had the idea for the study and full access to all data in the study and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis. lh is an epidemiologist and physician scientist with clinical epidemiology as the major subject and public health and statistics as subjects during his phd, xwz is an infectious disease specialist with rich work experience in isolation ward, xyz is a statistician, zjw is a physician scientist, llx and jjx have rich experience in clinical communication and data collection, ppl is an emergency medicine specialist, yhx is a professor of laboratory medicine, cyz is a respiratory medicine and critical care medicine specialist, and amx is a physician scientist with interest in clinical epidemiology and public health. lh, xwz, zyz, zjw, cyz, and amx played roles in the literature search, study conception and design, patient recruitment, clinical management, sample collection, data collection, analysis, and interpretation, and writing of the report. llz, jjx, and yhx played roles in the laboratory assays, data collection, analysis, interpretation, and confirmation and critical revision of the report. ppl played roles in recruitment, clinical management, data collection, and critical revision of the report. all authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript. amx is the guarantor. the corresponding authors attest that all listed authors meet authorship criteria and that no others meeting the criteria have been omitted. none of the funders had any role in the study design and the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data or in the writing of the article and the decision to submit it for publication. the researchers confirm their independence from funders.the data that support the findings of this study are all included in the manuscript, with no additional data available.severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (sars) is a respiratory illness characterized by fever and other symptoms, which may include:• a fever with the temperature greater than 100.4 °f or 38.0 °c• a general feeling of malaise, headache, and/or cough after two to seven days, the respiratory symptoms may become increasingly severe so that oxygen support and mechanical ventilation are necessary. according to the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), approximately 10 to 20 percent of cases progress to the stage of requiring respiratory support. the exact cause of sars is still under investigation; however, scientists have identified a type of coronavirus in patients with sars. the common, known types of coronavirus cause upper respiratory illnesses. sars coronavirus (sars co-v) may survive in the environment for up to several days. laboratory studies at the cdc and around the world are currently studying sars co-v to determine what factors and conditions support its survival outside the body.because the sars co-v has only been identified recently, there are no environmental protection agency (epa) approved cleaning agents known to be specifically effective disinfectants. the cdc recommends using products already proven effective against other related viruses such as bleach, ammonia or alcohol, or agents that contain any of these disinfectants.the treatment for sars is directed at alleviating the symptoms presently. in the absence of ann c. holden, rn, msc a q exploring your questions about this new infectious disease a specific antiviral agent for sars, the cdc currently recommends treating the patient similarly to a patient with serious communityacquired atypical pneumonia.a careful screening is essential. ideally this will occur at the hospital entrance and consist of a written tool with specific questions related to symptoms, present or recent illnesses in the household and any history of recent travel to affected areas. when a woman presents to the nursing unit with her completed screening tool, it's prudent to review it with her and ensure that she has carefully read and understood the questions. cultural diversity in a health care community may require additional resources (see box 1 for sources), such as translators or questionnaires in multiple languages, at the point of care to provide and obtain accurate information.a frontline staff, such as the birthing unit triage nurse responsible for seeing patients who may not have been screened, should wear an n95 mask, face shield or goggles, gown, and gloves until the screening for sars has been completed and all questions related to possible symptoms or an epidemiological link have been answered and are negative.universal precautions are the minimum standard of care. additional precautions should be taken depending on the specific situation. frequent hand washing and the use of alcohol-based hand rubs should be stressed. during the recent sars breakout in toronto, ontario, canada, patients and visitors were given surgical masks to wear during their time in the hospital. laboring women were not expected to wear a mask; however, the health care providers were in full protective garb. medical and surgical patients as well as postpartum women were instructed in the use of masks.a public education about the disease and hospital restrictions in the form of public information announcements and publica-tions are useful. defining visitors versus family or significant others for the door screeners is also necessary. during the height of the recent toronto sars experience, women giving birth were able to have their support person remain with them. postpartum visitation was limited to one support person. newborns in the nicu and pediatric patients were permitted both parents. no visiting or support persons (other than translators) were permitted on the medical or surgical units. the restrictions were relaxed slightly when the disease was believed to be under control. to date, visiting has not returned to pre-sars practices among toronto hospitals.a minimizing the risk of infection to others is one of the goals when caring for any patient who may be infected; therefore, the less movement through the hospital, the better. creating an isolation ldrp room in an ldr is preferable. a negative pressure isolation room is ideal.there should be a supply of all required protective garments and supplies located outside the room. disposable equipment should be used whenever possible. protective coverings should be used on nondisposable items. no equipment or supplies should be shared between the isolated patient and others. the mother-baby couplet should be nursed together and discharged home in quarantine as per the current guidelines. when a newborn requires special care, isolation precautions must be implemented in the nursery setting.women who remain asymptomatic may be discharged and complete the quarantine period at home. arrangements for follow-up appointments and assessments must be made with consideration for the period of quarantine. community resources and contact telephone numbers may help provide the isolated family with some reassurance that help is still available for them in their unique situation.a diately activated a sars provincial operations centre (poc), which functioned as a type of mission control for all health care organizations in the province. in addition to working with the local toronto authorities, the operations centre ensured that communication was maintained throughout the province.strategic planning for the containment of the disease and treatment of sars patients was co-coordinated through this body. regular teleconferences were held and directives issued. the directives clearly articulate how all acute care hospitals in toronto and the surrounding area are to conduct business with the goal of containing and eradicating sars.examples of some of the directives include:• advising all hospitals to restrict the number of entrances to control access • requiring all patients and visitors entering through the emergency department to apply a surgical mask prior to entering the department • requiring every hospital to establish a sarsspecific isolation unit and details pertaining to the numbers of beds the unit should have based on the size of the hospital and specific infection control measures that are to be implementedin june 2003, as sars was contained and toronto experienced a 20-day period (twice the incubation period) with no new cases of sars diagnosed, recognizing the need for continued vigilance, the poc issued a directive that requires all hospitals to have a comprehensive sars surveillance program in effect.a hospital workers are exposed to a certain level of risk simply because they are working in an environment where there are sick people. during the outbreak of any disease, it's important to become as educated as possible about the disease, the symptoms, its mode of transmission, incubation period and treatments. adherence to and application of the appropriate infection control measures for the situation is essential. communicating accurate information to patients, visitors and the public will assist with the containment of a disease. when door screening is done vigilantly and staff are compliant with frequent hand washing, and the proper wearing and use of protective equipment, the risk to health care workers is minimized.]). many cases have been described, and the spread has occurred quickly in china but also internationally, with the virus reaching europe. [2] [3] [4] [5] the disease seems to spread with human-to-human transmission, 6 implying professionals can be contaminated during the care of some patients. 7, 8 as of february 11, 2020, 3019 chinese health care workers were infected with covid-19, and 6 died from it. 9 in recent decades, we have had examples of epidemic coronaviruses. during the severe acute respiratory syndrome and middle east respiratory syndrome epidemics, infected patients had to undergo emergency surgery. [10] [11] [12] [13] cases of transmission to health professionals while in operating theaters also have been described in previous epidemics and should be prevented. 10, 14 the situation is rapidly evolving, and we have observed an alarming increase in cases around the world. the european situation is worrying: at the beginning of march 2020, 15 million people were placed in quarantine in italy and thereafter the whole country, and a significant increase in the number of cases has been observed in other countries, especially in france, which is now in quarantine ( figure 1 ). the situation subsequently spread worryingly to north america. surgical emergencies may be multiple, and some infected patients will need surgical care. facing this increase of cases, in the same way as china, 8,15,16 we will be confronted with patients needing emergency surgery. it is necessary to anticipate and prepare to take care of patients with covid-19 in the operating room (or).the objective of this study is to establish recommendations for the management of a patient with covid-19 coronavirus in the or. it is essential to be prepared and to have received good information to deal with the management of these cases to reduce the risk of contamination.the degree of emergency must be assessed, and it is preferable to postpone the surgical procedure if it is not urgently needed. it is necessary to use protective material in the right situation and avoid shortages. we recommend seeking the advice of the hospital's infectious disease department to consider surgery in a patient with covid-19. in our centers, scheduled patients are hospitalized 48 hours before surgery. if the patient is asymptomatic, we perform a polymerase chain reaction (pcr) screening test on the patient's arrival. if the patient is symptomatic, we perform 2 screening tests 24 hours apart, combined with a computed tomography scan of the chest. the same procedure is applied for patients arriving in emergency adjusted to the required delay of surgery. antibodies are not routine tests at this time. as soon as they will be available and reliable, they probably should be added to the screening strategy and coupled with the pcr technique to optimize preoperative screening.several situations can be encountered:1) if the patient is suspected or confirmed to have coronavirus covid-19, it is necessary to take the utmost precaution for the management of this patient. a specific protocol should be followed in the or. it is obvious that a pcr test must be performed to obtain a necessary diagnosis in these patients. 17 2) if the patient is cured (resolution of clinical symptoms), we currently advise taking the same precautions in the or as for a confirmed patient. the precautionary principle should be followed, given the absence of follow-up on this disease (risk of asymptomatic case, risk of second contamination of the patient, risk of carrying the virus longer).3) if a coronavirus diagnosis is made after surgery, it is necessary to identify all the surgical staff who have been in contact with the patient and consider quarantining them after advice from the infectious disease department.the surgical staff that will take care of this type of patient must have been trained in this risk management and aware of the protocol established in the institution. in this protocol, the patient's journey must be planned in advance by the or referents.it is necessary to delimit a precise route, to avoid as much as possible the patient's contact with other unprotected personnel as well as other patients, by the use of dedicated elevators and corridors ( figure 2) . in this course, the patient's route should avoid buffer zones such as the recovery room or the induction room. an or must be dedicated for these patients.the patient must wear a surgical mask when transferring to the or. personnel must use a dedicated stretcher with disposable protections that will be well disinfected after use. moreover, caregivers should take their temperature before surgery.ors are generally under positive pressure. in these cases, an or must be dedicated and should be switched to negative pressure. [10] [11] [12] [13] 15 we must therefore anticipate this situation and plan to modify the environment in these rooms. in fact, the passage of air from the room to the outside must be limited as much as possible. 18 this procedure should be planned upstream with the hospital engineers, to obtain a negative room pressure (à5 pa). 10 we recommend for each surgical team to approach their engineering team to study the feasibility and prepare their structure to anticipate such a situation. a clear display must be set up outside the room to inform other health care workers. the number of people in the or must be reduced to the strict minimum. it is necessary to establish the traceability of any health care worker present during the surgery. all the equipment necessary for the surgery procedure must be prepared and present in the or. it is necessary to avoid entering and leaving the room as much as possible during surgery. disposable equipment is preferred.all health staff in the or area should use the following protections 11 : head cover, shoe cover, surgical gowns, surgical goggles, 2 pairs of surgical gloves, and respiratory masks (ffp2 [i.e., filtering facepiece particles 2]). if the material is available, it is possible to use a system-powered air-purifying respirator. 10 the staff must be trained to wear the equipment in good conditions, in particular the ffp2 respiratory masks.the anesthesiologist must wear the same protective equipment when faced with a very high risk of contamination during 297  298  299  300  301  302  303  304  305  306  307  308  309  310  311  312  313  314  315  316  317  318  319  320  321  322  323  324  325  326  327  328  329  330  331  332  333  334  335  336  337  338  339  340  341  342  343  344  345  346  347  348  349  350  351  352  353  354  355  356  357  358  359  360  361  362  363  364  365  366  367  368  369  370 intubation and extubation procedures. 11 the patient must benefit from an adequate sedation, preferably associated with a curarization to avoid agitation and episodes of cough. after the intubation, a wet compress can be added to the patient's nose to avoid spreading the virus in the air in the event of a cough. 15 it is also important limiting disconnection of the circuit when positioning the patient.the surgeon must take the utmost precaution during the surgical procedure to reduce the risk of accidents involving exposure to body fluids and tissues. in the event of an exposure accident, the establishment's standard protocols should be followed to deal with a blood exposure accident. the infectious disease department should immediately be contacted and a test could be considered. 19 the patient should be awakened in the or. the patient should wear a surgical mask as soon as he or she is awake. once again, the recovery room should be avoided and the patient should be brought back to his or her room directly if possible. 10 a 30-minute ventilation of the room at the end of surgery should be achieved. 12, 20 after surgery at each transfer, the patient should wear a surgical mask when leaving the or. a strict disinfection of the or should be achieved. the or should be closed for 2 hours and then switched to the laminar flow again. we recommend the elimination and destruction of body fluids and tissues using bags that allow double closure, and waste and liquids to be destroyed with infectious medical waste. for bacteriological or anatomopathologic samples, also use a hermetically sealed bag with a double closure and call the center to recover and inform about the situation.the health care staff must undress at the end of the procedure, helped by another caregiver because of the risk of contamination during this procedure. strict decontamination of the or is required. the infectious disease department of the hospital or hygiene department may be requested to perform tests in the or to check the presence of viruses. the reusable material used must be carefully cleaned with the usual decontaminating detergent products.concerning patients, during postoperative time, they present with a high risk of pneumonia, fevers, infections, with an increase in the level of white blood cells, which can make diagnosis of postoperative infection difficult. in addition to regular temperature monitoring for patients, the surgical staff in contact also must monitor their temperature twice a day. 15 postoperative temperature monitoring is necessary for patients not at risk who are being treated for another pathology. indeed, we can cite the situation in a wuhan hospital with the postoperative appearance of several cases of covid-19 coronavirus, either in asymptomatic patients q6 . 16 we recommend the daily washing of hands for staff, patients, and families of patients. family visits should be limited to the strict minimum. however, in the current situation in our centers, family visits are prohibited. in the case of visits, the patient's family also should wear a surgical mask when visiting the patient, and staff should pay attention to contact with families. indeed, they can also carry covid-19, so it is necessary to apply the protection procedures for suspicious cases. the management of patients with covid-19 represents a new challenge for medical and surgical teams not accustomed to a large flow of patients. it is important, as of now, that each establishment and structure became aware of the development and prepare for an adequate crisis management.it is obvious that these recommendations are the result of thinking and research between health care professionals working in the or (figure 3) . these recommendations will be confirmed by additional studies with more perspectives on the situation concerning this new virus.patient supervision in the or must be considered and organized previously to guarantee the safety of the surgical staff and to limit the spread of the disease. each or in the world must prepare with thinking by developing a protocol and patient route. the surgical staff must be aware of the procedure for the care of patients with covid-19, well trained in the establishment, and prepared to deal with it, including during emergencies. at the end of 2019, a novel viral pneumonia caused by an unidentified pathogen was reported in wuhan, china. the causative pathogen was identified as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2; previously provisionally named 2019 novel coronavirus). 1, 2 owing to its extremely high infectivity and the susceptibility of the population, the 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (covid-19) has spread rapidly and widely in china and several other countries in less than two months. faced with the gravity of the epidemic, china has incorporated covid-19 into the statutory class b infectious diseases and controlled it in accordance with the class a infectious diseases. hospitals are not only the gathering places for suspected and diagnosed covid-19 patients but also high-risk areas for infection. reducing on-site hospital gathering is a highly effective prevention and control measure to reduce the risk of cross infection, which has obviously affected the routine examination and treatment of lung cancer patients in regions affected by the epidemic.one study showed that among patients infected with sars-cov-2, patients with malignant tumors progress to severe disease more rapidly than noncancer patients (13 vs. 43 days, p < 0.0001). the number of severe cases was approximately five times higher in cancer patients than in the general population (39% vs. 8%, p = 0.0003). 3 in addition, lung cancer patients are more susceptible to covid-19 since they are usually elderly patients and smokers and have low immunity, poor nutritional status and poor lung conditions. thus, they need to be well protected from covid-19. conversely, some advanced lung cancer patients need to receive regular antitumor treatment due to the high tumor burden and deal with treatment-related adverse events. therefore, to minimize the effect of the epidemic on lung cancer patients, providing recommendations of scientific and reasonable treatment and preventive measures for lung cancer patients in the global epidemic scenario is an urgent requirement. based on the characteristics of lung cancer, this article focuses on individualized treatment recommendations and measures for adverse events management during the covid-19 epidemic.due to low immunity combined with poor lung function in lung cancer patients, it is vital to ensure protection and adopt measures for prevention. during the epidemic, lung cancer patients should stay at home and minimize going outside. we suggest that a regularly ventilated, clean, and regularly disinfected environment is necessary for lung cancer patients. in addition, patients should perform proper exercises at home to enhance their immunity. adequate sleep is essential to maintain a good emotional state, and suitable methods to relieve tension, anxiety, and other emotions should be practiced; a safe and nutritious diet without raw meat and eggs must be consumed. finally, body temperature and respiratory symptoms should be routinely monitored to identify problems and deal with them promptly. 4for lung cancer patients who have not yet started medical treatment, the treatment strategy should be comprehensively considered according to the tumor burden and general condition of the patient. for patients awaiting adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery, reasonable decisions should be made based on the postoperative pathology, clinical stage, genetic status, risk factors, and prognostic indicators. one study showed that lung cancer patients with a sluggish recovery can still benefit from delayed adjuvant chemotherapy starting four months after surgery without increasing mortality. 5 therefore, the duration of adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with postoperative lung cancer with earlier clinical stage and better prognosis can be appropriately extended during the epidemic. in addition, for patients with lymph node stage n2 after surgery with epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) gene mutations, oral egfr tyrosine kinase inhibitor (egfr-tki) treatment at home may be considered as the optional adjuvant treatment option, 6 which may reduce the risk of cross infection caused by repeated hospital visits.however, for patients with advanced lung cancer awaiting chemotherapy, in principle, limited extension of the waiting time with administration of antitumor treatment at the earliest are recommended possible. professional oncologists must be consulted to identify more convenient alternatives, such as oral targeted drugs or chemotherapeutic agents. for patients that need immediate chemotherapy, choosing the nearest hospital with experience in chemotherapy is recommended.lung cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy may not be able to receive timely chemotherapy during the epidemic. a major concern in these patients is the reduction in antitumor efficacy due to interruption of chemotherapy. even if there is no effect of the epidemic, during normal chemotherapy, several patients have difficulty in advancing chemotherapy due to intolerable adverse events, local medical conditions, and family factors. therefore, while we attach importance to the adverse effects of this epidemic on chemotherapy delays in patients with lung cancer, we should also regard the adjustment of chemotherapy regimen rationally. the treatment strategies should be appropriately adjusted under the guidance of an oncologist, according to the tumor burden of the individual, stage and effect of antitumor treatment, tolerance of antitumor treatment, and local epidemic situation.we suggest that for patients with a low tumor burden and stable disease and those undergoing postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy and maintenance treatment, chemotherapy in hospital can be appropriately postponed or switched to oral chemotherapy with targeted drug administration at home. for patients who need further chemotherapy, it is recommended that the treatment should be carried out under the supervision of an oncologist. a safe chemotherapy regimen with appropriate dosage should be chosen and any adverse events post chemotherapy should be closely monitored.targeted therapy is recommended for patients with advanced lung cancer with sensitive mutations such as egfr, anaplastic lymphoma kinase fusion (alk), and ros1 fusion. 7, 8 studies show that patients receiving targeted therapy in combination with antivascular therapy, chemotherapy, or immunotherapy may experience enhanced antitumor effects. [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] however, in the current epidemic situation, being vigilant about a possible increase in adverse events due to combination therapy is necessary. 14,15 therefore, it is recommended that lung cancer patients with sensitive gene mutations be treated with oral targeted drugs during the outbreak, without combination therapy. 16 although patients can be treated at home with oral drugs, attention should still be paid to the adverse events of some targeted drugs. patients whose symptoms are obviously relieved after targeted therapy and those with stable disease can be appropriately deferred to the hospital for review during the epidemic. further, it is necessary to promptly consult a doctor under proper protection under emergency symptoms or obvious disease progression.immune escape mechanism is one of the reasons why tumor cells can continuously replicate and proliferate in the human body. 17 programmed cell death-1/programmed cell death ligand-1 (pd-1/pd-l1) inhibitors developed by selectively blocking the pathway involved in tumor cell escape have spring boarded this therapy to a new stage, which to a certain extent may maintain longer-lasting antitumor effects. [18] [19] [20] we suggest that for lung cancer patients receiving immunotherapy during the epidemic, it is not urgent to receive immunotherapy on a set date. considering the adverse events of potential pulmonary toxicity or injury caused by immunotherapeutic drugs, immunotherapy can be suspended or postponed in patients with stable disease.regular examination of patients with early-stage postoperative lung cancer can be delayed. for advanced lung cancer patients receiving targeted therapy with sensitive gene mutations, the scheduled examination can be appropriately postponed or delayed on the basis of the cancer conditions. the interval between examinations can be extended to more than 2-3 months for patients with symptomatic remission or stable disease. during the postponed examination period, patients are advised to continuously take the original targeted drugs and closely monitor symptoms. patients should be examined immediately and be kept well-protected from infection, if symptoms progressively worsen. examinations during chemotherapy should be performed in a timely manner as far as possible under permissible epidemic situations. the examination procedures and methods should be simplified to shorten hospital stays. after examination, patients may consult oncologists online or offline to comprehensively select the appropriate follow-up treatment plans.some lung cancer patients are required to undergo antitumor treatment such as systemic chemotherapy during the epidemic and deal with treatment-related adverse events outside the hospital. the common adverse events include myelosuppression, nausea, and vomiting. we provide some recommendations for management of common adverse events outside the hospital for reference.routine blood examination should be emphasized in the management of patients during chemotherapy intermission to monitor the extent of myelosuppression through the important concerns including leukocyte counts, neutrophils, platelets, and red blood cells and hemoglobin levels. mild-to-moderate myelosuppression can be treated with corresponding oral drugs. however, the following conditions need to be treated under medical guidance: leukocyte count <2.0 × 10 9 /l, neutrophil count <1.0 × 10 9 /l, or infection symptoms such as fever, frequent urination, and abnormal vaginal secretions in women; platelet count <50 × 10 9 /l, or the occurrence of gum/nose bleeds and skin congestion; hemoglobin level < 100 g/l, or pale appearance, fatigue, anorexia, etc.in order to reduce the incidence of nausea and vomiting, we recommend that patients rest and maintain a reasonable diet before chemotherapy. in addition to medication to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy such as ondansetron, studies have shown that psychological adjustments such as periorbital massage, listening to music, enjoying pictures, and yoga can also reduce the incidence of nausea and vomiting. [21] [22] [23] if vomiting persists, a lateral position is essential when vomiting to prevent choking. after vomiting, we recommend that patients rinse their mouths with warm water in order to keep their mouths clean as well as clearing up vomit to avoid revomiting caused by the pungent smell. moreover, if the manifestations continue, such as abnormal vomit color, excessive vomiting and dizziness, then patients should be taken to hospital for symptomatic treatment.in addition, it is necessary to monitor the liver, kidney function and electrolytes in a timely manner, and intervene if necessary during the intervals between courses of chemotherapy. moreover, lung cancer patients at home need to be aware of dyspnea caused by mass compression, bleeding or massive hemoptysis caused by tumor invasion of surrounding organs, electrolytes imbalance, and other emergencies such as severe arrhythmia. in case of emergencies, patients should seek medical treatments immediately under the condition of epidemic protection.lung cancer patients may be prone to lung infections due to low immunity or lung damage caused by chemotherapy, and targeted and immunotherapy drugs, which may lead to different degrees of lung infiltrative lesions on chest ct. 14, 24, 25 these lesions need to be distinguished from the chest manifestations of covid-19 with multiple small patchy shadows and interstitial changes in early stage, multiple lung ground-glass shadows, and infiltration shadows later, and even lung consolidation in severe cases. 26, 27 we suggest that if this kind of problem occurs, patients should pay more attention to monitoring their respiratory symptoms and temperature with the suspension of antitumor treatment, and visit a hospital under the premise of self-isolation and protection. even patients without typical clinical symptoms, and peripheral blood routine performance cannot rule out the possibility of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection. we recommend that patients complete epidemiological history screening, sars-cov-2 nucleic acid and igm/igg antibody tests at designated hospitals to rule out covid-19 infection from other bacteriological infectious pneumonia or drug-induced lung injury. 28 the procedures recommended for sars-cov-2 infection screening and distinguished diagnosis are shown in fig 1. the next appropriate treatment may be determined according to the causes and comprehensive situation of the individual patient.the covid-19 global health emergency has resulted in increased anxiety, fear, depression and other negative emotions among civilians. 29 studies have shown that approximately half of the survivors of malignant tumors have moderate fear of cancer recurrence. 30 coupled with epidemic, lung cancer patients may worry about covid-19 and the impact of delayed antitumor treatment on their own treatment efficacy, which makes them more predisposed to anxiety, depression, and insomnia. we recommend that lung cancer patients may utilize association, relaxation exercises, appropriate venting to eliminate negative emotions, 31 and use online psychological consultations and interventions if necessary. 32 in conclusion, the covid-19 epidemic is undoubtedly a profound global health emergency, but people worldwide are courageous and need to be brave to fight this battle. here, we provide available recommendations for the alternative transitional treatment and management of common treatmentrelated adverse events for lung cancer patients at different stages during the epidemic. the war against the covid-19 epidemic will eventually be won, and we are willing to work with cancer patients to overcome the challenges!in late december 2019, several medical institutions in wuhan admitted a cluster of patients with pneumonia of unexplained etiology. [1] [2] an unknown novel coronavirus, which was temporarily named as the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), was identified as the pathogen. [3] subsequently, the pneumonia caused by the 2019-ncov has been officially named by the world health organization as the coronavirus disease 2019 . [4] accompanied with the arrival of the chinese spring festival travel rush, the 2019-ncov spread rapidly all over china. [5] as of february 17, 2020, a total of 72,436 patients with confirmed covid-19 including 42,752 (59.0%) in wuhan have been reported in china. [6] [7] of these, 11,741 and 1868 cases were severe and death cases, respectively. furthermore, most of severe (9222, 78.5%) and death (1381, 73.9%) population were from wuhan, china, the original district of this disease. the rate of severity and mortality in covid-19 patients from wuhan were significantly higher than that in other regions outside wuhan, suggesting patients infected in the original district (wuhan, china) of this disease may have more rapid aggravation.to detect covid-19, viral nucleic acid detection using realtime polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) remains the standard of reference. [8] however, several defects such as immature development of nucleic acid detection technology, variation in detection rate from different manufacturers, false negative caused by low patient viral load or improper clinical sampling may cause low efficiency of detection and limit its clinical application. [8] as a promising method recommended by chinese society of radiology, [9] computed tomography (ct) plays an essential role in diagnosis and monitoring treatment responses in covid-19. multifocal bilateral ground glass opacity (ggo) as an indicator of early disease stage, and patchy consolidations as a marker of the disease progression are the most common patterns of ct abnormalities. [9] [10] [11] based on above-mentioned typical ct findings, the severity of covid-19 could be staged into early, progression, severe, and dissipation stage which embodied in the consensus of chinese society of radiology. [9] as for the patients outside the original district (wuhan, china) of this disease, the infection routes included an exposure history of the original district (wuhan, china) in short term (i.e., imported infection), and a close contact with the infected individuals exposed to the original district recently (i.e., secondgeneration infection). to the best of our knowledge, there were no reports focusing on the discrimination in severity of the covid-19 between patients outside the original district (wuhan, china) according to different routes of infection. thus, the purpose of our research was to determine the discrepancy in ct manifestations of covid-19 in patients outside the original district (wuhan, china) between cases with imported infection and with second-generation infection, aiming to help clinicians outside the original district formulate more accurate and effective prevention and treatment measures.the institutional ethics committee of the affiliated hospital of north sichuan medical college approved this study (approval number, 2020er007-1), and the written informed consent was obtained from each participant.from january 23 to february 17, 2020, 22 consecutive covid-19 patients derived from 2 designated hospitals in nanchong, china, 938 km away from the original district (wuhan, china) of this disease, were enrolled into our study. all patients had positive results for 2019-ncov detection via the initial rt-pcr after admission. patients were subsequently classified into 2 groups based on the following criteria:(1) patients with imported infection were enrolled into group a, and they had a history of travelling to/or living in the original district (wuhan, china) recently for less than 1 month. (2) in group b, patients had second-generation infection, and they were in the absence of exposure to the original district (wuhan, china) but were in close contact with the patients with confirmed covid-19, or with the healthy individuals from the original district (wuhan, china).the baseline data of the onset of symptoms are recorded in table 1 .all patients underwent initial thoracic ct examinations ( fig. 1a and fig. 2a ) after admission. the intervals between the initial ct scan and the onset of symptoms were 4.9 ± 3.9 days in group a and 10 ± 4.5 days in group b. it should be noted that 1 patient in group a, and 3 in group b were asymptomatic, and there was no interval between the initial ct scan and the onset of symptoms. all patients underwent follow-up ct scans ( fig. 1b and c, and fig. 2b ) and rt-pcr every 3 to 8 days during their hospitalization based on the severity of covid-19. but for the asymptomatic patients in group b, they received follow-up ct scans when their rt-pcr results were positive. in addition, all patients received relevant medical management during their hospitalization.thoracic non-contrast enhanced ct scans were performed in 17 patients with 16-row multidetector row ct system (uct 510, united imaging, shanghai, china), and in 5 patients with a 128row multidetector ct system (somatom definition flash, siemens healthcare systems, germany). each examination was performed in a breath-hold mode at full suspended inspiration. the scanning coverage was from the thoracic inlet to the middle level of the left kidney. scanning parameters for the uct 510 scanner were as follows: table 1 baseline clinical characteristics of the coronavirus disease 2019. the scanning parameters for somatom definition flash scanner were similar to those for the 16-multidetector row ct scanner except the tube current of 250 ma and detector collimation of 0.6 mm. data from 2 ct scanners were respectively transferred to the image processing workstation (somatom definition flash, siemens healthcare systems, germany). the window width and level were set to 350 hu and 40 hu for mediastinal window, and to 1000 hu and -700 for lung window, respectively.all image data were independently reviewed on above-mentioned workstation by 2 experienced radiologists (the first author with 1 year of experience in radiology and the co first author with 8 years of experience in radiology) blinded to epidemiologic and clinical information. in case of discrepancy between the 2 observers, a third radiologist (co corresponding author with 12 years of experience in radiology) reviewed the images for the final adjudication. before the previous radiologists reviewed the image data, a professor of radiology (the corresponding author with 22 years of experience in body radiology) trained them on how to review the image data.according to the expert consensus, [9] the initial ct manifestations in groups a and b were assessed based on the following features:(1) no abnormal finding (2) ggo (3) consolidation (4) other abnormalities (e.g., reticulation, and interlobular septal thickening)in order to assess the severity of the disease more accurately, we also devised a semi-quantitative scoring system to evaluate the extent and severity of disease in this study. as illustrated in tables 2 and 3 , the ct lesion extent and density scores were determined based on the anatomic distribution and density of lung lesions referencing to the reported semi-quantitative score system. [12] the extent score was assessed on lung window based on the extent of the 5 lung lobes involved by covid-19. the overall lung extent score was obtained by summing the 5 lobe scores. the density score was evaluated on lung window based on the percentages of consolidation and other abnormalities in each covid-19 lesion, and the overall lung density score was acquired by summing the 5 lobe scores. the score range for both lungs in each patient is from 0 (no detectable abnormality) to 20 (more than 75% of each lung lobe involved by covid-19 lesion and 100% of consolidation in each lesion).in order to assess the intra-observer variability of the above semi-quantitative measurements, the first author repeated the image data analysis 3 days later. the intra-observer variability was obtained by comparison of the 2 measurements by the first author. the inter-observer variability was accessed with the results by 2 independent double-blinded observers (the first author and the co-first author).all data were statistically analyzed by ibm spss statistics software (version 25.0 for windows; spss, chicago, il, usa). the normality of distribution was evaluated by shapiro-wilk test. continuous variables, expressed as the mean and standard deviation. the categorical variables were described in percentiles and compared using the chi-squared test or fisher exact test. both intra-observer and inter-observer variability were tested for ct score using interclass correlation coefficient (icc). the semi-quantitative extent and density scores of covid-19 lesions on initial ct were considered to be reproducible when the icc was greater than 0.75. [13] statistical difference was defined as p < .05 for all tests. (fig. 1a ) and 3 (42.9%) in group b had abnormal findings on initial ct while the remaining 4 (57.1%) patients had none abnormal ct findings. patients with abnormal ct findings were more frequent in group a than in group b (p < .05). pure ggos, and ggos with consolidation and/or other abnormalities were observed in 3 (20%) and 12 (80%) patients in group a, respectively. in group b, 1 (14.3%) and 2 (28.6%) patients had pure ggos and ggos with consolidation, respectively. among the previous 4 patients with normal image on initial ct scan, 3 cases (75%) developed into focal pure ggo on follow-up scans ( fig. 2a) .the mean intra-observer and inter-observer icc values were 0.96 (95%ci: 0.91-0.98) and 0.94 (95%ci: 0.86-0.97) for extent score, and 0.95 (95%ci: 0.90-0.98) and 0.93 (95%ci: 0.84-0.97) for density score, respectively. therefore, the average of the extent score and density score from the first author and the co first author's measurements was used for the subsequent statistical analysis.as demonstrated in table 4 , the mean extent score of lesions on ct in group a was 6.7, ranged from 1 to 17. in group b, the mean extent score of lesions on ct was 1.1, ranged from 0 to 4. in group a, 13 (86.7%) and 2 (13.3%) patients scored at least 5 and 10, respectively. except the 4 patients with a normal ct finding on initial scans, the remaining 3 patients in group b scored 1, 3, and 4 according to the extent scoring system. the extent of lung lobe involved by covid-19 lesions in group a was strikingly greater than that observed in group b (p < .001).as shown in table 4 , the mean density score of lesions in both lungs in group a (mean score, 10.1; range, 1-17) was significantly higher than that in group b (mean score, 1.3; range, 0-4). in group a, 14 and 11 patients scored at least 5 (93.3%) and 10 (73.3%), respectively. in contrast, none of patients in group b with abnormal ct findings on initial scans had lesion density score of more than 5 (p < .001), indicating that the covid-19 in second-generation infected patients could be milder when compared with those with imported infection. table 3 the density scoring system of the coronavirus disease 2019 on initial computed tomography.no abnormal findings 0 pure ggo 1 ggo with < 50% consolidation and/or other abnormalities 2 ggo with≥50% consolidation and/or other abnormalities 3 consolidation with other abnormalities without ggo 4 ggo = ground glass opacity. table 4 comparisons of patients between groups according to the extent and density scores of the coronavirus disease 2019 on initial computed tomography.lesion score group a (n = 15) group b (n = 7)extent score 0 0 4 (57.1) 1 1 (6.7) 1 (14. covid-19 is a new disease with high infectivity causing an enormous impact on public health. [14] the chinese spring festival travel rush has triggered massive population movements which gave rise to the confirmed cases of covid-19 outside the original district (wuhan, china) of this disease with imported infection, as well as cases with second-generation infection in succession. in order to better master the characteristics of covid-19 in patients outside the original district for appropriate treatment, we carried out our study to investigate the discrepancy in ct manifestations of this pneumonia in patients outside the original district (wuhan, china) between cases with imported infection and the second-generation infection.our study revealed that abnormal findings on initial ct scans can be found in each patient with imported infection but not patients with the second-generation infection. in patients with the second-generation infection, some patients could have abnormal initial ct appearances, and some could not. our findings can be explained by the following pathological mechanism. as reported, [15] [16] [17] rna virus is characterized by error-prone viral replication and recombination and usually generates progeny viruses with highly diverse genomes which might result in reduction of virulence and pathogenicity. we could presume that the 2019-ncov as a novel rna virus might have the similar characteristics of reduction of virulence and pathogenicity resulted from the error-prone viral replication and recombination.as shown in our study, ggo and consolidation could be the most common patterns of ct abnormalities of the confirmed covid-19 in patients with imported infection, which was consistent with the published reports. [9] [10] [11] as reported, [9] ggo and consolidation could respectively reflect the potential pathological abnormalities in different stages of the disease. seen mainly in the early stage of the disease, the underlying pathologic change of pure ggo can be small amount of exudation of fluid in alveolar cavity and interlobular interstitial edema. [10] consolidation lesions could be regarded as a marker of more severe phase, [11] reflecting a large amount of cell-rich or fibrous exudation accumulated in the alveolar cavity and pulmonary interstitium. [10] it is noteworthy that 3 cases of second-generation with normal finding on initial ct scan developed into focal ggos during follow-up ct, suggesting that the limitation of ct in the early detection of asymptomatic patients with the second-generation. the covid-19 case without abnormal manifestation on initial ct scan should be confirmed by 2019-ncov detection via rt-pcr together with a history of close contact with imported infection.moreover, we found that the discrepancies of extent and density scores obtained on the initial ct could exist between patients with imported infection and with the second-generation infection. in detail, the extent of lung lobe involved by covid-19 lesions in patients with imported infection was strikingly greater than that in patients with second-generation infection. the previous discrepancies of extent and density scores between groups can be explained as follows. on one hand, the virus load or the chance of being exposed to the virus in the environment in the original district (wuhan) could be much higher than any other district where there were much fewer covi-19 cases. on the other hand, ggos with consolidation or other abnormalities (i.e., reticular and/or interlobular septal thickening) involving multiple lobes could be more common in patients with imported infection than in patients with the second-generation infection, resulting in elevated ct density and extent scores in patients with imported infection when compared with patients with secondgeneration infection. our findings suggest that patients with imported infection might have more rapid progression of disease and increasing likelihood of mixed bacterial coinfection. [18] [19] based on the comparison of ct density score between groups, we can presume that the covid-19 in second-generation infected patients could be milder when compared to those with imported infection.our study had several limitations. for one thing, a larger sample size of covid-19 patients is required for further investigation, especially with an emphasis on asymptomatic second-generation patients. for another thing, the semi-quantitative scoring system of disease in this study was based on the typical ct manifestations applied in the expert consensus, [9] the other abnormal findings such as reticulation and interlobular septal thickening did not particularly evaluate, and further modification is required.the ct findings of covid-19 vary according to the routes of infection. patients with imported infection tend to have more severe ct manifestations, suggesting that ct could accurately evaluate the covid-19 in the population. cases with secondgeneration infection could be manifested as normal finding on the initial ct scan, but may progress to mild abnormalities on follow-up cts, indicating 2019-ncov detection via rt-pcr could be essential in the population with high risk of infection. we hope that our findings can help clinicians outside the original district (wuhan, china) of this disease formulate more accurate and effective prevention and treatment measures.1. the fi rst sars case was reported around the world on january 2, 2003; a hospital in heyuan city of guangdong province hospitalized two patients' with severe pulmonary infection of unknown cause, which was the fi rst traceable report of "sars" around the global. 2. on february 28, 2003 , sars was fi rst diagnosed by the who expert carlor urbani in hanoi of vietnam, who also named this new unexplained disease " s evere a cute r espiratory s yndrome" (sars).following the emergence of sars, who and governments around the world attached great importance and took consecutively effective control and prevention measures, which reined in the infection rapidly controlled in a short time.on april 28, 2003 , who eliminated vietnam from the name list of the sars-infected area, which made vietnam the fi rst to get rid of sars outbreaks. since then, numerous countries were also ticked off the list. on july 5, 2003 , who announced to remove taiwan of china from sars-affected area list, which is also the last. at present, there is no sars-affected area around the world, signaling the victory of global battle against sars. by the end of september 26, 2003 , there were in total 8,098 people infected and 774 deceased, with the mortality at 9.5 %.on april 16, 2003, a new coronavirus never seen was announced as the cause of sars by who. it is the joint efforts of global scientists and biological scientifi c and technological advances that enabled establishment of international sars research network, separation and identifi cation of sars coronavirus, and confi rmation of sars pathogenesis.some canadian laboratories excluded infl uenza virus a and b; para-infl uenza virus type 1, 2, and 3; adenovirus; and respiratory syncytial virus by scanning electron microscopy and direct fl uorescent antibody test. they also conducted immunohistochemistry on the corpse tissues of dead patients about viruses including infl uenza virus a and b, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, circovirus, hantaan virus, measles virus, intestinal tract virus, and pneumonia mycoplasma and chlamydia, which showed negative. scholars from german, france, america, hong kong, and taiwan applied specifi c pcr tests targeted at corresponding pathogens to examine pneumonia mycoplasma, pneumonia chlamydia, human cytomegalovirus, circovirus, herpes virus, human coronavirus oc43 and 229e and arenaviruses, bunyavirus, hantaan virus, crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever virus, which also indicated negative.on march 21, 2003 , hong kong university fi rstly separated and cultured coronavirus from the nasopharyngeal specimen of sars patients by vero cells, and then several laboratories of canada and america disease center and sars international coordination group also cultured coronavirus. on april 16, 2003 , based on the aforementioned research fi ndings, who declared a new coronavirus as the pathogen of sars and named it as sars coronavirus (sars-cov).sars-cov is a single-stranded and positive rna virus belonging to the genus coronavirus of coronaviridae family of nidovirales order. it bears great morphological resemblance with known human coronaviruses. under the electric microscopes, sars coronavirus presents with pleomorphic spherical particles with envelopes in vero e6 cell in vitro and with a diameter of about 80-140 mm. it has distinct coronavirus morphological characteristics that rodlike surface projections about 20-40 nm long protrude outside viral envelope to form a corona. for separation and culture of viruses in vero e6 cells, viral particles are mostly found in vacuoles inside cells under electric microscope, mainly hollow particle, and viruses outside cells observed with spikes.the coronavirus is mainly composed of nucleic acid, protein, carbonate, and lipid. sars-cov are relatively stable in human specimens and environment but relatively sensitive to chemical and physical factors. the viruses could be killed by exposure to ultraviolet rays for 60 min. as the envelope of sars-cov contains lipoids, they are sensitive to lipid solvents and could be inactivated by ether, chloroform, tween, 70 % ethyl alcohol, methanol, pancreatic enzymes, and ultraviolet rays. ether could sterilize the virus completely under 4°cafter 24 h, 75 % ethyl alcohol could deactivate virus after 5 min, and disinfectants containing chlorine may kill the virus aft.sars is the fi rst newly emerging infectious disease in the twenty-fi rst century. since the fi rst case was detected in guangdong on january 2, 2003, sars spread to 29 countries at fi ve states at an unprecedented speed with several months. according to the report of who, sars epidemics was found in total 29 the main source of infection is sars patients, and other infectious sources such as animals need to be further consolidated.it is regarded that only symptomatic patients can effectively spread sars-cov.at present there still lacks clinical proof that asymptomatic sars patients could spread sars coronavirus.few cases are highly contagious and able to directly infect over 10 patients, who are called super-spreader. the fi ve super-spreaders in singapore have been found infecting 103 people. such powerful infectiousness is attributable to the high viral load inside patients who could discharge abundant viruses via respiratory tract in a short time.specialists from the department of microbiology of hong kong university and guangdong provincial disease control and prevention center tested abundant sars coronaviruses from the samples collected from civet cats sold in guangzhou and shenzhen, suggesting that the human sars coronavirus might originate from civet cats.sars virus is spread mainly through the respiratory tract and also spread by aerosol and droplet.high level of sars coronavirus could be detected in the throat swabs and sputum specimens of the patients in acute phase. viruses discharged by patients via cough would exist in the air within certain radius, thus forming short-distance respiratory tract droplet spread. it is a main route of sars dissemination.indirect or direct contact spread could also spread sars coronavirus. it could be spread through contact with the respiratory tract secretion or through the mouth and nose via contaminated hands and toys.as viruses proliferate abundantly in the respiratory tract, exfoliated cells containing infectious viruses could be expelled outside the body through patients' respiration, cough, and sneeze and suspend in the air, thus forming the aerosol of sars virus. cough and sneeze could greatly contribute to production of sars virus aerosol.sars is a new type of infectious diseases, and people effectively exposed to sars pathogens are vulnerable.present data reveal that sars is an acute self-limiting infectious disease, and neutralizing antibodies to sars could be detected 3 weeks after onset. however, the change patterns of neutralizing antibody titer have not been fully elucidated.the epidemics of sars mainly take place in the winter and spring.sars outbreaks are mainly concentrated at coastal tourism cities with prosperous economy, dense population, and convenient transport, particularly air transport. from the perspective of international geography, sars primarily occurs in southeastern countries or regions, including china mainland, hong kong, taiwan, singapore, and vietnam.analysis of the statistics of various countries shows that sars onset is mainly recorded in young populations aged 20-50 years old, occupying around 80 % of the total.sars coronavirus (sars-cov), a mutant of coronaviridae, is pathogenic to hosts in the following two aspects: fi rstly, viral infections could directly damage the structure and functions of infected cells and trigger cell apoptosis; secondly, immune reactions and release of various cytokines induced by viral infections could not only eliminate infectious pathogens but also may deal severe damages on histiocytes due to excessive immune reactions. the member of coronaviridae is a single-chain positive rna virus, which taxonomically belongs to nidovirales with arteriviridae. the homological analysis of sars-cov structural protein amino-acid sequences shows that the main structural protein s (spike protein), m (membrane protein), n (nucleocapsid protein), and e (envelope protein) bear very low homology with other known coronaviruses, between 20 and 30 %. besides, bioinformation analysis infers that sars-cov may also encode 5-9 nonstructural proteins of unknown functions. all these sars-cov specifi c proteins may play key roles in determining the viral virulence.s-protein, existent on the viral surface in form of trimer, is the main component in constructing the coronal structure and major structural protein for the integration of virus and host cell receptors and fusion of viral envelope and cell membrane to enable invasion of viruses. after infection with sensitive cells, sars-cov could replicate enormously and release virions, which may disturb cell metabolism and directly result in injury of body tissues and cells.in the early phase of the disease and in the continual progression phase, the active immune cells such as cd4+ and cd8+ t lymphocytes, nk cells, and dc cells are decreased prominently, to an extent positively correlated with severity of conditions and speed of progression. besides, all dead patients are detected with irreversible signifi cant decline. however, along with remission of conditions and entry into recovery phase, the number of aforementioned immune cells could be recovered to some extent, whose change presents distinct par-allel correlation with disease evolution. dynamic observations suggest that serum pre-infl ammatory cytokine il-6, il-8, il-16, and inf-α level of sars patients could reach the peak at about second week of disease course, which relatively corresponds to the acute aggravation phase. all these consolidate the immune damage of sars-cov infections.autopsies of the over 20 patients who died after infected with sars revealed that sars is a disease detrimental to organs of the whole body, particularly lung tissue and immunity system. primary pathologic changes can be classifi ed into severe lung lesions, immune organ impairment, toxic changes of other organs, and secondary infections. the causes of death were as follows: (1) diffusive lung alveolar damages lead to progressive respiratory failure; (2) impairment of liver, kidney, heart, and several other organs may induce multiple organ failures and exacerbate conditions; (3) due to injury of immune organs particularly lymph nodes and spleen, the lymphocytes are decreased and immunity compromised, therefore resulting in secondary mycotic infections.lung tissues become swollen and heavier. according to domestic report, the left lung may reach 500-1480 g (average 811.4 g) and right lung 700-1125 g (average 869.3 g), with the total lung up to 1170-2605 g (average 1460.7 g). the lung tissues appear in dark red. texture is hard, indicative of consolidation. the surface is relatively smooth and free of pleural adhesions. lung tissues are observed with blood vessel dilation and congestion, spotted and patchy necrosis, and hemorrhagic infarct foci and focal compensatory emphysema. sections of various lung lobes are visualized with outfl ows of light red or/and a few foamy blood-stained fl uids. the trachea and bronchi are found with exudations of slight mucoid or blood-stained secretions. pulmonary hilar lymph nodes are revealed with slight enlargement and pleural cavity without or with a few effusions.microscopy reveals bilateral diffusive severe injuries of alveoli, characterized by acute exudative, hemorrhagic, and fi brinous infl ammation. however, the injury may be inhomogeneous and diverse at different lung lobes and different parts of the same lobe. the characteristic change in early phase is pulmonary edema, with homogeneous pink serous or fi brinous effusions fi lling alveolar cavities as well as erythrocytes leakages in some cavities. the effusions from some alveolar cavities may condense to form thin-layer membranelike substance which adheres to alveolar walls, namely, formation of hyaline membrane ( fig. 2.1 ). alveolar epithelia present with such diffusive injuries as degeneration and necrosis, with exfoliated or/and apoptotic type ii alveolar epithelial cells observable in alveolar cavities, which are similar to changes of desquamative pneumonia ( fig. 2.2 ). among them, some appear like apoptotic bodies. partial regional type ii alveolar epithelial cells and macrophages proliferate actively, with obvious increase of cell volume and distinct nucleolus. in some case, cells are detected fusing with each other to form syncytial monocytes and multinucleated giant cells (fig. 2.3 ) . the alveolar epithelia of some cases are examined with structures similar to viral inclusion bodies, mostly spherical and with eosinophilic staining, around which a transparent halo is visible (fig. 2.4 ) . pulmonary interstitium and alveolar spaces are detected with high dilation and congestion of capillaries, swelling and exfoliation of epithelial cells, as well as widening of the latter, which present slight lymphocyte and monocyte infi ltration, small vessel proliferation, and enlargement characteristic of vasculitis changes. some regions are observed with pulmonary vascular embolism or fi brinous microthrombi in alveolar capillaries, while some alveolar capillary cavities manifest dilation but free of blood components. in addition, some patients are detected with lung tissue focal hemorrhage, compensatory emphysema, and small airway necrotizing infl ammation and alveolar collapse or shrinkage. patients with a disease course of over three weeks manifest fi broblast proliferation in alveolar septa, and individual cases demonstrate organization of fi brinous exudates from alveoli and fi broblast proliferation, which gives rise to glomeruloid structures, named "glomeruloid organizing pneumonia" (fig. 2 .5 ). the bronchial epithelial cells are revealed with exfoliation, scarce and exfoliated cilia, as well as structures similar to viral inclusions and squamous cell metaplasia at the inside. the bronchioli are detected with submucosal edema, infl ammatory cell infi ltration, and serous grandular hyperplasia with hyperactive secretion.pulmonary hilar lymph nodes demonstrate light swelling and present different degrees of congestion, hemorrhagic necrosis, and decrease of innate lymphocytes under the microscope. blood sinus in the lymph nodes presents with grave congestion and dilatation, lymphoid nodule atrophy or disappearance, prominently the cortex, and lymphatic tissue focal necrosis, accompanied by apoptosis of some lymphocytes ( fig. 2.6 ). the spleen mostly shrinks with soft texture, and has patchy and focal hemorrhage at the surface and sections. splenic white pulp is detected obviously atrophic or absent, with central arterial wall thickened, endothelial cells swollen and partially shed, peripheral lymphatic sheath lymphocyte depleted greatly, and germinal center disappeared. splenic corpuscle is observed with plasma protein sedimentation in central arterial walls, white pulp and marginal sinus lymph tissues with large patchy necrosis, and partial remaining lymphocytes with apoptosis. the splenic sinus inside red pulp is revealed with obvious congestion and focal hemorrhagic necrosis as well as proliferation of histiocytes ( fig. 2.7 ).the number of hematopoietic cells in bone marrow declines, and granulocyte system and megakaryocytic system are relatively inhibited. polychromatic erythroblasts present with small focal proliferation.tissues of the brain, liver, kidney, and heart demonstrate varying degrees of congestion, edema, degeneration, and necrosis as well as infi ltration of a few lymphocytes.secondary bacterial pneumonia and fungal infection may occur ( fig. 2.8 ).the initial symptom of sars is frequently fever, accompanied by headache and general muscular and joint souring soreness, and often without nasal discharge, sore throat, and other upper respiratory tract catarrhal symptoms. pulmonary signs are not obvious and signs and distinct systematic symptoms are inconsistent, which is typical to sars. the clinical manifestations of sars may vary, which can be divided into light type, common type, severe type, and atypical type, with the common type most commonly seen. based on the clinical development, it could be divided into early phase, progression phase, and recovery phase.generally, the incubation phase lasts 2-14 days, with an average of 4-7 days and a median of 6 days, predominantly 2-10 days.the initial symptom primarily is fever, mostly high fever, accounting for 94.4-100 %. patient body temperature may reach 38-40 °c and 42 °c at the highest. the fever type varies, including remittent fever, irregular fever and continuous fever. the duration of fever is mostly 5-9 days.it presents as headache, joint or/and systematic soreness, and chest pain. it is reported that the incidence of headache in sars patients is 17-90 %.most sars patients have cough, which is dry with scanty sputum. generally sars does not incur upper respiratory tract catarrhal symptoms. severe cases may suffer from accelerated respiration, shortness of breath, or even acute respiratory distress syndrome, characterized by progressive dyspnea or even distress with respiratory frequency up to >20 times. patients complain of heart beat or palpitation accompanied often by precordial discomfort. the incidence is 35-90 %.the incidence of diarrhea is reported mostly at 7-44 %, with single case up to 70 %.one characteristic of sars is severe symptoms and light signs. the signs are mostly not obvious or even absent.dyspnea presents irregular respiratory frequency, depth, and rhythm. the incidence of dyspnea of sars patients is 21-57 %. severe patients may manifest nose fanning, orthopnea, and cyanosis, involvement of accessory respiratory muscles in respiration, as well as "three depression signs" upon inhalation.according to report, 11 % of typical patients and 14 % of severe patients have sinus tachycardia, and 2.3 % of sars patients suffer from paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia.the pulmonary signs of sars patients are frequently unobvious or absent in the early phase. light moist rales may be audible (17-62 %) . patients may also demonstrate pulmonary consolidation sign and attenuated breath sounds. there may also be a few pleural effusions.in light of conditions, it could be classifi ed in clinics into light type, common (typical) type, severe type, and special (atypical) type.the follow-up visit of 267 sars patients via x-ray and hrct by choi et al. found that about 3-4 % patients developed fi brotic changes of lung interstitium and shrinkage of lung volume.application of glucocorticoids could to some extent alleviate lung injury of patients with severe infectious atypi-cal pneumonia. however, long-term and abundant use of glucocorticoids may generate numerous side effects, and it is an undisputable fact that hormones may induce femoral head ischemic necrosis. literature reports suggest that the incidence of femoral head ischemic necrosis is 5-25 %.the white blood cell count remains within normal range in majority patients and may decrease in some patients (24.2 %). 95 % of severe patients without secondary infections are revealed with decreased total white blood cell, and normal neutrocyte and monocyte differential white blood cell count. however, 80 % initially diagnosed patients manifest a decrease of absolute lymphocyte count, suggestive of a tendency of gradual decline, and morphocytology change, with abnormal lymphocytes observable. 13.2-41 % patients are examined with thrombocytopenia. many evidences prove that sars-cov could directly invade the immune system and act mainly on lymphocytic system, especially the t lymphocytes, which could lower peripheral blood lymphocytes. the peripheral blood white cell count is normal or decreased in most sars patients, but cd3+, cd4+, and cd8+ t lymphocyte counts are distinctly lower compared with those of healthy population. the more severe the condition, the more drastically declined the t lymphocyte count.blood gas analysis reveals hypoxemia of different degrees and commonly no carbon dioxide retention. generally under 3-5 l/min oxygen uptake, patients with severe hypoxemia are measured of arterial partial pressure from oxygen (pao 2 ) <70 mmhg or blood oxygen saturation (spo 2 ) <93 %, or develop acute lung injury (ali) or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards).one of the main immunopathogenesis changes in sars patients is insuffi ciency of t-lymphocyte-mediated specifi c cellular immunity, characterized by distinct damages of t lymphocytes and its subgroups, particularly cd3 + , cd4 + , and cd8 + . there exists distinct correlation between the extent of t lymphocyte damages and severity of the disease.the method recommended by who for test of serum sars-cov antibodies is enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa). upon test of the sars-cov-specifi c antibodies in the infected patients, including igg, igm, or total antibody, seroconversion or increase by 4 times and above of any serum antibody in progress phase and recovery phase could serve as evidence for defi nite diagnosis.polymerase chain reaction (pcr), a type of molecular biological test, could identify sars virus genes from various specimens (blood, feces, respiratory tract secretions, tissue sections, etc.), that is, sars virus rna.presence of any of the following three circumstances could be sars virus positive :1. clinical specimens from at least two different sites are tested positive (nasopharyngeal secretions and feces). 2. the same clinical specimens collected by at least 2 days apart are tested positive (two or more specimens of nasopharyngeal excretions). 3. the same clinical specimen is tested positive by two different methods or in different laboratories. 4. repeated pcr examination indicated positive.clinical diagnosis1. the patient has a history of intimate contact with patients or is one of the infected populations or consolidated having infected others by defi nite evidences. 2. the patient had been to or lived in the areas with sars patients and secondary infection epidemics.the onset is acute and initial symptom is fever, with body temperature >38 °c, and occasionally accompanied by concurrent chillness. patients may also suffer from headache, joint and muscular soreness, fatigue, and diarrhea, and generally there is no upper respiratory tract catarrhal symptom. patients may have cough, mostly dry with scanty sputum, and chest dullness. severe patients demonstrate accelerated respiration, shortness of breath, or obvious respiratory distress. pulmonary signs are not obvious, and light moist rales may be audible or pulmonary consolidation observable.there is generally no increase of peripheral white blood cell count or decrease. besides, the lymphocyte count is found generally declined.lungs present different degrees of patchy and plaque-shaped infi ltration shadows or reticulate changes, which may progress rapidly into large patchy shadows. these commonly occur at multiple lobes or both sides, and absorption and dissipation of shadows are relatively slow. pulmonary shadows and symptoms and signs may be inconsistent. if the test indicates negative, reexaminations shall be conducted after 1-2 days.there are no remarkable responses to antibiotics.patients in compliance with any of the following three circumstances are diagnosed as suspected cases.1. the patient has a history of intimate contact with patients, or is one of the infected population, or is confi rmed having infecting other people by concrete evidences, who also manifest aforementioned clinical symptoms but not high white blood cell count by test of peripheral blood. 2. the patient has been to or lived in areas reported with infectious sars patients and patients suffering from secondary infections 2 weeks before the disease onset, who also have abovementioned clinical symptoms and consistent pulmonary shadows on chest x-ray fi lms with the abovementioned characteristics. 3. despite the lack of epidemic data, the patient has abovementioned clinical manifestations and not high peripheral white blood cell count, as well as pulmonary shadows on chest x-ray that accord with abovementioned characteristics.in other words, the patient conform to the aforementioned 1 (1) + 2 + 3 or 1 (2) +2 + 4 or 2 + 3 + 4.in case of any of the three following circumstances, the patient could be clinically diagnosed with sars.1. the patient has a history of intimate contact with patients, or is one of the infected population, or is confi rmed having infecting other people by concrete evidences, who also manifest aforementioned clinical symptoms and pulmonary shadows on chest x-ray image. 2. the patient has been to or lived in areas reported with infectious sars patients and patients suffering from secondary infections 2 weeks before the disease onset, who also have abovementioned clinical symptoms, not high peripheral blood white cell count and pulmonary shadows on chest x-ray fi lms. 3. the patient has been to or lived in areas reported with infectious sars patients and patients suffering from secondary infections 2 weeks before the disease onset, who also have abovementioned clinical symptoms, pulmonary shadows on chest x-ray fi lms, and no obvious response to anti-infectious treatment.in other words, the patient conform to aforementioned 1 (1) + 2 + 4 or 1 (2) +2 + 3 + 4 or 1 (2) + 2 + 4 + 5.the conditions are mild without pulmonary fi brosis and other sequela. the prognosis is good.patients have typical clinical manifestations of the early phase, progression phase, and recovery phase. the onset is acute, and the fi rst symptom is fever, with body temperature generally >38 °c. besides, the patients have no obvious respiratory distress or hypoxemia. some patients are auscultated with slight moist rales or observed with pulmonary consolidation. the prognosis is good without sequelae.severe type accounts for about 30 %. it is same with the common type in clinical process but presents severe conditions and rapid progression. some cases may progress to acute pulmonary injury or ards, rapidly incurring respiratory failure or even death. the diagnosis could be reached in case of any of the following three circumstances:1. dyspnea adult respiratory frequency is ≥30 times /min, accompanied by one of the following conditions:the chest imaging shows that the total surface of multilobar lesions or foci occupies more than 1/3 of the two lungs on orthotopic imaging. conditions progress, with the focal area increased by over 50 % within 48 h or accounting for over 1/4 of the two lungs on orthotopic imaging. 2. obvious hypoxemia is detected, with the oxygenation index lower than 300 mmhg. 3. shock or multi-organic dysfunction syndrome occurs.there are still some atypical cases of this disease.this generally refers to the fi rst 1-7 days. the onset is acute and initial symptom is fever. half of the patients are accompanied by the nonspecifi c systemic symptoms such as chillness, headache, and joint and muscular soreness.this phase spans the day 8-14 of the disease course.infectious toxic symptoms such as fever, fatigue, muscular soreness continue to exist or even aggravate. patient's body temperature rises, possibly to 39 °c or higher in a short time, and the high fever is persistent. lung lesions demonstrate progressive exacerbation. a few patients (10-15 %) may develop ards, which is life threatening.it mostly takes place at day 15-21 of disease course. most patients have good prognosis after recovery for about 2 weeks. some severe patients could gradually recover within 2-3 months after discharge.these mainly encompass standing chest x-ray and bedside chest x-ray, which are economic and effective examination methods and fi rst optional examination for preliminary diagnosis and reexamination. mobile x-ray bedside imaging should be applied for patients under observation and inpatients. as lung disease of sars patients progress rapidly, chest x-ray reexamination within a short period could help observe changes of conditions, commonly once every 1-2 days at the early phase and progression phase. regular chest x-ray also need to be conducted during recovery phase so as to ascertain absorption and dissipation of lesions, residual foci, and pulmonary interstitial fi brosis.for sars patients, ct scan generally is not a preferred method and, if necessary, could be conducted under strict disinfected quarantine. if the foci could not be absorbed for a long term in sars recovery phase or patients still have symptoms but normal chest presentations, ct scan need to be carried out for further observation as it can better visualize the subtle pulmonary interstitial changes, such as lung interlobular septum thickening, intralobular septum thickening, subpleural linear shadow, and small ground-glassdensity lesion and regional and segmental bronchiectasis, and therefore is helpful for clinical diagnosis of pulmonary interstitial fi brosis. thin-layer ct scan or hrct scan can better visualize intrapulmonary low-density small lesions, thus contributory to early diagnosis of pulmonary interstitial fi brosis. ct examination could also aid identifi cation of other concurrent lung lesions.medical staff in the room of imaging examination and department of radiology shall prevent infections in strict compliance with sars disinfection and prevention requirements and meanwhile conscientiously implement x-ray protection.1. ward shall be equipped with bedside x-ray machine; imaging for all sars inpatients shall be conducted in wards and patients shall wear masks. 2. the personal protection for imaging technician should be subject to the level-two protection requirements and, when necessary (imaging for critically ill patients), to level-three protection requirements. 3. x-ray fi lm magazine should be put into the isolation bag before imaging (one isolation bag for each person). 4. the imaging technicians should sterilize their hands before return to the radiological department and then remove protective clothing, gloves, and protective glasses at the designated place. they should wash hands thoroughly, gargle, take a shower, and change clean working clothes before work.1. the department must strengthen interior ventilation and air disinfection . ultraviolet irradiation may be assumed at night, 2-3 times per day, 30 minutes per time, and peracetic acid spray conducted 2 times per day. 2. rigorous isolation measures: all subjects must wear masks. the operation staff must wear protective masks, gloves, and gowns, with masks changed every 4 h and gowns replaced in time, and should use disposal bed sheet and shoe covers, and dispose of and replace them timely after the examination. 3. sars examination zone should be separated from conventional patient examination zone and examination staff shall be fi xed. if feasible, special chest x-ray examination room and x-ray machines may be set up in the isolation zone to avoid cross-infections.1. the protective measures for subjects and operation staff are similar to those required about isolation protection in radiological department. 2. all the subjects must wear masks and, for examination in ct room, shall minimize the stay time as much as possible. 3. after the patient leaves, the environment and articles which may be polluted by patients shall be given terminal disinfection. 4. the department must enhance interior ventilation and air disinfection and, in addition to use of chemical disinfectant spray, may also initiate long-term ultraviolet irradiation at night for disinfection. 5. a pathway specifi c for sars patients should be established.chest x-ray diagnosisthe imaging manifestations of sars are closely related to its pathological changes. besides edema, infl ammatory cell infi ltration and other nonspecifi c infl ammatory changes, the more prominent pulmonary pathological feature of sars is abundant exfoliation of epithelial cells, inducing obvious thickening and damage of alveolar septum, as well as significant organization of effusions inside alveolar cavities. all the three changes of infl ammation in early phase (degeneration, exudation, hyperplasia) are observable. the mechanism of acute lung injury induced by sars may be ascribed to sars coronavirus direct attack of alveolar epithelia and alveolar capillary epithelia or (and) indirect damage via lymphocyte, macrophage and effector cells, and lymphokine, cytokine, and infl ammatory mediator released by them. this suggests that besides viral direct infection, immune reactions are also involved in lung injury. in severe lung injury, pulmonary interstitial and pulmonary parenchymal air cavity changes detected by autopsy pathology, especially pulmonary air cavity not completely fi lled by lesion or fi lled but coexistent with unfi lled alveoli, are visualized as ground-glass-density shadows on x-ray and ct. varying degrees of residual lung cavity present with different densities of ground-glass shadows on thin-layer ct or high-resolution ct (hrct). complete fi lling of the alveolar space leads to pulmonary consolidation shadows.once pulmonary edema and alveolar hyaline membrane are formed, patients clinically manifest decreased lung compliance, progressive dyspnea, and intractable hypoxemia. it is such rapid pathological changes of sars that give rise to characteristic presentations by chest x-ray examination, including rapid progression of lesions, diverse morphological states, and wide range, often spanning several segments and lobes. therefore, dynamic observation of chest image holds great signifi cance for diagnosis of sars.ground-glass-density shadows are pathologically the result of lesions mainly at pulmonary interstitium and alveoli, with pulmonary interstitial lesions frequently complicated by alveolitis. ground-glass-density shadows incurred by alveolar consolidation are attributable to partial fi lling of alveoli or coexistence of fi lling and unfi lled alveoli. such shadows on x-ray and ct can be determined if the density of lesions is lower than that of blood vessels, and blood vessel presentations are observable inside. the density of lesions lower than that of pulmonary hila on x-ray could also help identify ground-glass-density shadows.pulmonary consolidation shadows are pathologically due to fi lling of alveoli by pathological tissues, which is frequently complicated with lung interstitial lesions. pulmonary consolidation could be confi rmed if the lesions are found with higher density than vascular shadows and without vascular shadows inside but with air bronchogram on x-ray and ct. it could also be determined if the lesions present higher density than pulmonary hila or similar density to mediastinum. the lesions are solitary or multiple in small patches, and some lesions are distributed along lung lobes and segments.96 % of sars patients may develop subsequently solitary and multiple small patchy shadows within seven days of onset, with relatively low density, blurry borders, and irregular shapes, predominantly solitary. occasionally, the pulmonary textures around lesions are revealed increased and thickened and mainly distributed at peripheral area, more commonly at bilateral inferior lungs. since chest x-ray can poorly visualize relatively small lesions and at sometimes posteroanterior x-ray can hardly display lesions overlapping with heart shadows, orthotopic chest imaging should be conducted at the same time ( fig. 2.9 ).the conditions of most patients become worse within 14 days after onset. the small patchy shadows in the early phase may progress into large patchy, multiple, or diffusive lesions. the lesions may spread from unilateral lung to both lungs and from one lung fi eld to several fi elds. severe patients may demonstrate obvious changes 1-2 days after onset.lesions present mainly as ground-glass-density shadows or coexist with lung consolidation shadows. the center of some shadows with high density indicates consolidation, and relatively low-density peripheral area suggests ground-glass fig. 2.9 the 18-year-old male patient diagnosed with sars. the specifi c segment rt-pcr of srs virus is positive. on day 5 of onset, the right inferior lung fi eld was observed with patchy ill-demarcated shadows of increased density density which may be complicated with thickening and increase of pulmonary textures. severe patients may develop "white lung." some cases may have pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and subcutaneous emphysema after the use of ventilator.a small part of lesions adjacent to the pleura may be complicated with local pleural thickening or revealed with mild tentiform adhesion. pleural changes may reside after absorption of intrapulmonary lesions. complication of slight pleural effusions may also be observable (fig. 2.10 ).the lesions of sars patients begin to be absorbed in 15-30 days, which can be completely absorbed for majority patients. a few patients may show pulmonary fi brosis or pulmonary interstitial hyperplasia, with apparent pulmonary interstitial hyperplasia occurring 30-40 days after the onset. the intrapulmonary patchy shadows present with shrinkage and increase of density to gradually form high-density cordlike and honeycomb-shaped shadows in lungs. severe pulmonary interstitial proliferation could dwindle the lung volume and make the mediastinum shift to the affected side. the imaging may reveal local irregular high-density plaque and cord-shaped shadows. occurrence of intrapulmonary honeycomb-shaped shadows and tractional bronchiectasis is the characteristic of pulmonary interstitial fi brosis (fig. 2.11 ).as rapid change is an important feature of sars chest x-ray manifestations, dynamic x-ray studies and observations could provide evidences for sars defi nite diagnosis. therefore, observation of the disease dynamic change is critical to sars chest x-ray, which is a major difference from x-ray examinations of other pneumonia. in the early phase and progression phase of sars, lung foci may undergo remarkable changes within a short time (24 h at the shortest), such as expansion and dissemination, which are characterized by changes in shape, extent, and site of the foci. this suggests that clinical physicians shall conduct chest orthotopic imaging once every 24-48 h after the sars patients are hospitalized so as to ascertain the disease changes. imaging dynamic changes are associated with multiple factors, such as age, original underlying disease, treatment method, and effi cacy. the lesions are generally absorbed 14 days after onset but possibly on day 7 in some mild patients. the focal shadows may become smaller with the density gradually decreased. one characteristic dynamic change of sars is migrating change of lesions in some patients, suggesting that the foci fi rstly occur at the unilateral inferior lung fi eld and then spread to contralateral and/or superior and middle lung fi eld. patients with worse lesions may manifest wider imaging extent and new foci, and severe patients may develop "white lung." ards is a key cause leading to death of patients (fig. 2.12 ) . lung imaging examination is an important basis for sars diagnosis, and continual imaging examination could visualize the dynamic change characteristics of the disease.after sars infection, chest abnormal changes frequently occur on day 1-7. in initial phase, focal shadows are frequently seen, which might be unilateral but dominantly bilateral. ct reveals small patchy ground-glass-density shadows, some of which are quasi-circular. lesions present as solitary small patchy lung consolidation and multiple small patchy or relatively large patchy shadows. large foci may appear as ground-glass-density shadows and concurrent lung consolidation shadows, with relatively higher-density vascular shadows observable in the former. besides, some foci are found with increased vascular shadows at the periphery. in addition, lesions are unveiled frequently at the bilateral lung inferior fi elds and lung margins (fig. 2.13 ).lesions in majority patients may progress and worsen within 14 days after onset. the small patchy shadows in early phase could expand into large patchy, multiple, or diffusive lesions within 3-7 days. besides, lesions extend from unilateral lung to bilateral lungs, from one lung fi eld to multiple lung fi elds. most patients could develop the severest infi ltration of lungs on day 8-14, namely, peak phase or "critical" phase. ct presentations are still predominated by ground-glass-density shadows, which may be complicated by pulmonary consolidation. lesions are commonly multiple and in diffusive distribution at both lungs, and lesions of varying shapes may coexist, with quasi-circular foci relatively common. some cases appear with ground-glass-density shadows all the time from onset to absorption of lesions. when ground-glass-density shadows are complicated by pulmonary consolidation, the large patchy, small patchy, or quasi-circular ground-glass-density shadows could be observed with pulmonary consolidation shadows of relatively high density. ground-glass density and pulmonary consolidation may also occur at different parts of the lung and could be visualized on the same layer or different layers of ct. for lesions typical of pulmonary consolidation, pulmonary consolidation appears as plaque-shaped high-density shadows or consolidation signs at lung lobes and segments. in addition, lesions are frequently recorded at lung lobe segment of the inferior lobe and outer band of lung fi eld (fig. 2.14 ) .lesions usually begin to be absorbed 2-3 weeks after onset, with the shadow shrunk and density gradually reduced and absorbed. although the clinical symptoms of some patients improve and disappear, light ground-glass-density shadows could still be seen in lungs on ct. it may prolong a relatively long time. during the absorption of intrapulmonary lesions, there is also concurrent pulmonary interstitial proliferation, which begins to be absorbed under dynamic observation. some lesions may develop into pulmonary interstitial fi brosis, characterized by lobular septum, intralobular septum, interstitial thickening, and subpleural curvature imaging signs as well as regional irregular high-density plaque and cord-like presentations. occurrence of intrapulmonary honeycomb manifestations and tractional bronchiectasis signifi es pulmonary interstitial fi brosis ( fig. 2.15 ).sars complication is an important factor affecting prognosis, which should be given enormous attentions. during sars treatment, antiviral drugs are administered as well as glucocorticoids and broad-spectrum antibiotics. some patients may still need airway positive pressure ventilation, tracheotomy, and tracheal intubation. reasonable use of such measures is of great signifi cance for improving the treatment rate and lowering mortality of sars patients. however, to be noted, such treatment drugs and methods may incur adverse reactions and cause complications. sars complications already detected encompass pulmonary secondary infection, mediastinal and subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax, bone aseptic necrosis, empyema, brain secondary infection, and pulmonary interstitial interstitial fibrosisin the early phase, sars manifests bronchiolar and peripheral interstitial pneumonia, which could further progress into patchy ground-glass blurry shadows at bilateral superior, middle and inferior lung fi elds, and consolidation and air bronchogram at different layers alveolar consolidation, with interstitial lesions present persistently and mostly reversible. in the recovery phase, only some cases develop into pulmonary interstitial proliferation and then cause fi brotic changes. pulmonary interstitial proliferation and fi brosis degree and outcome are associated with the extent of pulmonary involvement in peak phase, occurrence of complications, and treatment. generally, if lesions on chest image are light in peak phase, there will be fewer pulmonary changes left in recovery phase. contrarily, patients with diffusive lung interstitial thickening in recovery phase are often those suffering from relatively severe pulmonary injury in peak phase and involvement of the great mass of lungs, particularly patients with recurrent conditions, protracted course, and concurrent infections. researches demonstrate that 7-8 % of sars patients have pulmonary fi brosis of varying degrees and male patients display relatively more obvious pulmonary impairment than female patients. primary manifestations are lung dysfunction, such as decrease of pulmonary diffusion capacity, lung capacity impairment, and change of total lung capacity particularly residual volume.generally obvious pulmonary interstitial proliferation occurs at about 30-50 days after onset, which presents fi rstly lobular septum and intralobular thickening and subpleural curvature shadows. then there is the shrinkage of intrapulmonary patchy shadows with increase of density and gradual formation of high-density cord and honeycomb shadows inside lungs. severe pulmonary interstitial proliferation could diminish lung volume and compel the mediastinum to affected side. besides, pulmonary interstitial proliferation could occur extensively inside lungs, predominated by lobular septum, intralobular interstitial thickening, and subpleural curvature shadows, as well as irregular high-density plaque and cord-like shadows at some regions. honeycombshaped shadows and tractional bronchiectasis are signs of pulmonary interstitial fi brosis. ct reveals cord, reticulate, and honeycomb-shaped shadows, and hrct could better visualize the subtle abnormal changes of pulmonary interstitium, such as lobular septum thickening, intralobular interstitial thickening, subpleural curvature shadows, and honeycomb-shaped shadows. whether the cord-like and reticulate changes visualized by ct are completely absorbed or induce persistent fi brosis still entails long-term follow-up observation ( fig. 2.16 ).numerous sars patients develop osteonecrosis after recovery, which mostly appears as femoral head necrosis and also possibly necrosis of the ankle joint, knee joint, and shoulder joint. scans of bilateral hips and knees of 82 sars patients in rehabilitation phase disclosed that 51 patients (62 %) suffered from osseous abnormality, of which bone ischemia accounts for 17 % and implication of three sites for 20 %. its pathogenesis still remains not completely ascertained, and it may be ascribed to improper use of hormones and injury of sclerotin from sars viruses, bacterial embolism, lipid embolism, or multiple mixed factors. the primary pathological change of aseptic necrosis of femoral head is degenerative alteration due to femoral head blood circulation disturbance, mainly characterized by limping and pain. the lower limb of the affected side is relatively shorter and presents with light fl exion and adduction, as well as with slightly limited abduction and intorsion.initial x-ray examinations suggest that the involved femoral head has normal appearance but inhomogeneous density, with spotted osteoporosis. gradually ensue the increase of density as a result of osteonecrosis, which meanwhile is interspersed with some transparent shadows. femoral head may become fl at, fragmented, and irregular in contour from pressures. typical femoral head necrosis appears in the shape of wedge, with the base toward articular surface and the top toward metaphysis. since lesions are dominantly confi ned at the anterosuperior area of femoral head, lateral imaging of hip joints could clearly reproduce the extent of lesions. the necrotic area is encircled by a ring of transparent band. hip articular cavity may become wider and irregular due to fl attening of the femur. sometimes, there may be complication of dislocation. the fragments of femoral head may be shed off into the joint, giving rise to joint mouse. normal femoral head is located at the acetabular center in the transverse ct image and may appear in the shape of sphere or hook on different layers, with delicate high-density bone cortex at the periphery. the high-density trabeculae inside femoral head are arranged in stelliform formation from the center continually to bone cortex, named as "stelliform sign." ct manifestations of aseptic necrosis of femoral head can be divided into early and advanced phase. in the early phase, the stelliform sign formed by the trabeculae of femoral head is deformed or absent, presenting spotted and patchy shadows of increased density inside femoral head and fasciculate changes or mutual fusion at its periphery. in the advanced phase, femoral head become ruptured and out of shape, and absorption of sclerotin between bone fragments appears as irregular low-density area, with stelliform sign disappeared.mri manifestations of aseptic necrosis of femoral head include: necrotic areas of femoral head of early cases have no repair reactions or mechanic collapse and still maintain normal lipid signals of medullary bones. however, lowsignal margins incurred by sclerosis reactions could be seen at the periphery of foci. the t1 high signals of normal femoral head on t1-weighted image are detected with black linear low signals (representing demarcation between normal and ischemic bone tissues). on t2-weighted image, a high-signal line is visible at the medial low-signal sclerotic reaction line, thus forming the typical double-line sign. the double-line sign could refl ect congestion and infl ammation of granula-tion tissues and proves specifi c to aseptic necrosis of femoral head. severe infl ammation, congestion, fi brosis, and sclerosis could greatly deplete the amount of lipids of femoral head, which presents liquid-like signals on mri, low signals on t1-weighted image, and high signals on t2-weighted images. advanced cases are typical of fi brosis and sclerosis, and the affected area present with fi brotic mri features, that is, low signals on t1-and t2-weighted and proton densityweighted imaging. complication with effusions in hip joints appears as t1 low signals and t2 high signals.based on mri presentations, aseptic necrosis of femoral head could be classifi ed into four phases: phase i is characterized by homogenous or inhomogeneous low-signal areas adjacent to the joint above the femoral head on t1-weighted imaging; phase ii is visualized with wedge-shaped lowsignal bands; phase iii presents with sequestrum crescent sign and cortex collapse; phase iv manifests joint degeneration and joint space narrowing besides presentations of phase iii. in light of the aforementioned mr staging criteria, sars cases complicated by aseptic necrosis of femoral head already reported are mostly in phase ii.additionally, aseptic necrosis after use of hormones, besides most frequently involvement of the femoral head, could also implicate other joints, such as the knee joint, elbow joint, ankle joint, and acetabulum. therefore, if necessary, mr examinations of other joints shall be conducted to ascertain the extent and degree of lesions. if sars patients complain of pain at both hip joints and limited movement, ct scan or mri examination of both hip joints is recommended to conclude defi nite diagnosis. x-ray plain scan is not sensitive to early bone ischemic necrosis, which therefore is not preferred (fig. 2.17 and 2.18 ). perhaps the most intimate relationship between the environment and the development of the vertebrate species is the interaction of the immune system with infectious disease agents. this is best exemplified by antigenic variations that occur in infectious disease agents such as viral peptides and the corresponding plasticity of the host to recognize the new variant in order to survive. this constant battle between host and parasite has occupied the minds of scientists from a number of disciplines not only including immunologists but also evolutionary biologists. it is hypothesized that the fine components of our innate and acquired immune systems have evolved by such environmental pressures some of which have translated into beneficial outcomes and others to debilitating chronic diseases and others yet to death. the beneficial outcomes clearly outweigh the negatives as evidenced by the mere survival of the human species. the debilitating outcomes are manifest by the ever increasing rise in chronic urban diseases such as asthma or autoimmune diseases and those leading to death include conditions such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids), or ebola haemorragic fever. the recent appearance of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) is the latest amongst these challenges for the human immune system. these illnesses may be seen as a "race" for evolution between mutualistic partners, one of which is represented by humans. the evolution rates of the partners are always asymmetric for reasons peculiar to each and every interaction (dawkins and krebs, 1979) . as a consequence of these factors, however, it is now accepted that coevolutionary processes always favor the rapid rate of evolution, as stated by the red queen theory (bergstrom and lachmann, 2003) . this explains why, in the challenge against sars or other emerging infectious diseases, research will be the key element to the "final victory."according to a retrospective study by the center for disease control (cdc) involving case reports during the year 1992 from four u.s. counties located in california, oregon, minnesota, and connecticut, as many as 14% of deaths occurred in people 1 -49 years old without an underlying medical condition may have been due to infectious causes (perkins et al., 1996) . this observation takes on added significance because in the latter quarter of the last century, a number of new infectious agents and diseases have been identified, including, among others, legionnaires' disease (winn, 1988) , lyme's disease (burgdorfer, 2001) , the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) (montagnier, 2002) , the hepatitis c virus (hcv) (purcell, 1993) , and, more recently, the hantavirus responsible for a new pulmonary syndrome (hawes and seabolt, 2003) and the nipah virus outbreak in south east asia (lam and chua, 2002) .although some of these diseases, i.e. legionnaires' disease and lyme's borrelliosis are treated with antibiotics, new and untreatable pathology is constantly emerging, because of human intrusions into newer ecological surroundings, international transportation advances, and the evolution of organisms by spontaneous and/or induced mutations or recombinations leading to the potential to cross species barriers. ironically, the evolution of new etiological agents of disease are reminiscent of the japanese art of origami with new patterns and images formed at each and every turn. in such situations, clinicians and researchers face the challenge of defining etiological agents, establishing assays for rapid diagnosis, instituting barriers to limit infection, and developing efficient therapeutic and preventive options.sars is the latest of these infectious challenges (outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome-worldwide, 2003). indeed, sars appears as the first severe and easily transmissible new disease to emerge in the 21st century; it is associated with a significant morbidity and mortality, thus making it a challenge for clinicians and researchers worldwide. as of april 18th, 2003 over 3400 patients have been diagnosed with the disease (with almost 200 deaths) in 25 countries across all five continents; this may be just the tip of the iceberg as the number of cases in china may be inaccurate.major outbreaks of sars were initially reported in some provinces of the people's republic of china (both mainland and hong kong; acute respiratory syndrome. china, hong kong special administrative region of china, and viet nam, 2003; tsang et al., 2003) , as well as in singapore (outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome-worldwide, 2003), hanoi (vietnam) (outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome-worldwide, 2003), and canada (poutanen et al., 2003) .the clusters in toronto, canada, and hong kong, in which the index cases apparently stayed on the same floor of the same hotel, together with the high number of healthcare workers that became infected, made the hypothesis of an environmental non-infectious cause unlikely after the first reports were known. several measures were proposed to limit the spread of the disease (table i) . despite such measures, sars continues to spread. in the united states, so far, over two hundred suspected cases in 34 states have been reported, with no lethal case observed (cdc reports as of april 17th, 2003). some of the specimens found positive for the suspected viral agent were from us patients (ksiazek et al., 2003) . however, until a clear definition of sars is established, the number of actual cases will be unreliable.major problems stand in the way of limiting the spread of disease. first, sars has spread throughout the world along international air travel routes. thus, individuals may travel during an incubation period and become symptomatic only later. second, as the number of cases increases, it is becoming harder to identify some of the risk factors involved in the infection, thus making the tracking of previous contacts more difficult. third, the potential of a vector that can transmit this disease (whether alive or not) has yet to be entertained. fourth, the first sars cases were in november 2002, but there was no warning by the chinese government (acute respiratory syndrome. china, hong kong special administrative region of china, and viet nam, 2003) causing a tragic delay in control measures.various laboratory based diagnostic methods have been used for the detection of a responsible agent, including light and electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, cell culture isolation, serology, and molecular techniques. these studies have led to the identification of a viral agent in a significant fraction of infected patients (from different sars clusters and by different laboratories), which was not detected in geographically matched healthy controls (drosten et al., 2003; ksiazek et al., 2003; peiris et al., 2003) , thus denoting an element of specificity. the virus belongs to the coronavirus family although it appears to be significantly different from any known members of the same family so far described based on the entire nucleotide sequence which has recently been determined (drosten et al., 2003; ksiazek et al., 2003; peiris et al., 2003) . it must be stressed, however, that this virus has been identified in most but not all patients diagnosed with sars thus failing to exclude the co-occurrence of some other infectious agent, as suggested by some evidence (drosten et al., 2003) , or the presence of a diverse group of coronavirus. nonetheless, a recent press release suggests that a sars-like disease has been experimentally induced in monkeys infected with the same organism (altman, 2003) , thus fulfilling koch's postulate.the coronaviruses family is known to have a very narrow host range, each of them infecting one or just a few species. known human pathogens belonging to this group include viruses responsible for the common cold in small seasonal outbreaks (makela et al., 1998) . a method to mutate the spike glycoprotein of some coronaviruses has been recently described that allows the naturally irreversible crossing of host cell species barriers (kuo et al., 2000; haijema et al., 2003) . the hypothesis that this newly identified virus might be the result of wet bench laboratory experiments in this direction is clearly cause for concern but no evidence has yet been found to support this view; on the other hand, such data raise new patients should limit interactions outside the home and should not go to work, school, out-of-home child care, or other public areas until 10 days after the resolution of fever, provided respiratory symptoms are absent or improving.during the same time, infection control precautions should be used to minimize the potential for transmission.† all members of a household with a sars patient should carefully follow recommendations for hand hygiene (e.g. frequent hand washing or use of alcohol-based hand rubs), particularly after contact with body fluids (e.g. respiratory secretions, urine, or feces). † use of disposable gloves should be considered for any direct contact with body fluids of a sars patient. † if possible, a sars patient should wear a surgical mask during close contact with uninfected persons. when a sars patient is unable to wear a surgical mask, household members should wear surgical masks when in close contact with the patient. † sharing of eating utensils, towels, and bedding between sars patients and others should be avoided. † household waste soiled with body fluids of sars patients, including facial tissues and surgical masks, may be discarded as normal waste. † household members and other close contacts of sars patients should be actively monitored by the local health department and should be vigilant for the development of fever or respiratory symptoms and, if these develop, should seek healthcare evaluation. however, at this time, in the absence of fever or respiratory symptoms, household members or other close contacts of sars patients do not need to limit their activities outside the home.hope in the attempt to inactivate the virus. other features previously described for coronaviruses should be addressed for the understanding of mechanisms of human pathogenicity. for example, only a few genomic point mutations can lead to a drastic change in the organ trophism of the virus, thus modifying the clinical syndrome (ballesteros et al., 1997; sanchez et al., 1999) ; a similar process may have caused the leap from animals into humans (pearson, 2003) . others have suggested that the appearance of this new agent is a result of the high recombination rate amongst these viruses (de haan et al., 2002) . however, data from the complete genome sequence of the putative agent do not support this latter hypothesis (pearson, 2003) . finally, from a clinical standpoint, while no clear diagnostic criteria have been defined, a list of readily recognized signs and symptoms has been outlined by the cdc which should raise an index of suspicion for possible diagnosis of sars (table ii) . nonetheless, until the etiologic factor is clearly identified (and a true and reliable diagnostic test described), it will be mandatory to keep a high index of suspicion for cases that fit the general criteria of sars and to follow isolation precautions for known cases.sars has been described by the world health organization (who) as a rapidly progressive, sometimes fatal pneumonia that appears to have arisen from the guangdong province in southern china in november 2002 (acute respiratory syndrome. china, hong kong special administrative region of china, and viet nam, 2003) . accordingly, initial laboratory efforts towards the identification of the responsible agent were focused on a diagnosis based on clinical symptoms and available epidemiologic information. evidence collected so far (preliminary clinical description of severe acute respiratory syndrome, 2003) indicates that sars has an incubation period spanning from 1 to 11 days and the major mode of transmission is through droplet spread, although airborne transmission or a role for contaminated objects cannot be ruled out at the present time. it is accepted that patients are highly infectious during the symptomatic phase of sars. it is not clear, at present, whether the infectious state is also present in pre-symptomatic stages and/or during recovery. however, a list of hygienic measures that should be implemented has been described by the cdc (table i) . there is also no current information about the potential for an asymptomatic carrier state. there have been extraordinary efforts already made to identify the agent, obtain viral nucleotide sequence, establish methods to culture and grow the potential agent, develop a reliable elisa assay, establish rt-pcr conditions, etc.; all made possible by well co-ordinated studies of scientists throughout the world. this degree of co-coperation/sharing of data is a monumental accomplishment by the scientific community and should be applauded. within this context, unlike hiv where the formulation of an effective candidate vaccine has been a daunting task, it is reasonable to assume that a candidate vaccine for the coronavirus agent responsible for sars will be a reality in the relatively near future. this is likely because, unlike hiv, a large number of individuals who get infected with sars, recover from the infection, and appear to become healthy and normal. this evidence suggests that the body's immune system is capable of containing the virus. thus, it seems reasonable that a safe and effective vaccine in the form of a live attenuated, recombinant, or killed vaccine may become a reality.based on epidemiological and clinical characteristics, sars is the first severe new disease of the 21st century with worldwide epidemic potential. the mode of transmission and its lethal potential have generated alarm. with the notable exception of hiv/aids, the new diseases that appeared during the last twenty years or have established endemicity in new geographical areas have features that limit their capacity to pose a major threat to international public health. some of these, in fact, such as avian influenza (horimoto and kawaoka, 2001) , nipah virus (hooper and williamson, 2000) , hendra virus (hooper and williamson, 2000) , hanta virus (hawes and seabolt, 2003) do not demonstrate a high rate of efficient human-to-human transmission. other infections, such as escherichia coli o157:h7 (park et al., 2001) , variant creutzfeldt-jakob disease (taylor, 2002) , strictly depend on food as a vehicle of transmission. west nile fever (nedry and mahon, 2003) and rift valley fever (wilson, 1994) that have spread to new geographical areas, beside requiring a vector as part of the transmission cycle, were moreover associated with low mortality, often in high-risk groups. other entities, such as neisseria meningitidis w135 (wilder-smith et al., 2003) , and the imported haemorrhagic fevers (ebola, marburg, and crimean-congo; leduc, 1989) did not significantly spread from the original strong geographical foci. the ebola fever, in particular, raised major concerns as some outbreaks of haemorrhagic fever were found associated with mortality rates in the range of 53% in uganda (outbreak of ebola haemorrhagic fever, uganda, august 2000 -january 2001 , 2001 to 81% in the democratic republic of the congo (ebola hemorragic fever, congo-update, 2003) . it must be stressed, however, that with these agents the transmission of the responsible agents requires close physical exposure to infected blood and other bodily fluids and that, in most cases, patients in the period of high infectivity are too sick to travel. sars indicates a great potential for rapid international spread under favorable conditions such as those created by the density of international travels. data available so far (preliminary clinical description of severe acute respiratory syndrome, 2003) indicate that the incubation period should vary from 1 to 11 days, allowing the infectious agent to be transported, unsuspected and undetected, in an asymptomatic air traveller throughout the world. on the other hand, interpersonal transmission through close contact with respiratory secretions associated with a lack of knowledge of the precise initial symptoms led to a concentration of cases in previously healthy hospital staff and an alarming proportion of patients requiring intensive care. the economic losses due to sars have already been substantial in s.e. asia and should sars continue to spread, will have a global effect.prompt identification of suspect cases is critical in the definition of emerging infectious diseases. in order to achieve this goal, the cdc established in 1994 an emerging infections program (eip), aimed at receiving reports from physicians on potential unexplained deaths (or admission) due to possibly infectious causes. this project, together with an effort to strengthen global surveillance (including prompt reporting, adequate laboratory capacity, and the expertise to be mobilized quickly across national boundaries to follow disease movements) as also provided by the global outbreak alert and response network by the who, is of obvious importance in the challenge provided by sars and all emerging diseases (even those derived from terroristic threats).at the present time, it is impossible to foresee the outcome of this global emergency. will the outbreaks be contained and prevented from becoming an endemic infection in human populations, or will they assume a cyclic pattern, thus reappearing again in the same or in another geographical area in the future? an rt-pcr assay for the identification of the agent, an elisa assay for the detection of acute and convalescent serum titers against the coronavirus agent, and a method to culture the etiologic agent have been established, chemotherapeutic agents are currently being screened for their potential anti-coronavirus effects and a potential animal model for vaccine testing is in progress. in a world where all national borders are permeable to microbial agents, we are reminded of a quote from the american poet wallace stevens, who stated, at the beginning of the 20th century, that thought is an infection and in the case of certain thoughts, it becomes an epidemic.the world health organization (who) declared coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by the virus sars-cov-2, a pandemic on 11 march 2020 [1] . droplet inhalation into the respiratory tract and contact transmission through infected secretions are thought to be the chief routes of person to person transmission [2] . the potential for airborne transmission is still being studied [3] [4] [5] [6] , and if proven, will have a major impact on measures to reduce transmission as well as the need and use of personal protective equipment (ppe) [7] [8] [9] [10] . patient respiratory activity and medical procedures such as intubation, bronchoscopy or respiratory tract suctioning are thought to generate aerosols that may remain airborne for some time and place healthcare workers at risk of infection. otolaryngologists and anaesthetists in particular, perform these high risk aerosol generating procedures (agp) which expose them to potential droplet, contact and airborne transmission of sars-cov-2 [5, 8, [10] [11] [12] [13] , whether the patient is in a symptomatic or asymptomatic phase of the disease process.as the case numbers of covid-19 have grown exponentially around the world, elective surgical operations have been reduced in many centres to allow diversion of resources to areas of need such as intensive care units. there are circumstances however in which agp still need to be performed. in preparation for undertaking these procedures as safely as possible, there has been an overwhelming amount of information to absorb from the growing literature, medical society statements, governmental recommendations, hospital infection control and local department policies, as well as newsfeeds and social media exchanges between health professionals.the situation is changing daily, resulting in generalised heightened anxiety among healthcare workers about access to appropriate ppe [7, 10] or powered air-purifying respirators (papr) [10, 11] , and how to modify protocols for agp from usual practice to minimise risk. during this pandemic, some paediatric services have been taken over by adult patients and staff have needed to be deployed to areas they have had minimal training in. infected healthcare workers can affect departmental rostering such that agp may need to be undertaken by clinicians who are less accustomed to the procedure in normal circumstances. emergencies requiring agp may need attendance after hours and working with unfamiliar staff with variable skillsets and knowledge of the risks.for all of these reasons, a concise and unified operative team checklist detailing the principles of patient flow can be helpful for staff involved with agp to consider and follow. approaching agp during this crisis requires a shift in mindset of the whole team involved, moving away from productivity and turnover to, instead, emphasising safety and risk mitigation. this requires actively taking time to pause and contemplate instances when respiratory secretions could be aerosolised and the area where they might linger, the surfaces that may be contaminated by droplets, and how to minimise these routes of transmission to healthcare workers. surgeons and anaesthetists need to be proactive in balancing safe patient management with protection not only of themselves, but their trainees, nursing and operating theatre staff.a checklist can provide a practical framework for the immediate pre-operative, intra-operative and post-operative needs of the participating teams and can be modified to suit individual preferences, procedures, hospital layout and practices. breaking down the steps into manageable, practical components that can be printed onto a couple of pages and ticked off, rather than multi-page documents from several stakeholder departments and authorities, may reduce the intimidation of undertaking agp during the covid-19 pandemic.the authors work at a tertiary children's hospital that is co-located with a tertiary adult's and women's hospital with a neonatal intensive care unit. the operating theatre complex is shared between the hospitals with designated theatres for adults, children and the women's hospital, though there can be crossover use of the facilities if needed. all authors are experienced in otolaryngology procedures especially those involving aerosol generation.in preparation for performing agp on patients positive for covid-19 or whose status is unknown and treated as potentially positive, the authors collated information from australian and international society statements [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] , who publications [8] , local state health department recommendations, hospital department policies, and reviewed the emerging literature [5, [10] [11] [12] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] . three agp were undertaken prior to the formulation of the operative team checklist. simulation was performed with a mannequin in the operating theatre using the example of paediatric laryngo-bronchoscopy for retrieval of an airway foreign body. amendments to the checklist were made after performing 14 various high risk otolaryngology agp on paediatric and adult patients with unknown covid-19 status (presumed positive). one of these cases was the emergency removal of a pistachio nut from a distal left main bronchus on a 16-month old child weighing 10.7kg that had been inhaled 6 days prior to presentation ( figure 1 ). the child was covid negative but managed as status unknown with full high risk agp precautions to allow real life simulation and identification of areas for improvement.a unified checklist was created to incorporate the perspectives of all the teams involved. details were included as reminders for staff less acquainted with the nuances of the modifications to be made for agp. the design was intended to be adaptable such that equipment or considerations for other high risk agp (e.g. tracheostomy, endoscopic sinus surgery) could be easily substituted, and updates made as further evidence unfolds and practices are refined.the following 8 steps are proposed to assist surgeons, anaesthetists, nursing and operating room staff in the management of patients requiring agp during the pandemic of sars-cov-2 to minimise their exposure (figures 2 and 3) . the example of paediatric laryngo-bronchoscopy for diagnostic purposes or removal of inhaled foreign body is used to illustrate some of the steps with a sample provided of the checklist used at our institution ( figure 4 ). the detail included here is to highlight the process rationale and can be abbreviated once staff are trained and familiar with the routine.depending on the patient's condition, it is preferable to perform agp during daytime working hours.a designated covid-19 or on call anaesthetic team may need to be activated to attend. a preoperative anaesthetic assessment should include the need for pre-medication and local anaesthesia cream application, as well as timing of administration for a child. the surgical team is responsible for ensuring that all relevant results are available, as well as consent paperwork including consent for collection of intra-operative swab for covid-19 testing if status is unknown. specific operating theatres should be allocated for treating these patients, preferably in a negative pressure room with separate access to the main theatre block entrance. if the layout of the operating complex dictates that the room is in a thoroughfare area, signs or barriers should be erected to notify staff that a high risk patient is attending and to avoid unnecessary passage through that area.one of the most important steps of the checklist is the full team huddle prior to commencement of agp. the senior anaesthetist is the assigned team leader. all team members (surgical, anaesthesia, nursing, assistants, and recovery staff) should be present at this huddle, introductions made and roles defined. as general principles, the most experienced staff should be present to minimise personnel in attendance, access to the operating theatre is restricted once the patient has entered the room, direct patient contact is limited to the fewest number of people as practical, techniques that are the least aerosol generating are employed and the handling of contaminated instruments and surfaces exposed to the patient's respiratory secretions is minimised.the designated covid-19 operating theatre should be stripped of all unnecessary equipment to reduce contamination of their surfaces. performing the full team huddle in the allocated room is useful to prepare for positioning requirements especially in a shared airway case. patience is required by everyone involved as the preparation for agp can take much longer than the procedure itself. given that there may be no patient files or computers to access records, a whiteboard on the wall can be helpful to document the patient name, medical record number, weight, allergies, procedure, specific site or side, and staff present in the room.in our institution there may be two anaesthetists allocated (one "contaminated" to manage the airway and the other "clean" focused on anaesthesia delivery), an anaesthetic nurse in the operating theatre and a clean anaesthetic runner outside, one surgeon and a surgical assistant, one scrub nurse and one scout nurse in the room, a clean scout runner outside, and an operating assistant (orderly) outside the room allocated for patient handling and transfers. a second clean operating assistant who does not touch the patient may be required to assist with clearing the corridors and lift access during patient transport however if not available, the clean anaesthetic room runner may take that role. it can be useful to have a surgical trainee assisting the clean scout runner outside the theatre to efficiently identify equipment needing to be passed in. a different coloured impervious gown worn by the outside clean runners has been beneficial as a visual indicator of their status compared to the inside team.the full team huddle should include communication about the following details elaborated in 2.a to 2.f.essential information from the surgical team should include the patient's age, covid-19 status and risk profile, procedure indication, relevant clinical background and investigations, fasting time and anticipated need for ppe versus papr if available. in our institution, papr (sterilised through the central sterile services department) is available though not mandated for all participating staff. prior training in its use, donning and doffing is required and the surgical team will not perform high risk agp without it. relevant clinical imaging may need to be printed to have available in the operating theatre though will be disposed of at the end of the case.specific anticipated concerns should be acknowledged such as highlighting the times when aerosol generation is anticipated to be greatest, patient in extremis, known difficult airway, extreme obesity, and difficult intravenous access or drug/anaesthetic allergies.the senior surgeon and anaesthetist should communicate their preferred techniques for general anaesthesia delivery and surgical plan, with back-up plans discussed. both teams need to be flexible and open to considering alternative techniques balancing the goals for the agp with the risks of secretion aerosolisation. the use of the microscope might be deemed impractical or not feasible due to the use of papr and a telescopic assessment may need to suffice. if a therapeutic intervention is indicated, cold steel techniques are preferred over powered instrumentation. diathermy and laser modalities are avoided due to the generation of plume. haemostasis is obtained through the use of topical agents (e.g. 1:10,000 adrenaline or oxymetazoline) applied on neuropatties.in the case of a paediatric patient, the caregiver may or may not be allowed to escort the child to the operating theatre complex and anticipated pre-medication timing or transport issues to the designated entrance should be considered. in our institution, the child's caregiver (who is presumed to be covid-19 positive) does not accompany them to reduce the number of people involved and to maintain distancing from the operative team. the anaesthetic team is responsible for notifying the patient's location of the plan and any ancillary items needed to accompany the patient such as essential photocopied paperwork and paediatric surgical masks. the use of topical local anaesthesia, amount, type and who is going to deliver it should be clarified. if using, the mode of administration onto the larynx should be slow and deliberate (e.g. droplet delivered through a blunt catheter), avoiding atomisation and potential spray back towards the operator.systemic agents to reduce upper airway secretions or topical nasal decongestants (applied on a pledget or slowly dripped in via a syringe rather than sprayed) can be of benefit in some circumstances. systemic steroids to reduce airway inflammation may need to be clarified depending on the patient's pathology and the latest evidence based recommendations for a known covid-19 positive patient. the role of preparing the nasal and oral cavity with a 0.5% solution of povidone iodine on pledgets for its virocidal properties towards sars-cov-2 is unknown at this point in time [24] [25] [26] [27] but is considered an option at our institution. care should be taken in an open airway to avoid aspiration of large volumes of topical treatments that may trigger laryngospasm.talking through the process from start to finish can be helpful for the whole team to hear. in the rare event of an arrest situation, the anaesthetic team are expected to manage within the room without activation of the general emergency call button until other staff with appropriate ppe or papr arrive (concept of "protected code blue" [11] ). the post-operative strategy including reversal of anaesthesia to minimise coughing and aerosol generation, recovery location, recovery staff involvement and transfer destination should also be communicated.prior to commencing the case, designating the orientation of the operating table, position of staff, equipment, cables, suction, sharps bins, and waste disposal units can be helpful to streamline the procedure, patient transfer in and out, minimise theatre door opening and time wastage. the anaesthetic team should allocate sites to place contaminated masks and laryngoscopes that may be required at later stages to minimise contact exposure for both teams (e.g. disposable kidney dish on left side of patient near the head under plastic drape). alternative warming technologies are employed rather than forced air warming blankets (such as 3m bair hugger tm ).further barrier precautions between the patient and team may be considered depending on the level of ppe available and type of procedure. this can include items such as a clear perspex box [28] , operating table side arm used for suspension microlaryngoscopy, screening bar attachment, or even a mayo instrument table with the solid tray removed, draped with a large clear plastic sheet to limit aerosolisation in the room but allow for unhampered hand movements during manipulation of the airway [22, 29] . the clear plastic can be secured to the operating table with adhesive drape tape at the free edges to prevent air escape and slippage, only keeping access for instruments unrestricted. ideally these measures should have been trialled in a simulation setting beforehand to identify any visual or ergonomic concerns and the choice made available in the room before the patient arrives.clear plastic drapes however, may encourage condensation and concentrate droplet secretions onto surfaces underneath it, especially the anaesthetists and surgeon's hands and forearms, the patient's face and surrounds. a suction device or smoke evacuator under the plastic drape may draw aerosols away from the operators and if used, should be secured as close to the source of aerosol emission as possible such that flow is directed caudally away from the team but not in a position to interfere with anaesthetic gas delivery. at our institution, an additional plastic backed absorbable underpad sheet (395 x 550 mm "blue sheet") is placed beneath the patient's head and a smaller clear plastic drape over the patient's exposed torso to allow visualisation of chest movements and to reduce surface contamination of the patient, adjacent operating table and linen [22] . a team member is designated to oversee plastic drape removal at the end of the case to reduce the risk of droplet spread from these sites.the surgical and anaesthetic teams each have essential equipment and consumables required to be kept inside the operating theatre for agp. anaesthetic drugs should be drawn up and labelled in disposable trays to minimise the need to access the drug trolley. these requirements can be detailed beforehand on preference cards based on local practices and supplies available. however, it is advisable that the surgeon and anaesthetist in charge confirm what they anticipate will be required for that specific procedure and not just rely on a pre-prepared list, to limit having to search for things outside the room once the procedure has commenced and to reduce wastage of unused items that will be deemed contaminated. detailing the need not only for surgical hardware but other specific items such as size and types of syringes (e.g. luer lock), sizes of flexible forceps, topical medications, microbiology swabs, sputum traps and specimen containers with patient labels available can be helpful beforehand to streamline the execution of agp and allow the focus to be maintained on minimising aerosolisation.keeping potential equipment, drugs and consumables close at hand but not in the theatre will reduce time taken for the nursing runners to travel to stock rooms and search for items. sterile reusable instruments that have been opened during agp may be subject to a lengthy turnaround time for sterilisation after the case. if there are limited supplies in the institution (e.g. bronchoscopy grasper forceps), it may be preferable to keep anticipated instruments clean just outside the room to be handed in as needed. technology can sometimes fail at crucial moments and unexpected pathology may make it prudent to have spare telescopes of various sizes and angulation, cameras and light leads also in close proximity. extra anti-fog and warmed water can assist in poor endoscopic visibility situations arising from the temperature differential between the operating theatre environment and the patient's lower airway. a range of airway devices (e.g. different endotracheal tubes, disposable or nondisposable flexible bronchoscopes with associated adaptors/connectors, endoscopic baskets and balloon catheters) may need to be available if the initial plan is altered.once the full team huddle has been completed, the anaesthetic and surgical teams should have their own individual team huddles to prepare themselves and equipment they will be using. a brief moment should be taken for staff welfare (nutrition/hydration, bathroom use) and to remove personal devices such as watches, jewellery, pens, pagers and mobile phones to reduce their contamination. back up arrangements are made to cover the surgical and anaesthetic teams who will not be able to be contacted during the procedure. patient details can be entered onto an image capture system at this point if being used. if covid-19 status is unknown and no testing has occurred prior, a request form for an intra-operative swab is prepared so a specimen can be collected under general anaesthesia. in our institution this does not change the management or approach but will be useful for contact tracing if the result is positive.communication methods within the operating theatre, and between the operating room and the outside should be checked as it can be extremely challenging to relay equipment needs through the closed doors when wearing ppe. papr in particular, generates background noise for each individual and muffles voices such that deliberate effort is required to speak slowly, loudly and clearly. closed loop communication is essential for the smooth progression of the case and patience is required for the repetition this entails. bluetooth headsets worn under papr may be an option if they are able to be inclusive for enough critical staff and be cleaned appropriately. theatre phones, intercoms and walkie talkie devices if being used should be checked to be functional beforehand. in our experience, having a specific hand gesture to flag attention between the inside team members is useful. writing messages on a small portable whiteboard or even simply paper on a clipboard can facilitate being understood within the operating theatre or for the inside team to communicate with the outside clean runners through the viewing window.hand hygiene and donning of ppe or papr is performed in line with local institution infection control practice. this should be rehearsed prior, ideally on several occasions, so that it is familiar and comfortable. if departmental rather than individually allocated papr are being used, keeping a register of the device user will be important for contact tracing in the event of a healthcare worker becoming covid-19 positive. name or role tags on the front of balaclavas or head coverings can be helpful as the team is likely to vary due to rostering, staff may be difficult to differentiate when in identical full ppe, and addressing an individual by name tends to be more effective for gaining attention.all surgical instruments are opened and checked in the operating theatre. surgical staff should test that the telescopes, forceps and suction devices are the correct size and length to fit through closed circuit ports. as we have encountered, this step can be crucial in a small child where rigid instrumentation has limitations in terms of access, concurrent ventilation delivery and therapeutic retrieval resulting in a prolonged airway procedure even with experienced team members. depending on the layout of the room, endoscopic equipment should be connected, white balance and focus adjustments pre-completed, and instrument trolleys positioned so as to not impede access of the patient and their bed into the room.when all teams are in agreement, the patient location is notified to prepare the patient and they are retrieved by the designated members. the patient preferably wears a surgical mask for the transport though this may be variably tolerated by a child. a phone call should be made to update the operating theatre when the patient is about to depart to confirm readiness for arrival and to minimise patient waiting time in an open environment. in our institution, a photocopy of the patient's identifying details, pre-operative checklist and consent form are the only paperwork to accompany them and are destroyed after the case to reduce staff contamination following the procedure. a surgical check-in is performed on arrival to the theatre complex and the patient is brought directly into the operating theatre for the team time out (who surgical safety checklist) to be performed. the anaesthetic bay is bypassed to keep it a clean area for the anaesthetic runner. once the patient has entered the room, the team within the operating theatre do not exit it until the completion of the case to minimise external contamination.prior to commencement, all staff are reminded to cross monitor each other for potential contamination during the procedure. the anaesthetic team commence induction using their preferred technique and instrumentation with the surgical and scrub staff staying distanced from the head of the patient, preferably more than 1.5 metres away in a cranial direction, until required to approach. intravenous access is established by the "clean" anaesthetist and laryngoscopy is performed by the "contaminated" anaesthetist. use of a video-laryngoscope is recommended to improve visualisation, reduce the need for repeated airway instrumentation and distance the anaesthetist from the airway. the shared screen may also allow the surgeon to obtain enough of an overview of the supraglottis and larynx prior to airway securement to not require direct re-examination of an open airway in some circumstances. if using, local anaesthesia or other topical preparations are carefully applied at this point.in our institution a nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swab is collected for covid-19 once the child is sufficiently deep but prior to the application of povidone iodine to these sites (avoiding irrigation or spraying). a tracheal aspirate obtained via a sputum trap may have a higher sensitivity for polymerase chain reaction (pcr) testing though care should be taken to collect this via a closed system to reduce risk to heath care workers in the room. the patient is positioned and draped in the agreed manner. if an open airway technique is preferred for laryngo-bronchoscopy, the lowest gas flows possible to maintain oxygenation are used. consider methods such as using insufflating channels on the laryngoscope to distance the anaesthetist's hands from the airway. an initial diagnostic look for dynamic and anatomical assessment with a hopkins rod can allow for further procedure planning.depending on the circumstances and patient size, an appropriate endotracheal tube loaded over the hopkins rod during this look can be left in situ once the telescope is withdrawn to buy some time with a safely secured airway whilst other instruments are prepared. a rigid ventilating bronchoscope can be used for the same purpose and allows maintenance of visualisation. accessories such as the rubber telescope guide, bridge attachment, storz fluvog adaptor and guide piece with rubber stopper for the working channel assist creating a greater seal.in the example of paediatric foreign body retrieval, the spontaneous ventilation technique can be more familiar and efficient, allow an unobstructed view and the position of the foreign body may be more stable. inhalational anaesthetic induction may be delivered via a standard face mask followed by several options including oropharyngeal insufflation (less mucosal manipulation than nasopharyngeal route), temporary placement of a laryngeal mask airway (lma) or endotracheal tube, or immediate handover to the surgical team to take over management with their instruments of choice. if a face mask is used, excessive positive pressure is avoided however gentle support may be required to avoid atelectasis and alveolar derecruitment. the best airway seal will be obtained by inflating the cuff of an endotracheal tube but this may not always be appropriate or available depending on the size of the child or the condition being treated (e.g. child with croup, subglottic stenosis or proximal airway foreign body). flexible bronchoscopy can be useful for a diagnostic assessment, however, it is generally a less familiar approach, ventilation can be obstructed by the presence of the scope in an endotracheal tube, the scope may be too big for a small child, the working channel is smaller and longer limiting therapeutic instrumentation available, it may be harder to manipulate and maintain coverage under the plastic drapes and the image quality may be inferior to the rigid telescope. final smooth withdrawal of an airway foreign body using flexible forceps may be hampered by the size of the material and the holding strength of the forceps. flexible endoscopy forceps that are small enough to fit through working channels are usually designed for taking biopsies and may break an organic foreign body into smaller pieces necessitating multiple passes for complete retrieval.the use of an apnoeic ventilation technique via rapid sequence induction or at later stages of the procedure can be considered to reduce aerosol generation but should only be undertaken if both the anaesthetist and surgeon are comfortable with the method and feel that it is suitable for the patient and the condition being managed. the time available for airway assessment and instrumentation by the surgeon is reduced, single lung ventilation may be more challenging in the situation of an occluding foreign body in a main bronchus, and if positive pressure is required, the position of an unstable foreign body may alter.the completion of agp will bring relief to all involved especially after the lengthy preparation and vigilance required, however elevated attention to aerosol exposure needs to be maintained by the whole team during anaesthesia reversal, whether it occurs with or without extubation. the anaesthetic team may prefer to keep plastic draping or screening attachments in situ to distance themselves from a coughing, gagging or crying child, and remove it after the patient is in a more settled state. a designated team member (e.g. anaesthetic nurse) is delegated to supervise plastic drape removal by several staff members together, to ensure the contaminated surface is rolled onto itself and away from staff in a caudal direction before discarding. accessories under plastic drapes such as the perspex box or side arm must be carefully detached, as they will potentially be soiled by surface droplets. patient eye tapes need to be removed slowly. depending on the procedure, the surgical team should distance themselves from the patient but may need to stay in the operating room with all equipment still connected to assist in the event of laryngospasm or unexpected deterioration.once stabilised, a surgical mask is placed on the patient's face if tolerated. supplemental low flow oxygen can be delivered either via nasal prongs under the surgical mask or a hudson mask on top of the surgical mask. local preference will dictate whether the patient stays in the operating room for their recovery or is transferred to another location. in our institution the patient is recovered in the operating theatre with the anaesthetic team and a recovery nurse who will also escort them out.transport to the final destination should involve a notification to the receiving area, operating assistants and cleaning services, to minimise delays and allow preparation for arrival. images and videos from the image capture device can be saved and backed up at this point prior to powering down in preparation for terminal cleaning.when the anaesthesia team are satisfied with the patient's progress, the surgical staff may stand down.careful and deliberate doffing of ppe or papr is essential to avoid self-contamination of healthcareworkers. an experienced spotter can assist the process otherwise prior training and practice is highly recommended to allow the team to help each other in the correct sequence and technique. hand hygiene and avoiding touching their own faces, conjunctivae and mucous membranes is essential.staff should immediately shower and change scrubs especially if the ppe or papr available does not provide complete front and back skin coverage. if the patient is known to be covid-19 positive, selfadministration of 0.5% povidone iodine gargle for 30 seconds and/or topical nasal application may be considered by those closely involved with the procedure [27] .the surgical team can then return to designated clean areas to complete the operation note, sign the surgical count sheet and provide handovers. the operating theatre is not re-entered once the patient has departed for 30 mins to allow aerosols to settle and ventilation exchange prior to cleaning. this period of time can be variable between institutions depending on the number of air changes per hour in the operating theatre. once the anaesthesia team have completed their care of the patient they may need to return to the operating theatre complex for their own doffing if that is the safest place for it to be performed under supervision and for access to showers prior to completing their own paperwork.the time taken from the commencement of the full team huddle to when all involved have stood down after the completion of the procedure has been considerably lengthy in our experience. all team members may be exhausted however a team debrief to communicate feedback is essential to improve the process for forthcoming procedures as subsequent agp are unlikely to be performed by exactly the same participants. it may be helpful to assign a clinical lead from the otolaryngology department or several leads for subspecialty interest groups (e.g. paediatric airway, rhinology, otology, head and neck) to provide oversight for each agp checklist used at the institution and to be the person to incorporate and distribute recommendations after each case to enhance it.teamwork, collaboration and communication are essential in usual surgical practice but even more so at present. a unified team approach can provide reassurance in a time of overwhelming change, resource rationing, anxiety about risk, and confusion about which hospital department flowsheet to follow. surgical, anaesthesia, nursing and operation assisting staff should be encouraged to contribute even seemingly minor details to help improve the process of performing agp efficiently and minimising their exposure to sars-cov-2 in the context of their own facilities and resources.it can be helpful to print an operative team checklist in a concise format to keep it less intimidating.the overall template can be maintained for different agp with substitution of relevant anaesthesia and surgical requirements. the intention is not to be prescriptive but to raise awareness of techniques to modify practice. even if experienced with undertaking agp in normal situations, a checklist of alternative approaches can be a reminder that things need to be done differently to reduce droplet, contact and potential airborne transmission, and highlights other risk management steps of the patient journey that the team are not usually collectively involved with.treating all high risk agp as potentially covid-19 positive at present, has been time and resource intensive but invaluable in terms of real life simulation and team training. this may not be sustainable as disease prevalence fluctuates, however it has allowed for preparation and system planning. like all new approaches there is a learning curve before attaining proficiency and mannequin simulation can be substituted to provide ongoing skill maintenance. similar to the spotter's role to minimise contamination with donning and doffing, stepping back to take an outsider's view with the general principles of approach in mind (figure 3) , should raise awareness, alter behaviour and potentially reduce transmission. to date, every agp undertaken at our institution using this process has resulted in a refinement of our practices and will continue to do so in the future.recommendations for risk reduction for healthcare workers during the covid-19 crisis will continue to develop as the pandemic unfolds and more is understood about the virus itself. an operative team checklist and its execution however are no substitute for meticulous hand hygiene, respiratory etiquette, environmental cleaning and disinfection, and physical distancing as recommended by the who, for healthcare workers when within the healthcare environment and when in the general community.an operative team checklist detailing the immediate pre-operative, intra-operative and post-operative handling of patients who are covid-19 positive or whose status is unknown is suggested to prompt healthcare workers to modify usual practices to reduce their exposure to sars-cov-2 during agp.in a time of rapidly growing information and recommendations, a concise checklist customised for local needs may alert frontline staff of subtle techniques to reduce droplet, contact and airborne transmission, and help provide focus during these high risk situations.clinical photograph during foreign body removal in a 16-month old child. the surgical team were wearing papr however the anaesthetic team had elected not to as the child was covid negative and they had not completed training in papr use prior to the emergency procedure.summary of 8 step operative team checklist used for high risk aerosol generating procedures (agp)general principles of approach for high risk aerosol generating procedures (agp)the ent checklist used at sydney children's hospital for aerosol generating procedures is provided as an example detailing site-specific nomenclature, equipment and preferences. numbered point form was used, and the font and margins of the layout were adjusted to allow printing on only 2 sheets of paper to be less overwhelming at a time of information overload.• sars-cov-2 is transmitted by droplet, contact and possibly airborne routes • agp during covid-19 pandemic needs alteration to reduce secretion aerosolisation • 8 step operative checklist can assist staff preparation and performance of agp• site specific adaptation is encouraged to lessen open airway time and exposurehigh-volume healthcare facility, which is how the previous south korea outbreak occurred 11 . moreover, there may be very few hospitals that are prepared to provide perioperative care for mers patients. therefore, herein, we share our experience of providing infection prevention and control measures for surgeries for mers-related patients in our hospital.during the mers outbreak in our hospital, six mers-related patients underwent surgery including three possibly exposed patients, one directly exposed patient, and two mers-confirmed patients who recovered from the disease. all patients were negative during two preoperative mers screenings using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) 14 . figure 1 shows the total number of surgeries performed during the outbreak period at our hospital and the distribution of mers-related patients undergoing surgery.temporary set-up of a negative-pressure operating room. the operating rooms in our hospital were generally positive-pressure environments, and we had no permanent negative-pressure operating rooms. because a negative-pressure operating room is the optimal environment to prevent airborne virus spreading to adjacent areas 13 , two of our 25 operating rooms in the main operating suite of the hospital were temporarily converted into negative-pressure operating rooms to perform surgical procedures on mers-related patients. operating rooms no. 16 and 17 were selected because they were connected to each other, but each room had separate atmospheric air inlets and exhaust systems. they also had separate air-conditioning and humidification systems. of the two connected rooms, one was used as the main operating room and the other was used as the anteroom where healthcare workers (hcws) applied and removed the personal protective equipment (ppe).in each room, fresh air was supplied from an inlet duct and discharged outside through the exhaust duct (fig. 2) . because a constant exhausting air volume was maintained through the outlet duct, negative pressure in the operating room was achieved by decreasing the inflow air volume that entered through the inlet duct. first, the blades of the air volume control damper in the inlet duct were closed as much as possible (fig. 2) . however, because the damper was not intended to be air-tight, the inflow volume to the operating room did not decrease sufficiently. second, as an additional measure to decrease the inflow volume, we opened the access hole in the inlet duct, which was originally used for duct inspection purposes (fig. 2) . finally, a smoke test was carried out to ensure negative pressure. the room pressure was maintained at −4.7 pa in the main operating room and at −1.2 pa in the anteroom (fig. 3) ; −4.7 pa is below the negative pressure room standard of −2.5 pa 15 . www.nature.com/scientificreports www.nature.com/scientificreports/ airflow in both rooms reached 14-18 air exchanges per hour, according to airflow velocity measurements with an anemometer (ebt731 balometer; tsi alnor ® , minnesota, united states). in this environment, removing airborne contaminants requires 18 minutes for 99% efficiency and 28 minutes for 99.9% efficiency 16 . therefore, 30 minutes of room ventilation was required after aerosol forming high-risk procedures, such as endotracheal intubation or extubation 12, 17 . the cleanliness level of each room was also measured using a particle counter (tsi 9310; tsi, united states): main operating room = 2,604 and the anteroom = 2,540, which were much lower than the institutional target level of <10,000 for general surgery (fig. 3) . cleanliness level was defined as the number of particles smaller than 0.5 µm in 0.3048 m 3 . equipment preparation and disinfection. all built-in instruments such as computers, telephones, and ventilators were covered with plastic paper. sufficient amounts of drugs, fluids, and other equipment were prepared in the operating room before surgery, and other unnecessary equipment was moved out. additionally, we used disposable equipment, when possible. high efficiency particulate air (hepa) filters were installed in the breathing circuits, both on the inspiratory and expiratory limbs of the ventilators and at the patient's site that connected to endotracheal tube. after operations with mers-exposed patients, 30 minutes of room ventilation was followed by surface disinfection with diluted chlorine bleach (500 ppm) 18, 19 . cleaners wore standard ppe while disinfecting surfaces. for mers-confirmed patients, surface disinfection was performed twice.institutional guidelines for perioperative management of mers-related patients. during the mers outbreak, we set the following principles for perioperative management of mers-related patients: all elective surgeries for mers-confirmed patients were postponed to reduce the risk of potential in-hospital transmission. for mers-exposed patients, surgical procedures were delayed until after the potential incubation period of 14 days 20 . when a mers-related patient required an urgent or emergency operation, mers-cov pcr tests were performed twice with distinct specimens preoperatively, to account for asymptomatic mers patients or delayed positive conversion in symptomatic mers-exposed patients. for patients with ambiguous pcr results or without a pcr test, operations were performed according to the management guidelines for mers-confirmed patients. all the surgical procedures for mers-related patients were performed in the last order of the day as possible.perioperative protection level for hcws. when an operation for a mers-related patient was scheduled, the division of infectious diseases and infection control department confirmed the protection level of the hcws, according to institutional guidelines (table 1 ). in principle, standard ppe was applied to hcws who cared for asymptomatic mers-exposed patients. standard ppe includes surgical gloves, surgical gowns, eye shields, and n95 respirators. while managing mers-confirmed or mers-exposed patients with mers-associated symptoms including fever, myalgia, respiratory symptoms, or diarrhea, hcws implemented enhanced ppe, which included coverall clothes with head cover, shoe covers, goggles, two pairs of surgical gloves, and powered air purifying respirator (papr) or n95 respirators. although we performed preoperative mers-cov pcr screening, enhanced ppe was still recommended when managing symptomatic mers-exposed patients regardless of their pcr results. anesthesiologists were recommended to apply enhanced ppe (including papr from the middle of the outbreak) when managing all mers-related patients because they were most directly exposed to the aerosol-producing high-risk procedures, such as endotracheal intubation and extubation. only minimal numbers of hcws were present in the operating room. institutional education regarding the precise use of ppe was provided to the all associated hcws and they were assisted by skilled nurses in the operating room during the ppe donning and doffing processes.patient transfer for operation. mers-related patients were transferred directly to the negative-pressure main operating room through an exclusive path and elevator by a physician wearing proper ppe. the walls and the floor of the passageways and the elevator were covered with plastic paper. mers-related patients wore a www.nature.com/scientificreports www.nature.com/scientificreports/ surgical mask during transfer. because only anesthesiologists wore enhanced ppe when in proximity to asymptomatic mers-exposed patients, 30 minutes of room ventilation was performed after anesthetic induction, including endotracheal intubation. the surgical team then entered the main operating room through the anteroom. in the cases of symptomatic mers-exposed patients or mers-confirmed cases, all hcws wore enhanced ppe and the 30-minute ventilation time was not required.after completion of operation procedures, patients who were moved to the general ward recovered in the main operating room without going through the post-anesthesia care unit. thirty minutes of room ventilation was performed after tracheal extubation. a physician in the main operating room sent the patient into the corridor, while the other physician outside the main operating room wearing ppe took over and transferred the patient to the general ward directly through the exclusive pathway (fig. 4) . patients moving to the intensive care unit (icu) were transferred while remaining intubated. before transfers, we injected patients with a sufficient amount of intravenous muscle relaxant and sedative drugs to prevent coughing or movement and we applied a portable ventilator or bag-valve mask with a hepa filter to the patient.operations for six mers-related patients. the details of the six mers-related patients undergoing surgery are presented in table 2 . two patients had operations during phase 1 and four patients during phase 2 of the outbreak (fig. 1) . the negative-pressure operating room was set up to be used from phase 2. regarding ppe levels for the hcws attending these six patients, standard ppe was applied during management of patient a (asymptomatic mers-exposed patient), while anesthesiologists wore enhanced ppe for high-risk procedures (tracheal intubation). enhanced ppe was applied to hcws for patient b because the patient was symptomatic and still within the two-week incubation period, even though both pcr results were negative. enhanced ppe, including papr to reduce risk of mers-transmission, was applied for patient c who underwent surgery in the middle of the outbreak (phase 2). papr provides more perfect sealing and protection of the head surface.patients d and e had documented mers-cov infection and their recovery was confirmed with symptom resolution and two negative mers-cov pcr tests. however, enhanced ppe with papr was applied to hcws because the infection risk could not be eliminated during exposure to a large amount of body fluid, especially during cesarean section (patient d). after spinal anesthesia, she recovered in the main operating room and was transferred directly to the general ward. patient f had a history of exposure to a mers patient in the emergency room and was isolated due to a fever. enhanced ppe was applied to the hcws for patient f and she underwent surgery with only one set of negative pcr results because of her emergency condition. mers, as well as sars, is associated with coronaviruses, both of which have high affinity for the lower repiratory tract and easily produce severe pneumonia [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] . although mers has lower human-to-human transmission potential and has resulted in fewer large outbreaks than sars, there may be occasional amplification of clusters in healthcare settings [21] [22] [23] . moreover, mers case fatalities are reported to be much higher than sars (35-45% for mers and 10-15% for sars) 12, 17, 23, 24, 26 . unlike sars, ongoing small and large mers outbreaks in the arabian peninsula foster potential future mers outbreaks in non-endemic countries. however, there is likely to be a very limited number of hospitals that are prepared with negative-pressure operating rooms, except for a few hospitals in hong kong that experienced the 2003 sars outbreak 13 . almost all hospitals generally have positive-pressure operating rooms and they may experience an outbreak without facilities that are prepared for perioperative management of mers patients, as our hospital did in 2015.one of the highlights of our experience during the outbreak was the temporary set-up of a negative-pressure operation room with an adequate pressure gradient (≥2.5 pa) by modifying two connected operating rooms according to us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) guidelines 15 . continuous negative pressure was maintained in the main operating room (−4.7 pa) and the anteroom (−1.2 pa). this temporary setting was possible because the two adjacent rooms had separate atmospheric air inlets and exhaust systems. although we could not measure the airflow pattern or dispersion of infectious particles directly 27 , the cleanliness levels in both operating rooms were 2,500 particles, well below the institutional target cleanliness for general surgery (<10,000 particles).although the precise route of mers-virus transmission is currently not clearly understood 21 , mers, as well as sars, is known to spread by direct contact with infectious material, such as large respiratory droplets, and also by airborne routes 28, 29 . touching contaminated objects may also be a source of transmission; this is different from tuberculosis, which is transmitted by airborne routes 19, 29 . therefore, when performing procedures that generate aerosols, such as endotracheal intubation, in patients with mers or sars, hcws must wear enhanced ppe, including gloves, a gown, either a face-shield that fully covers the front and sides of the face or goggles, and respiratory protection at least as protective as an n95 filtering face piece respirator 19, 28, 30 . when removing ppe, care should also be taken not to contact contaminated materials. considering potential aerosol generation in operating rooms and the transmission risk of mers-cov while changing ppe, the temporary modification of an operating room to a negative-pressure room with an anteroom should provide suitable protection for hcws participating in operations on mers-related patients 5 .a second highlight of our experience is the highly conservative application of ppe to hcws. at the time of the outbreak, there were no specific guidelines for perioperative management 31 . therefore, we used a conservative approach based on our experience and previous reports. first, although the previous guidelines recommended that asymptomatic mers-exposed patients be managed as general patients undergoing surgery, we applied standard ppe to hcws and we performed mers-cov pcr screening twice. although mers progressed gradually after symptom onset 32 , we could not exclude the possibility that asymptomatic mers-exposed patients had the potential to develop symptomatic disease perioperatively. moreover, we observed development of mers after the known incubation period of 14 days in an immunocompromised host 10, 33 ; thus, the possibility of exceptional cases could be considered. furthermore, a certain proportion of asymptomatic mers-exposed patients could actually be asymptomatic mers-infected patients. approximately 21% of laboratory confirmed mers patients have been classified as asymptomatic or having nonspecific mild symptoms at the time of testing 34 . the potential for transmission from asymptomatic mers-cov pcr-positive person is currently unknown, but there are reports about prolonged viral rna detection in the upper respiratory tract in asymptomatic pcr-positive person 9 . considering these points, it would be reasonable to prepare more conservatively than the existing guidelines call for. www.nature.com/scientificreports www.nature.com/scientificreports/ another point on which our preparations differed from the guidelines was the application of enhanced ppe, which emphasizes full protection of the body surface with a hooded coverall. during the outbreak in our hospital, mers transmission events occurred among hcws who were equipped with standard ppe, including n95 masks. transmission may have occurred after possible contamination of uncovered head or face surfaces 35 . therefore, if a patient with a mers contact history had mers-associated symptoms, applying enhanced ppe (either a n95 respirator or papr) during surgery would be appropriate for hcws because numerous droplets and aerosols may be produced during airway interventions. because the n95 may fit inadequately if worn for a long time or after movement during surgery, wearing papr will be more beneficial. however, unlike hcws dealing with ebola virus, impermeable and fluid-resistant gowns are not required because body fluids are not infectious as with ebola virus diseases 9, 28, 35, 36 .our experience was limited in that, as a mers outbreak outside the endemic country, we did not have an opportunity to perform surgical procedures in actively virus-shedding mers-infected patients. additionally, our infection-prevention protocols would be too conservative to apply in mers-endemic situations. however, considering the potential risk of infected hcws, preventing mers transmission is extremely important in the management of a mers outbreak. importantly, our experience can be generalized to other non-endemic countries for managing potential outbreaks of emerging respiratory diseases.in the era of globalization, a mers outbreak can occur in any country outside the middle east. a very limited number of hospitals are equipped with negative-pressure operating rooms, and therefore, most hospitals are likely to experience a mers or other outbreak in an unprepared circumstance. we hope that this report will help other hospitals in preparing for future mers outbreaks and infection control in unexpected conditions.this study was based on all available data at the samsung medical center from the mers outbreak and on interviews with hcws associated with the outbreak. the study was approved by samsung medical center institutional review board. the documents for review included electronic medical records of mers-related patients who underwent operative procedures and institutional guidelines for perioperative management of mers-related surgical patients. the mers guidelines were prepared through multidisciplinary team discussions that were held by our hospital's infection control department during and after the mers outbreak. the records about the temporary set-up of a negative-pressure operating room were also reviewed. we also collected data through interviews with hcws who participated in surgery and anesthesia for mers-related patients.we defined mers-related patients as those who were possibly or directly exposed to mers or who had a previously confirmed mers diagnosis 10 . in brief, patients who had a potential but unconfirmed close contact history with a mers patient were defined as possibly exposed patients, and they were allowed to continue their normal activities until mers-like symptoms developed. directly exposed patients included those who had close contact with a known mers patient and who did not wear proper ppe; these patients were isolated in their homes or in private negative-pressure rooms at our hospital.because the number of mers-infected patients continuously increased at our hospital, we partially closed the hospital on june 13 10 , at which point outpatient-care clinics were closed and the emergency department was only available for life-threatening emergencies. all elective surgeries were postponed if possible 10 . we defined the early phase of the outbreak (before june 13) as phase 1 and the middle phase of the outbreak (from june 13) as phase 2.for mers-cov pcr tests, either sputum or nasopharyngeal swab samples were collected and sputum samples were preferred if available 14 . sputum was collected directly into a sterile, leak-proof, screw-capped sputum collection sterile container and nasopharyngeal swab was collected with an eswab (482 c, copan diagnostics inc., murrieta, ca, usa). clinical samples were screened by rrt-pcr testing with amplification targeting the upstream e region (upe) and confirmed by subsequent amplification of the open reading frame (orf)1a usingpowerchek ™ mers real-time pcr kits (kogene biotech, seoul, korea). all rrt-pcr reactions were performed using the 7500 fast real-time pcr system (applied biosystems, foster city, ca, usa). the pcr reaction was performed in a total volume of 20 μl (15 μl pcr reaction mixture and 5 μl template rna). thermocycling conditions included a step at 50 °c for 30 min, followed by 95 °c for 10 min and then 40 cycles of 15 s at 95 °c and 60 s at 60 °c. positive viral template control and no-template control were included in each run. the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gapdh) gene was amplified simultaneously as a heterologous internal control to monitor pcr inhibition. a positive test result was defined as a well-defined exponential fluorescence curve that crossed the cycle threshold (ct) < 35 cycles for both upe and orf1a. a sample was considered "equivocal" if the upe result was positive but the ct value for orf1a was >35 and <40. we interpreted the result as "indeterminate" if (1) the upe result was positive but the ct value for orf1a was undetected or if (2) the ct value for upe was >35 and <40.institutional review board statement. the study was performed in accordance with the declaration of helsinki and experimental protocols were revised and approved by irb at samsung medical center. (irb no. smc 2016-08-156-002).informed consent statement. irb at samsung medical center has approved the waiver of patient consent form because of the retrospective nature of this study. patient confidentiality is maintained at all time in accordance with samsung medical center policies.any outpatient or new inpatient especial in burn department during the pandemic should be as a potential infectious source of covid-19, which could lead epidemic in burn ward by transmission from person to person. hence, it is particularly important to organize management strategies for burn ward during the pandemic of covid-19. this paper establishes some management strategies for burn ward based on our own experience and the chinese national and international public health issues regarding ward management as well as the specific characteristics of the burn ward during the respiratory infectious diseases(1-2). 1. management strategies of the administrational system in burn ward: 1.1 establish and strengthen the managing team of epidemic prevention and control in each ward the new coronavirus infection is a major public health emergency, and each ward responds to the emergency under the guidance of the hospital emergency response system and the superior administrative agency in combination with its own features [3] . based on the model of the ward's infection control team, the ward director and the head of nurse are responsible for the epidemic prevention and control team, the composition includes the medical chief in hospital, the nursing group leader, the clinical and laboratory infection control specialist, and the microbiology team. each clinical diagnosis, nursing and recovery procedures will be conducted under the guidance of chinese national health commission regarding covid-19 prevention and management along with class a nosocomial infection requirements.in order to train medical staff in an effective way, our ward establishes related knowledge and basic methods in prevention and control of covid-19. each one should complete online theory learning styles, and update basis knowledge learning on a regular basis firstly. the clinical skills such as hand hygiene, wearing masks, goggles, protective face screen should be learned on line through video and practice repeatedly. after that, each staff should pass the theory knowledge test on line and the practical operation test to ensure all medical staff to deal with any situation proficiently. 1.3 the emergency plan for epidemic prevention and control in the department/ward (figure1) [4] 2. management strategies of the ward environment 2.1 environmental layout of the ward 2.1.1 environmental control of burn buildingthe management of access control shall be strengthened, and the visitors shall be suspended. in special cases, visitors shall be monitored for temperature and screened for epidemiological history before entrance.our clinical diagnosis and treatment units includes burn intensive care unit, ordinary wards, rehabilitation center, wound treatment center, scar treatment center, the operating room , outpatient emergency, etc. some adjustments were made based on the diagnosis and treatment procedures with the features of the architecture. the outpatient part, emergency part, ordinary ward and bicu are divided into clean area, potential polluted area and polluted area respectively. signs and instructive lines among three different zones should be clear and obvious. the emergency part in the ward was set up as a separate area for emergency treatment and admission of new patients. all new inpatients including pediatric burns will be isolated in a single room of the ward for 14 days without leaving the ward. meanwhile, the severe burn patients should be admitted to bicu, who should be managed as a suspect of covid-19 following the instruction of infectious disease specialists. after the new inpatients stay in the ward for more than 14 days excluded the suspection, the patients can be collected together and put into the ordinary ward. public areas in the ward such as rehabilitation center, wound repair center and scar treatment center are only provided for patients who have been hospitalized for more than 14 days. new patients and emergency patients are treated in the ward accordingly and avoid any unnecessary prompt management.each staff needs to comply with strict hand hygiene to improve disinfection prevention. the ward is sterilized and ventilated with the circulating air sterilizer 3 times a day, more than 30 minutes for each time. the wards avoid central air conditioning due to safety reasons, use infrared burn treatment equipment for patients to keep warm and maintain good natural ventilation. 1000mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant or 75% alcohol are chosen for table disinfection, wipe or soak disinfection method is confirmed. the ground will use 1000mg/l chlorine-containing disinfectant to wipe or spray disinfection from the outside to indoor, not less than 30 minutes for each time. disinfection of public air should be done without people on sight, acid peroxide and hydrogen peroxide will be used for ultra-low capacity spray disinfection, and the disinfection frequency was also 3 times a day [5] [6] [7] .3.1 patient management 3.1.1 management of inpatients and caregivers for burns 3.1.1.1 education of epidemic prevention knowledge for burns each ward should to the new patients and their caregivers should be given basic education of epidemic prevention knowledge in each ward. it is required that no any visitors from outside can enter into the ward and the caregivers are not allowed to leave the ward. the food delivery system will deliver daily groceries and food to each individual. 3.1.1.2 management of the caregivers for burns only one caregiver in the ward is allowed to accompany each adult patient, two for pediatric patient. temperature and registration will be conducted to each caregiver. basically, caregivers are not allowed to go out of their rooms expect certain special conditions. in case that caregivers should go out from their rooms, the security and the nurses should be informed firstly and they should perform hand hygiene, face hygiene when they come back to their room. no visitors are allowed during the outbreak. our ward delivers fully consistent remote video for visitors to reduce the emotional impact and minimize the risk of potential infection within family members [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . 3.1.1.3 monitoring of vital signs of burn patients staff should monitor body temperature, respiratory rhythm, frequency and depth, and blood oxygen saturation of the patients and their caregivers. at the same time, the consciousness and systemic symptoms, such as systemic muscle pain, fatigue, loss of appetite, etc., should be observed and recorded. importantly, the respiratory symptoms including cough, sputum cough, chest tightness, dyspnea and cyanosis should be payed much attention to. for patients with assisted ventilation, parameters such as inspiratory pressure, expiratory pressure,oxygen concentration and others should be adjusted according to the doctor's advice.according to the national new diagnosis criteria treatment of infection scheme (version 5)of covid-19, the patient should be screened by clinical symptoms and epidemiological history. for the suspected or confirmed patients, the operations should be followed the consultation of infectious disease experts in time to prevent further possible transmission. for the suspected patients, it is recommend to accept lung ct scan and routine blood tests. if it is necessary, the confirmed patients should be transferred to the infection department as soon as possible.the outpatients are not encouraged to back the ward for only rehabilitation treatment, they can get consultation and instruction by using website, wechat app, even phone on line. in addition, each patient check-in online everyday and they can share his status and improvement of rehabilitation which reinforces the encouragement among patients. if the recovered patients need to readmit to the ward due to disease condition, they can be allowed to see their doctor and evaluated through outpatient appointment system with the related preventive measures. the staffs are recommended not to take public transportation as far as possible. everyone should monitor and report his health status day including fever, cough, shortness of breath and other abnormal conditions. if he has any symptoms or signs related with covid-19, he should report to the epidemic prevention and control team as soon as possible. meanwhile, personal contact history was reported based on epidemiological history. the staff with possible infection should be in home quarantine strictly, and consult or see the fever clinic as required. the staff in each ward should be assayed and record body temperatures twice a day with noncontact detector. meanwhile, the detail of the staff's transportation between his home and the ward should be recorded. according to the situation of patients in ward, flexible scheduling for the staffs should be implemented, which requires who should stay at home and who should work in the ward to reduce maximally the risk of transmission. all the personnel who went out of the city after january 23 will be quarantined at home for 14 days. those who contacted with persons from hu bei province since january 1 will be required home quarantine. meanwhile, each ward should strengthen the arrangements for emergency personnel, interns and trainees.in accordance with the national protection plan [3] , the layered protection method is adopted for medical personnel. the medical staff in the ordinary outpatient, emergency and ward of burns shall adopt primary protection. secondary and tertiary protection should be applied for the staffs who contact with the suspected or confirmed cases.researches demonstrated that endotracheal intubation, tracheotomy, mechanical ventilation and fiberoptic bronchoscopy increase the transmission risk of sars-cov and mers-cov [14] . according to the "medical institutions in suspected novel coronavirus infection prevention and control of provisional guidelines" announced by who, [15] , medical staffs who perform tracheal intubation, tracheostomy intubation, airway lavage, and bronchoscopy microscopic lavage operation need to act with double preventive standards which including hand hygiene, personal protective equipment use, respiratory health, precautionary needle stab wounds, the cleanness of medical supplies and medical waste treatment, etc. the suspected or confirmed cases of covid-19 should apply droplet isolation and contact isolation, moreover, air isolation is also necessary for medical operations producing aerosols.in the management of specimen collection, according to the doctor's advice and under the implementation of standard preventive measures, correct collection of patients' respiratory secretions, blood specimens, wound specimens, etc. each time the staff should work with the microbiology group for specimens collection, transferring and others.we recommend stopping the selective surgery of burns before covid-19 is excluded completely. only the necessary operation of the suspected or confirmed patients which may threat life or influence the prognosis significantly could be perform with the secondary and tertiary protection. or staff could not be allowed to enter the ward and can stay in the lobby to handover the patients before or after the operation.for the patients who need urgent surgery, the necessary check including blood routine test, lung ct scan and others should be done firstly. for the suspected or confirmed cases, ward should comply with strict emergency proposal to deal with the patient and be fully prepared in the perioperative period to prevent the transmission of the disease. infection specialists should be consulted for the treatment plan for the suspected or confirmed patients, if necessary they should be transferred to the infection department for further treatment [16] [17] [18] [19] .in case of the shortage of protection and disinfection supplies, it is necessary for each ward to establish a registration and management system for obtaining and using various protection and disinfection materials. the usage should be calculated in store room every day. the staffs require to use the supply effectively.the burn inpatients should be supply with high-calorie, high-protein, high -vitamin, digestible diet and be encouraged to drink adequate amounts of water each day. meanwhile, the patients are not allowed to order delivery food from outside unless the restaurant is authorized.patients isolated are prone to be fear, anxiety, anger, lonely with sleep disorders and other problems, especial the critical patients who can not be visited by family members with face to face in a certain period. therefore, it is necessary to correctly assess the psychological state and needs of patients. according to the patients' emotional reactions and behavioral changes, intervention measures such as psychological adjustment were given to the patients. medical staff also needs to supply the patients more emotional support and accurate information to reduce mental problems.on the other hand, supporting strategies should be set up for the quarantined medical staff. the isolated staff at home should be given greeting and concerning to help them mental health.summarily, it is important to have a regulation to manage the burn ward to prevent and control the transmission of covid-19. the strategies should include administrational management, environmental management, personnel management, and management of surgery, protective supplies, mental health and others. animal models are necessary in the development of all drugs and therapeutics to demonstrate efficacy and safety, as well as providing essential information on route of administration, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, and to identify key mechanisms driving pathology in vivo. the pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 , the disease manifestation of sars-cov-2 infection, has led to the rapid development of animal models of sars-cov-2 infection which have already provided insights into the natural history of the disease and, together with data from previous studies, have permitted identification of potential antiviral approaches identified in studies of other viral infections (alexander et al., 2020) .notably, at the time of writing (late april 2020) studies using animal models have already provided some evidence that immunity might confer protection from reinfection (bao et al., 2020a) , and that convalescent plasma might decrease viral burden . animal studies have also confirmed the susceptibility of domestic cats to infection , and have provided evidence of the importance of angiotensin i converting enzyme 2 (ace2) enabling infection (bao et al., 2020b) .these animal models are well suited for proof of concept studies into efficacy of potential vaccines or antivirals. however, each model system has its drawbacks, and at the time of writing (april 2020) , no reported animal model of sars-cov-2 infection fully recapitulates every key feature of severe covid-19 (table 1 & figure   1 ). this deficit in preclinical modelling is important as until vaccines are widely available, there is a particularly urgent need to identify potential treatments for this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. patients who already have established sars-cov-2 infection and who are at risk of progressing to severe covid-19 requiring hospitalisation and the need for respiratory support in a high dependency or intensive care unit. the ideal evidence from preclinical efficacy studies of potential therapeutic interventions to prevent or promote resolution of severe covid-19 in patients who are already symptomatic will be meaningful improvements in clinically relevant endpoints in models which deterministically progress to severe disease following infection with sars-cov-2.interventions should also be applied at realistic time points in these models ( figure   2 ). this ideal standard of evidence will of course have to be balanced with practical and ethical considerations.sars-cov-2 has zoonotic origins (andersen et al., 2020) , but several major factors complicate the study of this virus in model organisms. these include lack of infectivity of clinical isolates of sars-cov-2 in some model species including mice and dogs (bao et al., 2020b; shi et al., 2020) , and an absence of the persistent infection, immunopathology, severe acute respiratory distress syndrome and systemic complications which characterise covid-19 clinically. furthermore, sars-cov-2 predominately causes severe covid-19 in older people with comorbidities , presenting a construct validity problem with attempted use of young and immunologically naïve laboratory animals in covid-19 testing scientists developing animal models therefore face a challenging set of trade-offs as well as a sense of urgency. despite the pressing needs for treatments, design and implementation of preclinical studies for covid-19 should maintain quality to produce meaningful results, avoid needless duplicity, and avoid undue reduction in consideration of animal welfare issues (london and kimmelman, 2020) . here, we review the mechanisms involved in covid-19 development and reported approaches to model sars-cov-2 infection responses. we then identify key areas in which studies using animal models might improve recapitulation of important characteristics of human covid-19 to better help in the identification and assessment of new therapeutic interventions.new modelling approaches are needed to improve our understanding of sars-cov-2 and covid-19 because the virus has newly transitioned to infecting humans, and because aspects of the disease are different to previously described syndromes developing as a result of viral infections including sars. fortunately, clinical and preclinical data related to the covid-19 pandemic have been disseminated at a never-before-seen rate.sars-cov-2 is a positive-sense single-stranded rna coronavirus thought to be the descendant from a bat coronavirus which spilled over to infecting humans after infecting an intermediate host, potentially a pangolin (andersen et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020b) . the genome of sars-cov-2 is 79% homologous with that of sars-cov which caused severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreaks in 2003 (lu et al., 2020) . studies indicate that, as with sars-cov, the spike glycoprotein expressed by sars-cov-2 undergoes activating cleavage by host proteases on epithelial surfaces which permits high affinity interaction of spike with host epithelial this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.ace2 (bao et al., 2020b; hoffmann et al., 2020) . when it is bound by spike, cleavage of ace2 by further host proteases such as tmprss2 allows viral entry into host epithelial cells for viral replication (hoffmann et al., 2020) . damas et al., (2020) assessed ace2 polymorphism and similarity to human ace2 in 410 vertebrates, including 252 mammals. based on conservation of 25 amino acids that are essential for interaction between ace2 and sars-cov-2, a scoring system that predicts the likelihood of infectivity was devised. although experimental data would be required to substantiate the merit of this system, this study does provide a rationale for choice of animal species to study the infectivity, pathogenesis and treatment of covid 19 and suggested that species such as old world monkeys would be highly susceptible to infectivity, while most rodents are less likely to be infected.sars-cov-2 and sars-cov exhibit similar stability outside of the body (van doremalen et al., 2020) , but differ in their incubation and transmission kinetics.compared with sars-cov, sars-cov-2 appears to replicate more rapidly in the upper respiratory tract (zou et al., 2020) , where it achieves transmission in asymptomatic carriers , factors which likely contributed to the rapid global spread of covid-19.the reported clinical symptoms of covid-19 range from mild to critical . mild disease varies from no symptoms to mild pneumonia. severe disease is characterised by moderate to severe pneumonia. critical covid-19 involves diagnosis of ards, septic shock, and/or multi-organ failure (wu and mcgoogan, 2020) . risk factors including advanced age, male sex, obesity, diabetes and immunodeficiency predispose towards development of severe or critical covid-19.sars-cov-2 appears to be less likely to cause severe disease than sars-cov , a factor which likely also enabled greater spread of sars-cov-2 and may also present an additional challenge for development of animal models.pathology of covid-19 is centered around immunopathology with persistent lung infection leading to ards, and clinical progression follows a time course characteristic of a dysregulated viral immune response (gattinoni et al., 2020; tian et al., 2020; xu et al., 2020b) (figure 1 ). it is clear, however, that critical cases of covid-19 involve damage to other systems in the body which may both be a result of ards and may also be causative of greater lung injury. notably, covid-19 has been associated with a coagulopathy driven by inflammation and characterised by elevated fibrinogen and d-dimer levels indicating increased thrombin generation and fibrinolysis zhang et al., 2020a) . patients suffer from increased thrombotic risk against which standard prophylactic anticoagulants appear only partially effective (llitjos et al., 2020) , and there is evidence that platelets, autoantibodies and neutrophil extracellular traps may be involved in the pathogenesis (barnes et al., 2020; bikdeli et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020c; zuo et al., 2020) .the ards presentation within covid-19 is heterogenous, and may involve both gas exchange and perfusion abnormalities (pulmonary dead space) to extents that differ between patients (gattinoni et al., 2020) . additionally, hyperactivation of inflammatory responses can result in a cytokine storm which may kill via exacerbation of multi-organ failure and lung inflammation or myositis (blanco-melo et al., 2020; sarzi-puttini et al., 2020) . recapitulation of these key processes driving severe pathology and mortality in covid-19 will validate animal models for severe covid-19 research.non-human primates are close in phylogeny to humans which makes them particularly important for use in vaccine development. at the time of writing, nonhuman primate models of sars-cov-2 infection have been reported using rhesus macaques (bao et al., 2020a; munster et al., 2020; yu et al., 2020) , and cynomolgus macaques (rockx et al., 2020) . for studies of sars-cov, african green monkeys, common marmosets, squirrel monkeys and moustached tamarins have also been used (gong and bao, 2018) . although non-human primate models can resemble human systems more closely than models which use more phylogenetically distant animals, it is important to note that these studies frequently use limited numbers of animals in their experiments (as low as 1 or 2 animals per group) and so their results should be interpreted with due caution (curtis et al., 2018) . investigators using these intelligent animals do however have limited numbers of non-human primates available for terminal proof of concept pathology studies, especially as many of these animals will soon be needed for vaccine tests, and so experimental designers are forced to make trade-offs between group sizes in early pathology studies versus those in later preclinical trials of therapeutics.the most convincing demonstration of an animal model of covid-19 has been reported by munster et al., (2020) . rhesus macaques were inoculated intranasally, intratracheally, by mouth and onto both eyes. pulmonary infiltrates were observed radiologically and oedema was measured gravimetrically, although superficial inspection found lesions to be focal and sporadic. alveolar flooding with the presence of hyaline membranes, which are rarely seen in other animal models of ards (matute-bello et al., 2011) , were observed in lung histology. this was accompanied by an irregular breathing pattern and increased respiratory rate in some animals suggestive of hypoxemia, although this readout may also be a marker of pain or distress. together these results suggest some degree of ards development. however, gas exchange impairment was not measured, and serum cytokine analysis detected no consistent evidence of systemic inflammation.as age is a major risk factor for severe covid-19, the response of aged rhesus macaques (~15 years old) to intratracheal inoculation with sars-cov-2 has also been compared with that of younger controls (3-5 years old) . this report suggests that there are age-related increases in viral load 7 days after inoculation. radiology and histology were indicative of mild interstitial infiltrates in younger animals with signs of more severe oedema including alveolar flooding in aged macaques. although preliminary and largely qualitative, this study suggests that aged macaque models may be useful for modelling more severe disease.rhesus macaques have also been used to test whether seroconversion provides protective immunity against sars-cov-2. in one reported study, two animals were inoculated intratracheally with sars-cov-2 and then challenged again 28 days later (bao et al., 2020a) . lack of viral shedding after re-challenge in both macaques suggested development of protective immunity. this study should not be overinterpreted, however, as other studies suggests low, or even undetectable, titres of neutralizing antibodies in previously infected patients , and the korean centre for disease control has reported reinfection of patients with previous covid-19. limited signs of lung inflammation and pneumonia were also demonstrated in this macaque study. rockx et al., (rockx et al., 2020) ferrets are useful in both studies of viral transmission and the pharmacology of the most frequently reported symptom of sars-cov-2 infection as, unlike mice and rats, they exhibit a cough reflex. there are also ferret models used to study cystic fibrosis (sun et al., 2010) . ferret studies also have potential veterinary and zoonotic relevance as an outbreak of sars-cov-2 infections with respiratory symptoms has this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. been reported in minks, related to ferrets within the mustilidae family, in two farms in the netherlands (dutch parliament report, 2020).following inoculation with sars-cov-2, ferrets have been shown to develop symptoms similar to those described in human covid-19, namely elevated body temperature suggestive of pyresis, reduced activity and appetite, and coughing between 2 and 12 days post infection (kim et al., 2020; shi et al., 2020) .histologically, sars-cov-2 infected ferret lungs have exhibited severe pulmonary lymphoplasmacytic perivasculitis and vasculitis at 13 days post infection .transmission of sars-cov-2 was studied by placing naïve ferrets in direct or indirect contact with inoculated ferrets (kim et al., 2020) . it was observed that all naïve ferrets placed in direct contact with infected ferrets displayed symptoms of infections (elevations in body temperature and reduced activity) 2-6 days post infection. however, ferrets placed in indirect contact with inoculated animals through separation with a partition that allowed air to move between enclosures did not show any symptoms, although some tested positive for viral rna indicative of airborne transmission. lung histology of inoculated ferrets in this study only showed mild signs of inflammation at 4 days post infection.measurements of upper respiratory tract gene transcripts from nasal washes (blanco-melo et al., 2020) . these studies showed a lower magnitude of upper airway immune responses relative to influenza a infection and the induction of a unique sars-cov-2 gene signature ontologically enriched for cell death and leukocyte activation-associated transcripts. tracheal cell analysis also showed that sars-cov-2-unique transcripts were also associated with hematopoietic progenitors, suggestive of extramedullary hematopoiesis at the infection site.however, importantly, this study did not report any lower respiratory or systemic pathological findings, and the lack of demonstrated pulmonary replication and edema in ferret sars-cov-2 infection models suggests a major limitation of ferrets in the study of lung pathology.although cats are not widely used to study respiratory diseases, the close association of humans and domestic cats means that investigation into sars-cov-2 infection and transmission in cats is important, although the relationship of domestic cats with humans in turn complicates their use as laboratory animals. it is notable here that domestic cats, as well as zoo-housed tigers which are also in the felidae family, have reportedly tested positive in the usa suggesting veterinary and zoonotic importance of feline sars-cov-2 studies (center for disease control report, 2020).to study transmission of sars-cov-2 two pairs (one inoculated and one naïve in each pair) of sub adult (aged 6-9 months) and 3 pairs of juvenile cats (aged 10-14 weeks) were housed together, with fecal samples analysed for the presence of viral rna to confirm successful infection. in both the sub-adult and juvenile cats only one out of the three naïve cats had viral rna detected in the fecal samples, suggestive of some transmission, albeit more limited than in ferrets. it is notable here that the researchers were unable to perform nasal washes on the sub-adult cats due to the aggression of the cats.also notable was the reported death of one of the inoculated juvenile cats at 3 days post infection during this study, suggestive of the provocation of severe disease in a young animal. lung histology on autopsy showed pronounced alveolar flooding, suggesting pulmonary oedema development. further study of whether severe disease can be reproduced in cats may be useful for severe covid-19 efficacy testing or for veterinary medicine development.hamsters have been used for a range of medical research studies, and importantly show a relatively high degree of homology with humans within the region of ace2 implicated in interaction with the ace2-binding domain of sars-cov-2 spike . chan et al., (2020) inoculated golden syrian hamsters intranasally with sars-cov-2. viral replication occurred in the lungs of infected hamsters, and lungs also developed marked lesions of pulmonary edema, inflammation and cell death as assessed histologically. inoculated hamsters lost weight, showed an increased respiratory rate, and could infect co-housed hamsters suggesting utility as a model for studying transmission. the infected co-housed hamsters showed similar signs of lung pathology but did not lose weight, suggesting that inoculated hamsters had greater severity due to a higher amount of virus delivered to lungs.inflammation was also measured in this study using quantitative pcr on lung samples, demonstrating an early interferon response and an elevation of il-6.together these data suggest that hamsters might be highly useful in modelling mechanisms of covid-19. however, inflammation and lung pathology resolved by 14 days post infection, suggesting that the hamster responses were reflective of a resolving inflammation and successful host defence as opposed to the dysregulated responses that are associated with severe covid-19.mice are widely used in studies of immunology and lung injury and have a highly characterized immune system, rapid breeding cycle, and can be used with a range of readily available research tools. importantly, the size and rapid breeding and growth of mice is useful for accelerating the completion of studies with group numbers high enough for statistical testing of efficacy of potential interventions.however, the spike proteins of sars-cov-2, and of its relative, sars-cov, are thought to have insufficient affinity for the murine ace2 entry receptor for infection of mice (wan et al., 2020) . clinical isolates of sars-cov have therefore been adapted by serial passage in the respiratory tract of mice to produce related viruses (ma15 and v2163) that can cause lung injury and mortality in wild-type mice (roberts et al., 2007; day et al., 2009) , with pathological exacerbation reported in aged or immunodeficient mice (graham 2012).at the time of writing there are no reports of mouse-adapted sars-cov-2, and it is not known whether naturally occurring mutations in the sars-cov-2 spike ace2binding domain found in clinical isolates have altered pathogenicity in mice (ou et al., 2020) . mouse adaptation of sars-cov-2 would be useful for the acceleration of mouse testing, but may prove difficult as sars-cov-2 spike appears to have evolved high affinity for human ace2 at the expense of lower affinity for ace2 in other organisms (wan et al., 2020) . initial studies published as preprints show that sars-cov-2 can also infect k18-hace2 mice in a transgene-dependent manner (bao et al., 2020b) . in these mice inoculation with sars-cov-2 at 10 5 tcid50 caused weight loss, antibody responses and both superficial and histological evidence of lung inflammation in a k18-hace2 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.transgene-dependent manner, although lung injury was limited and not quantified (bao 2020) . in contrast to previous sars-cov experiments, however, no mortality was reported with sars-cov-2 infection in k18-hace2 mice, perhaps related to the lower virulence of sars-cov-2 observed in humans, although only one dose of virus was studied. further adaptations of the experimental approach to infecting transgenic mice may be required to study lethal lung injury resulting from sars-cov-2 infection.another issue for future studies is whether the tissue distribution and surface expression levels of hace2 in k18-hace2 mice faithful recapitulate those in humans, as murine ace2 expression appears to be highly localised to bronchial epithelium in mice (sodhi et al., 2019; sun et al., 2020) , with ace2 perhaps more generally distributed in human lungs (hamming et al., 2004) , and with transgenic hace2 expression mouse lungs (bao et al., 2020b) . there are also species differences in distribution of ace2 expression outside the lungs which may have implications for systemic responses to sars-cov-2 infection. additionally, ace2 downregulation may play a role in disease progression (kuba et al., 2005) , and k18-hace2 have both human and non-spike reactive murine ace2 and so may be resistant to ace2 downregulation related complications. the targeted insertion of human ace2 into the endogenous mouse locus may therefore be useful in better modelling severe covid-19.sars-cov-2 likely originated from a coronavirus infecting bats (andersen et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020b) . although bats are not commonly used as model organisms they are of particular research interest because (a) they appear to be the originating species of many particularly deadly zoonotic viruses, and (b) their immune systems have evolved to tolerate persistent infections with viruses with higher virulence in other species, which possibly accelerates viral evolution (brook et al., 2020; rabi et al., 2020) . it is also notable that sars-cov-2 isolates have shown infectivity in rabbit and pig cells in vitro (chu et al., 2020) . although in vitro tropism does not always mean infection can occur in vivo, these model organisms may be useful for studies related to covid-19, as rabbits are well suited for longitudinal lung function studies and the organ systems of pigs more closely resemble the scale of those in humans which is useful for studies involving haemodynamic measurements.the route or method used for viral inoculation can affect the severity of viral disease models and a range of inoculation routes have been used in reported animal studies (table 1) . intranasal delivery has been widely used as this delivery method is simple, some inoculum can be aspirated into airways, and because the intranasal route is potentially reflective of the real-world route of entry for viral droplets. however, this method can lead to limited and focal delivery of inoculum to lungs (su et al., 2004) , and viral diseases affecting the lower respiratory tract such as covid-19 may result from inhalation of aerosols which can enter deeper into the lungs, or from widespread deposition of virus in lungs due to high upper respiratory tract viral load and mucociliary escalator disruption.aerosolised delivery of viral inoculum may therefore be useful in the induction of widespread lung injury which might be sufficient to provoke severe disease, as well as in the standardisation of the dose of inoculum that reaches the lower airways and respiratory lungs. evidence that aerosolized delivery can provoke injury resembling severe ards with elevated cytokine release has been produced in cynomolgus macaque models of h5n1 influenza (wonderlich et al., 2017) . there have also been recent developments in the quantitative delivery of aerosols and powders to lungs of laboratory animals (lexmond et al., 2018) . aerosolized or intratracheal administration approaches for controlled delivery of inoculum may be worthy of consideration in animal models for more severe covid-19.histological analysis, superficial visual inspection and radiological imaging have been the predominate approaches used to assess the development of lung inflammation and injury following experimental sars-cov-2 infection. however, these pathological observations have so far often been reported in only some animals under study, and only some regions of the lungs of those animals (table   1 ). this is likely due to probabilistic provocation of injury and primary focus of where pulmonary oedema was measured consistently in infected animals using the index of lung weight as a percentage of body weight (munster et al., 2020) . this simple method may prove to be a useful terminal approach for lung injury this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. assessment that is feasible in in most studies within constraints of bsl3 conditions and later requirement for lung homogenate for viral load readouts.personnel time, the personal protective equipment requirements in biosafety level (bsl) 3 laboratories and both the size of animals and consideration of their welfare can limit measurements that are feasible in sars-cov-2 infection studies.however, serial measurements of blood oxygen saturation, or arterial blood gases would be highly valuable in definition of the time course of impairment of gas exchange, if this occurs in animal models. it is notable here that, in covid-19 patients, decreased arterial oxygen saturation has been reported prior to the dyspnoea and dramatically decreased saturation which leads to hospitalization and pao2/fio2 can fluctuate during the course of clinical covid-19 progression and so, as in the clinical setting, serial close monitoring of oxygen saturation is ideal (cascella et al., 2020) . these points are reminders that some degree of hypoxemia and pneumonia is indicative of some disease, but not conclusive evidence of progression to severe covid-19-like ards.where possible, serial noninvasive imaging approaches as reported in some macaque studies (table 1) , are also useful for tracking the time course of pulmonary oedema development. it is notable that some patients with covid-19 ards have more limited oedema with severe hypoxemia (gattinoni et al., 2020) , and so additional measurements of lung perfusion (pulmonary dead space fraction or ventilation perfusion scans) in animals may also be useful for better understanding of this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. covid-19 as disease sub-phenotypes may be also be present within animal models (carla et al., 2020) .planning of terminal measurements should involve consideration of how the maximum number of high-value measurements can be made. if inoculations can affect the lungs widely and relatively evenly this can involve the use of different lobes for different potentially confounding measurements. for example, bronchoalveolar lavage is useful for simultaneously measurements of viruses, inflammatory cells, inflammatory mediators, and protein deposits in the bronchoalveolar spaces, but causes artifacts in histological analysis and prevents later measurement of pulmonary oedema. likewise, formalin inflation is useful for histological analysis which can be performed outside of bsl3 conditions, but prevents the most direct and quantitative methods of measurement of viral load in lungs and pulmonary oedema. lobes of lungs can therefore be sequentially tied off and sampled to permit functional and histological measurements related to ards as well as viral load in lungs. experimental designs will of course require appropriate trade-offs between study complexity and welfare and safety of animals and laboratory workers.the serious and potentially lethal nature of covid-19 means that bsl3 laboratories are required for experiments using sars-cov-2. however, insights into mechanisms driving covid-19 may still be derived from non-infectious models.one example directly related to sars-cov-2 is the effects of absence of ace2 function on enhancement of the pulmonary edema response, which were established using a mouse acid inhalation model which to provoke rapid and severe pulmonary edema (kuba et al., 2005) . this finding has led to ongoing trials to assess whether administration of recombinant ace2 may address infection-related deficiencies in lung barrier protective ace2-derived angiotensin ii generation in addition to potential action as a decoy preventing viral entry into cells.some urgently needed studies of putative therapeutic agents for covid-19, particularly those targeting host responses, may therefore be possible or supportive using other lung injury models with higher throughput. influenza viruses have been adapted to infect mouse cells and can be used for viral induced, lethal lung injury experiments in mice in more widely available bsl2 laboratories where the mechanisms under study might feasibly be shared in sars-cov-2 responses. however, immune responses to coronaviruses and influenza are not the same, as for example knockout of complement component 3 in mice is detrimental in influenza h1n1 and h5n1 infection models (o'brien et al., 2011) , but beneficial in sars-cov infection models (gralinski et al., 2018) . viral pseudotypes expressing sars-cov-2 spike may also be useful for in vivo non-bsl3 studies of antiviral efficacy (hoffmann et al., 2020) , although these will not model the evasion mechanisms and immunopathology unique to sars-cov-2 or related coronaviruses.there are many other models used for the study of ards in mice and other model organisms closer phylogenetically and anatomically to humans (matute-bello et al., 2008 aeffner et al., 2015) . of these, lung injury caused by instillations of bacteria or endotoxins, ventilation, and antibodies may be particularly relevant to covid-19 complicated by secondary infections, barotrauma and antibody reactions and associated dysregulated responses. additionally, there may be central mechanisms of ards progression and resolution meaning that non-viral models may have utility for rapid proof-of-concept studies outside of bsl3 conditions, although it is likely that in many cases efficacy studies with sars-cov-2 infection will also be needed.known risk factors for severe covid-19 offer opportunities to drive models towards pathological states (figure 1 ). advanced age, obesity and diabetes are additional risk factors associated with high case-fatality rates covid-19 (onder et al., 2020; petrilli et al., 2020) . these features may predispose towards severe disease through complicating medical treatment, by hypoventilation as a result of low cardiorespiratory fitness, and through dysregulated immunity with imbalance of inflammation and repair mechanisms, as well as a propensity for underlying cardiovascular disease and changes to haemostasis that will influence progression of respiratory infection towards ards (tzoran et al., 2018; sattar et al., 2020) .use of aged animals might allow for modelling of the age risk factor. it is encouraging in this light that early development of pre-clinical models of covid-19includes the influence of age in rhesus macaques. infection with sars-cov-2 reportedly led to heightened lung pathology and viral replication in older macaques (15 years old) compared to younger animals (5 years old) .additionally, aged mice have previously demonstrated exacerbated inflammation and lung injury following sars-cov infection (rockx et al., 2009) .animal models which require ageing over years may not permit the rapid testing of treatments which is required for the covid-19 pandemic. models incorporating other risk factors such as induced obesity (e.g. high fat diet-induced), diabetes (e.g. leptin receptor deficiency (paul et al., 2007) ) or impaired immune responses (e.g. stat1 knockout/inhibition (frieman et al., 2010) ) might be made available more quickly. additionally, covid-19 may progress to severe disease status as a result of immune priming, secondary infections or intravascular sequelae, and so combining sars-cov-2 infection models with a first or second hit such as immune priming with lps, or additional challenges such as the non-bsl3 approaches to cause lung injury described above (i.e. inoculation with pathogenic bacteria or injections of injurious antibodies), might be capable of driving host responses towards a pathological state.as discussed above, severe covid-19 is also associated with low blood platelet counts and thrombosis, a consumptive coagulopathy, and a hyperinflammatory state involving platelet activation, release of nets and prolonged systemic elevations of cytokines such as il-6 and cxcl10. these pathological features associated with severe disease have not yet been demonstrated in animal models (table 1 ).the degree of thrombocytopaenia has been reported as a potential biomarker for severe covid-19 (lippi et al., 2020) . a large retrospective study revealed the degree of thrombocytopaenia to be dynamic after presentation to clinic, with decreasing platelet numbers being predictive of mortality later on .furthermore, a shift in platelet-lymphocyte ratio may indicate the occurrence of an acute inflammatory or thrombotic event and therefore have prognostic value (qu et al., 2020) . thus, thrombocytopaenia may reflect 1. alteration in thrombopoiesis due to the bone marrow, or lungs (and potentially spleen) being inflamed/receiving inflammatory and trauma-related thrombopoietic cues; 2. localized lung recruitment of platelets as a facet of their role in the immune response or alveolar coagulation;3. disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) throughout the body (xu et al., 2020a) ; or 4. platelet-viral interaction, although this remains hypothetical as an engagement of platelets with sars-cov-2 has not been described (amgalan & othman 2020) . evidence from other disease states with features of covid-19 pathology indicate potential causative roles of platelets in the worsening of the disease, which might therefore provide opportunities for adaption of more severe mechanistic models of severe covid-19. reports on animal studies published to date have not included measurements of these pathological responses, but their detection would be useful further evidence for successful modelling of mechanisms of severe disease.results of studies in mice modelling influenza agree on the necessity for platelets in the immune response and inflammation, but conflict as to whether this is beneficial (guo et al., 2017; campbell et al., 2019) , or detrimental (boilard et al., 2014; lê et al., 2015) . additionally, platelets have been shown to respond to influenza virus to increase complement availability and encourage the release of nets into blood, and so platelets may be important integrators linking viral infection to neutrophil responses that are associated with coagulopathy and venous thrombosis (koupenova et al., 2019) . furthermore, platelets have a complex relationship with lung inflammation in that they can be both protective of the alveolar capillary-barrier or can promote excessive vascular leak (weyrich and zimmerman, 2013; middleton et al., 2018) .given the importance of platelets in coagulopathies (dic, and alveolar thrombi), the innate immune response and hyperinflammation, their influence on the patency of the alveolar-capillary unit, and the association of low blood platelet counts with severe disease; the manipulation of platelets might be a useful experimental tool to reciprocate these pathological events in animal models of sars-cov-2 infection.our previous findings that experimental thrombocytopenia can convert a mild selfresolving bacterial lung infection to a more severe form of systemic infection, with extra-pulmonary organ involvement and death (amison et al., 2018) suggest that, the induction of severe experimental thrombocytopenia (>95% depletion) in animal models of sars-cov-2 may allow these infection models to demonstrate the progression from a mild to severe disease phenotype. additionally, pulmonary platelet retention can be induced by intravenous injections with anti-mhc class i antibodies which are also associated with thrombocytopenia and release of nets (looney et al., 2009; caudrillier et al., 2012) . use of these antibodies combined with infection models might be useful in modelling the contributions of platelets and nets to severe covid-19 associated with lung hypoperfusion, release of nets, and autoantibody production (zhang et al., 2020c) . the involvement of fcγriia in viral platelet responses suggests that transgenic expression of human fcγriia on platelets may be useful in driving greater platelet responses in murine sars-cov-2 infection models as mice lack activating fcγ receptors on platelets (boilard et al., 2014) . treatment with heparin or low molecular weight heparin has been associated with reduced mortality in clinical studies of covid-19 yin et al., 2020) , and nebulised delivery of heparin is associated with a reduced requirement for ventilation in patients hospitalised by other respiratory diseases such as severe copd (dixon et al., 2010; shute et al., 2018; ashoor et al., 2020) . although heparin is classically used as an anticoagulant, it has also been demonstrated to bind and reduce the activity of a range of cytokines implicated in the covid-19-associated cytokine storm (mulloy et al., 2015) , and also interacts with the sars-cov-2 spike protein in a manner which causes structural alteration of the ace2-binding domain which is likely to reduce viral entry (mycroft-west et al., 2020) . the potentially useful polypharmacy of heparin underlines the need for integrated in vivo sars-cov-2 infection models incorporating simultaneous and clinically relevant measurements of coagulation, cytokines and viral load.in addition to platelet number, the severity of covid-19 disease progression also correlates closely with levels of the pro-inflammatory mediators such as cxcl10 (interferon-inducible protein 10) and tnfalpha, both associated with the pathology and progression associated with hyperinflammatory condition associated with ards (tang et al., 2005 , bautista et al., 2013 yang et al., 2020) . the amelioration of lps induced ards following cxcl10 neutralisation in rats, and the proposition of anti-tnfalpha therapy in covid-19 patients, therefore highlights the potential for combining sars-cov-2 infections with tnfalpha and cxcl10 challenge as a further method in the development of models with a more severe phenotype. (lang et al., 2017; feldman et al., 2020) . this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.persistence of infection and inflammation due to ineffective viral clearance is a key feature of severe covid-19, although maintenance of infection and systemic cytokine release has not yet been reported in animal models of sars-cov-2 infection. a potential approach to model this feature of severe disease is the experimental disruption of important antiviral host defence pathways. a key mediator of defensive signalling might be the transcription factor stat1, the genetic deletion of which can convert a mild sars-cov mouse infection model into one resulting in 100% mortality (frieman et al., 2010) . pharmacologic inhibitors of stat1 are available (miklossy et al., 2013) , and may be useful in the rapid development of animal models with deficiencies in protective antiviral responses without the requirement for multigenerational crosses or ageing out of laboratory animals.dysregulated immune responses by myeloid leukocytes may also be important in pathogenesis of severe disease (barnes et al., 2020) . although the impact of covid-19 on cystic fibrosis patients is still unclear (colombo et al., 2020) , mouse models of cystic fibrosis mutations involve heightened platelet activation and a hyperinflammatory state with increased neutrophil responses, so these models might be useful in driving increased severity of pathology (ortiz-muñoz et al., 2020) .efficacy studies using animal models of many disease processes have been criticised for over-use of the prophylactic application of interventions (i.e pretreatment) when such approaches would not be realistic for clinical treatments (denayer et al., 2014) . severe covid-19 has a characteristic time course which suggests that there are several windows where different treatment approaches might be useful (figure 2 ).users of animal models for covid-19 research should wherever possible assess the time course of readouts in their models and consider the type of therapeutic being assessed, the potential of risk to patients from any anticipated adverse effects, and whether the intervention will likely need to take place in a hospital setting. for example, as viral replication increases likelihood of transmission and persistent infection mediates severe disease, antivirals with low toxicity might be useful for all diagnosed cases and perhaps even prophylactically in high-risk populations. some interventions such as nebulised heparin may be of benefit as anti-viral agents (mycroft-west et al, 2020) and in reducing the inflammatory response (dixon et al, 2010; mulloy et al, 2015) and there may need to be dosed at different time points across the development of covid-19. once severe disease develops, interventions which are aimed at resolving ards and systemic complications would be useful, and robust preclinical testing might require models which include aspects of intensive care support such as invasive ventilation (alexander et al., 2020) . careful model characterization will be required to identify analogous phases of pathology development in animal models for appropriate timing of interventions under study.animal models have been rapidly mobilised to address the need for greater understanding of covid-19 and for testing of new therapeutic approaches for this pandemic. while useful observations have already been shared, it is important that animal studies are adapted to measure and report key readouts that are relevant to clinical covid-19 such as evidence of lung injury resembling ards, physiological gas exchange impairment, hyperinflammation, platelet responses and coagulopathy.study designs may need to incorporate additional risk factors or disease triggers to shift from modelling protective and self-resolving infection and inflammation to recapitulating severe disease with ards and multi-organ failure ( table 3 ).development of models that reproduce these hallmarks of disease will permit better understanding of covid-19 pathogenesis and facilitate improved efficacy testing of desperately needed drugs and therapeutics. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. 10 6 tcid50 (i.t.) 10 5 pfu (i.n.) 10 5 pfu (i.n.) 10 5.5 tcid50 (i.n.) 10 5 pfu (i.n.) 10 5 pfu (i.n.) 10 5 tcid50 (i.n.)yes ( the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) pandemic, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), began in wuhan, china, in december 2019. 1 on january 21, 2020, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) announced the first case of the virus in the united states had been detected in a man with recent travel from wuhan. 2 the world health organization declared the outbreak a pandemic on march 11, 2020. since that time, the number of cases worldwide continues to increase exponentially, including in the united states, with the number of cases in the united states now surpassing all other countries worldwide. no treatment or vaccination is currently approved for sars-cov-2. it is recommended to implement quarantine, social distancing, and infection control measures to prevent disease spread and to provide supportive care for those who become ill. 3 with the number of critically ill patients overwhelming hospitals in cities across the nation, clinicians are looking to investigational antiviral agents for possible added benefit over supportive care alone. ongoing clinical trials of investigational treatments for sars-cov-2 will likely not conflict of interest: the authors have declared no conflicts of interest for this article.*address for correspondence: julie j. belfer, department of pharmacy services, mercy health saint mary's, 200 jefferson se, grand rapids, mi 49503; e-mail: julie.j.belfer@mercyhealth.com. ó 2020 pharmacotherapy publications, inc. c a s e r e p o r t be completed until after the peak of this pandemic in many countries. remdesivir (gilead sciences, inc, foster city, ca, u.s.) is an investigational antiviral that displays potent in vitro activity against sars-cov-2. 4 it has shown promise in preclinical models as well as in case series, with clinical trials ongoing in multiple countries including the united states. 4, 5 because remdesivir is not approved by the food and drug administration (fda), this medication may only be obtained through participation in registered clinical trials or via a request to the manufacturer. unfortunately, the overwhelming number of requests for remdesivir put a significant strain on the manufacturer's drug supply, and on march 22, 2020, the company halted their individual compassionate use program for most patient populations. they did, however, commit to fulfilling drug delivery for patients who had already been approved for compassionate use remdesivir. 6 this, coupled with delays in testing across the country, may result in significant delays in starting antiviral therapy following symptom onset. for other viral illnesses, such as influenza, the efficacy of antiviral administration was shown to be most effective when administered within 48 hours after symptom onset. 7 it is unknown whether remdesivir's antiviral activity would have a similar temporal relationship. we present the case and outcomes of a critically ill patient who tested positive for sars-cov-2 and met criteria for remdesivir compassionate use that was administered after symptoms had persisted for nearly 2 weeks due to a significant supply shortage and delay in delivery from the manufacturer.a 40-year-old-man presented to his ambulatory provider for a covid-19 screening with a 2-day history of dry cough, shortness of breath, and subjective fever. in accordance with cdc recommendations and state and local health officials, the patient was considered low risk and did not meet criteria to be a person under investigation or for covid-19 testing at that time. on day 3 of illness, he had a telemedicine covid-19 screening due to worsening symptoms and new-onset vomiting. at this time, he was advised to report to a designated covid-19 testing center. there he was tested for covid-19 via nasopharyngeal swab with a real-time reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) assay (advanced technology laboratories). he was advised to quarantine for 14 days and await test results. during this visit, both a rapid streptococcus antigen test (bbl streptocard acid latex test; becton dickinson and company, franklin lakes, nj, u.s.) and respiratory pathogen panel by multiplex pcr (biofire; biomerieux, lombard, il, u.s.) panel were negative.on day 5 of illness, he presented to the emergency department (ed) with worsening body aches and inability to tolerate oral intake. the covid-19 pcr from his day 3 visit was still pending. the patient's past medical history was significant for anxiety and depression, obesity (body mass index 30.8 kg/m 2 ), and hypercholesterolemia. his smoking history included a 5-year history of vaping with nicotine. physical examination revealed a body temperature of 38.1°c, blood pressure of 147/93 mm hg, pulse of 100 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 93% on room air. lungs were found to be clear to auscultation, respirations were nonlabored, and chest radiography was performed that reported areas of faint hazy opacity in the lateral left midlung and the upper right lung field, possibly related to atelectasis or infiltrate ( figure 1 ). after improvement following supportive care, he was discharged with a diagnosis of likely covid-19 and was advised to return to the ed if he had worsening symptoms. later that same day, the patient returned. physical examination revealed body temperature of 38.5°c, blood pressure of 135/74 mm hg, pulse of 122 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 87% on room air. the remainder of the examination was unremarkable. influenza a/b pcr (cepheid) was negative. at this time, the patient was admitted to the hospital for suspected covid-19 and further observation.by day 6 of illness (hospital day 2), he was requiring 6 l of oxygen by nasal cannula with increased shortness of breath and tachypnea with his respiratory rate 25-28 breaths per minute. he was placed on 15 l of oxygen by nonrebreather mask with improvement to oxygen saturation of 95%. the intensive care team was alerted and advised to switch the patient back to 6 l of oxygen by nasal cannula non-rebreather to prevent further viral aerosolization. an hour later he was urgently intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit. a chest radiograph revealed diffuse patchy infiltrate bilaterally. a chest computed tomography without contrast revealed extensive ground glass/mosaic attenuation and consolidation opacification throughout 2 pharmacotherapy volume **, number **, 2020 bilateral lung fields, highly concerning for changes secondary to viral pneumonia (figure 2) . he was initiated in an assist control mode of ventilation requiring fraction of inspired oxygen (fio 2 ) of 60% with positive end-expiratory pressure (peep) 14 cm h 2 o. the infectious diseases (id) consultation team initiated hydroxychloroquine 400 mg enterally twice/day for 1 day followed by 200 mg enterally twice/day for 4 days. additionally, cefepime 2 g intravenously (iv) every 8 hours and azithromycin 500 mg iv every 24 hours were recommended for possible superimposed bacterial pneumonia. a sputum culture was ordered as well as legionella urine antigen testing. later that evening his covid-19 test was confirmed as positive. because of his acute hypoxic respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation and likely progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), the use of investigational remdesivir was discussed among the id team, clinical pharmacist, and the patient's family. following signed consent by the patient's family for treatment, the id physician contacted gilead via e-mail to initiate the individual compassionate use process, and approval was received early the following morning (figures 3 and 4) . on day 7 of illness (hospital day 3), the patient's oxygen requirements increased to an fio 2 of 70% and a peep of 14 cm h 2 o. furosemide as needed was initiated to maintain an even or slightly negative fluid balance. he intermittently required fio 2 to be titrated up to 95% and peep 16 cm h 2 0. the fda was notified via phone of gilead's approval for compassionate use by the id physician, and the request was made for an emergency investigational new drug (eind). the institution's investigational review board was also notified for approval. the id physician and clinical pharmacist were granted access to the medidata system to input the patient's baseline testing and laboratory data. later in the day, the eind was received from the fda approving the use of remdesivir. pharmacotherapy volume **, number **, 2020on day 8 of illness (hospital day 4), ards treatment was initiated with prone positioning, neuromuscular blockade, and aggressive diuresis to achieve a fluid negative balance. with maximum ventilator support achieved, there was a discussion about extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) with a nearby hospital with capabilities. later that afternoon, however, he tolerated a downward titration to fio 2 of 35% with peep 16 cm h 2 o, and methylprednisolone 100 mg iv/day was added. the fda eind, fda form 3926, patient consent form, and prescriber curriculum vitae and medical license information were e-mailed to gilead. following the receipt of these documents, the final steps in the process were awaiting the manufacturer to send a formal prescriber agreement for signature, shipping instructions, as well as the medication administration and handling instructions.during the next 48 hours, mechanical ventilator settings were stable although unable to be weaned down significantly. he had been afebrile for 24 hours, and sputum culture was reported complete with normal respiratory flora; therefore, the cefepime and azithromycin were discontinued. hydroxychloroquine was also discontinued due to upward trending alanine aminotransferase (alt) and aspartate aminotransferase (ast). at this time, the id team was still awaiting the prescriber agreement paperwork and shipping instructions from gilead that were delayed due to drug supply issues and cessation of the compassionate use program.on day 11 of illness (hospital day 7), the id physician received the prescriber agreement from gilead. this was returned via e-mail, and a letter of authorization was then sent from gilead to the fda to accompany the patient-specific eind. additionally, reference materials including the investigator brochure, template protocol, and pharmacy manual were received from the manufacturer. throughout this period, the patient continued to require aggressive mechanical ventilator support. the id pharmacist was contacted by gilead with shipping instructions indicating medication delivery would occur within 24 hours. at this time, the medication and administration and handling instructions were built in the electronic medical record system to expedite drug compounding and delivery once the product arrived.on day 13 of illness (hospital day 9), remdesivir arrived and a 200 mg iv loading dose was administered to the patient. this was followed by orders for a remdesivir 100 mg iv maintenance dose every 24 hours for the next 9 days. during the following 48 hours, the patient continued to progress, he was able to tolerate aggressive mechanical ventilation weaning, and his alt and ast were downtrending. on day 16 of illness (hospital day 12), he was extubated without incident. his oxygen saturations remained stable requiring 2-3 l of oxygen by nasal cannula and were able to maintain his oxygenation saturation on room air by day 17 of illness (hospital day 13). the patient continues to be in stable condition on room air and is progressing toward discharge.remdesivir, also known as gs-5734, is a novel antiviral nucleotide prodrug created by gilead sciences for the treatment of the ebola virus outbreak in 2016. 8 although it did not demonstrate efficacy in human clinical trials for this disease, it has shown efficacy against coronaviruses including sars-cov-1 and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus. [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] because of this, remdesivir has garnered significant attention for its potential use as a treatment option for sars-cov-2. as an adenosine analog, remdesivir was shown to incorporate into growing viral rna chains, resulting in premature termination and a decrease in viral rna production. 4 due to a 96% structural similarity in its rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) compared with the virus causing sars-cov-1, remdesivir, which targets the viral rdrp, is postulated to be effective against sars-cov-2 as well. 13 previous literature showed significantly reduced lung viral load and improved clinical signs of disease as well as respiratory function following remdesivir administration. 11 its favorable safety profile demonstrated in multiple case reports, randomized trials of ebola virus disease, as well as currently ongoing phase 3 randomized double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trials in china, further expand interest in this potentially lifesaving drug. 9, 13 unfortunately, the process to obtain remdesivir for compassionate use is both challenging and time consuming. although the manufacturer cautions prescribers that the process to obtain the medication typically takes a minimum of 72 hours, for our patient this process took more than double the estimated time expected. this delay in obtaining medication is concerning because other antivirals, such as oseltamivir for influenza or acyclovir for herpes viruses, are effective only if given within a small window of time delayed remdesivir initiation hillaker et al after symptom onset. 7, 14, 15 additionally, many patients hospitalized with sars-cov-2 may have already been symptomatic for several days, selfisolating while awaiting test results or until symptoms have worsened before presenting to the hospital, further delaying time to therapy. fortunately, our patient made significant improvement in oxygenation and was able to be extubated less than 72 hours after starting remdesivir despite this delay in therapy. thus administration of remdesivir, regardless of time from symptom onset, may still have clinical benefits for patients with sars-cov-2. another report detailing the first case of community-transmitted sars-cov-2 in the united states demonstrated similar complications of delayed diagnosis and treatment with remdesivir was recently published. similar to our case, the authors observed clinical improvement after treatment with remdesivir initiated on day 11 of illness. 16 the rapid increase in critically ill covid-19 cases reported across the country and subsequent demand for remdesivir has resulted in a supply shortage with the manufacturer halting the individual compassionate use process outside of patients who are pregnant or pediatric with severe disease manifestations. at this time gilead is moving toward an expanded access program for future institutional use of remdesivir outside of clinical trials; however, details of that program are still forthcoming, and the procedure is expected to be similarly cumbersome as the previous individual compassionate use process. enrollment in ongoing clinical trials to obtain remdesivir may also be difficult for institutions, especially community hospitals with less investigational research support. this case highlights significant issues that must be addressed as a health care and regulatory system in the united states. as the covid-19 global pandemic continues to spread, it is critical that access to potentially lifesaving treatments be quickly available to patients. the fda and government regulatory agencies must be called on to take urgent action to work with drug manufacturers of promising investigational therapies to ensure adequate supply and rapidly evaluate safety and efficacy data. changes to improve and accelerate the processes of drug manufacturing, fda evaluation, and approval during times of pandemic are paramount to expedite access to treatment for critically ill patients.this report has limitations that must be considered. our perspective comes from a single patient treated with remdesivir late in the course of disease. this patient also received hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin for 5 days, and although he did not initially show clinical improvement after the duration of these therapies, this combination is also being investigated as potential therapy for sars-cov-2. 17 it is possible these medications may have impacted his clinical course. he is also a younger patient with few comorbidities. his most significant risk factor for mortality was obesity; because the mortality rate in his demographic in the united states is less than 1%, it is possible that he would have improved without remdesivir. 18, 19 further study and clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of remdesivir are required to confirm its efficacy against covid-19 including if efficacy differences exist between early and delayed administration.late initiation of remdesivir may be effective in treating sars-cov-2, unlike antivirals such as oseltamivir and acyclovir, which are most effective when started as soon as possible following symptom onset. this case highlights the urgent need for action by regulatory agencies to work with drug manufacturers to expedite the study and approval of investigational agents targeting sars-cov-2 as well as to meet manufacturing demands.after so many years of the discovery of dna/rna as the genetic base of organisms, we are not capable to fully understand the newly emerging diseases based on the genetic study. as the human population has been evolved, it is exposed to new environmental conditions in terms of migration, change in food habits and lifestyle pattern. parallely they have interacted with wide range of new micro biome. now in this host-pathogenic interaction, both of them are in a track for winning a race to evolve and establish itself by creating immense selective pressure over each other. here comes the role of the key player, the nature or environment. from the origin of life, the nature ultimately selects the prevalence of the genetic makeup and decides the winner beyond the game of neucleotides. the interplay between the environment and the genetic material actually creates new or evolved genetic variety and selects its existence both for pathogen and the host and decides who will dominate in the nature [2, 17] . this ancient story of nature's selection rule has been observed for the development of novel diseases like, small pox, cholera, tuberculosis and in recent past like, aids, different flus and the most related newly emerging sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) and mers (middle east respiratory syndrome) outbreak [31] .in the current global covid-19 outbreak, which is the major health concern in the world, it is very important to understand how this novel entity suddenly emerged and capable enough to create a global pandemic with its fetal form. in this regard prevention in form of vaccination is the only way to combat the disease and genome study is the basic thing. but beyond this, the effect of nature over it needs to be understood to evade the origin and evolution of the new genetic character and its virulent establishment in nature by population distribution. it has been observed that 40% of the new emerging diseases is caused by virus, and rna virus are too much progressive in this case. thus how these rna based fetal pathogen with their upgraded genetic setup has been originated and selected by nature with its disease outcome must be analyzed well [5, 31] . covid-19 is a viral disease caused by human rna virus sars-cov-2. in this review we will focus on how the viral pathogen is evolved and potent enough to cause infection at pandemic level from nature's point of view. in case of infectious disease, the host-pathogen interaction must be understood where the host environment attributes a major role in the establishment of disease. in case of any pathogenic disease outcome both the host and the pathogen struggles with each other with their unique genetic setup but the gene function is not the only factor for disease establishment or the healthy body maintenance. the environmental conditions during this struggle play influential role in the action of genome, more specifically, collective action of environment and genetic mutation affects the regulation and function of genes [5] . moreover when we consider a virus, it needs a living body to functionally active and thus we can say that, the environment for the virus to work is its host body environment. on the other hand the host body where the virus survives also needs the external environment as its survival resource during transmission. now in the following discussion we will try to understand how these two kinds of environment interplay in the development of the virus, causing current covid-19 outbreak.nature is the key player of origin, evolution and pathogenicity of the virus to understand the root of the novel viral pathogen and role of environment for its development, we need to explain it with the molecular basis of darwin's theory of evolution and natural selection by the continuous process of genetic permutation and combination. sars-cov-2 is associated with respiratory syndromes showing flue like symptoms. if we recall the emergence of different other deadly viral flue pandemics, specifically the sars and mers in past, all of them are of similar kind with different version and originated by species spill over and zoonotic transfer, which is occurred once in a while over a period. all of these evidences indicate towards the origin of the pathogens from a common ancestral form which needs to be investigated. the probable line of development for such pandemic outcomes happened by continuous evolutionary procedure within different species or host environment exposure, by mutation during replication or genetic recombination between two different viral species and ultimate adaptation to a susceptible host by natural selection of the new version of the viable pathogen resulting infection [7, 8] . in case of these pandemics, beyond the genetic mechanisms, varied permissive host exposure (intra or inter species spill over/intermediate host) seems an important determining factor for pathogenic evolution among human population [13, 14] . but the natural way of genetic adaptation of the current sars-cov-2 is not understood yet. in this part, based on its published sequence analysis we will try to figure out how the molecular genetic variation leads to viral adaptation to the human host body environment. out of the corona virus society, the sars-cov-2 can cause infection to humans like other human cov. but we have to think about the fact that, its infection severity is deadly enough compared to all the other human covid. this fact can be explained by the unique disease causing genetic character of sars-cov-2. receptor recognition is the initial and important genetic determinant for a viral infection. evidence shows that viral spike protein structural specificity decides the host range in human cov like, sars and mers by exerting human cell receptor recognition [14, 15] . the sars-cov and sars-cov-2 both shows same binding affinity with the ace2 (angiotension converting enzyme 2) receptor in human cells. so it is important to understand the molecular genetic property of the spike protein receptor recognition site of sars-cov-2 which genetically isolates this variant from other corona virusand decides the human cell specificity and infection in more severe form. the human cell receptor binding domain of the spike protein of sars-cov-2 is mutated in 5-6 amino acid residues and shows high specific ace2 human cell receptor binding affinity. the spike protein has two subunits (s1 and s2) and at the junction, there is a polybasic cleavage site present which allows furin or protease mediated cleavage and insertion of prolin like molecule which adds 0-linked glycan molecules resulting the flanking of the two cleavages [2, 29] . thus it is clear that, the uniqueness of spike protein is crucial for the genetic isolation of sars-cov-2 and its high affinity binding to human cells. but it has been observed from receptor homology study that, the sars-cov-2 also has affinity to the ace2 receptor in other animals like the humans. now the next question come in mind that, how sars-cov-2 particularly becomes pandemic for human beings with high mortality rate compared to the other one. for a specific host pathogen interaction and disease establishment, except the receptor recognition by the unique spike protein domain of the virus, the receptor variation of the host cell also is an important genetic character. the human ace2 cell receptor is genetically identical from other animals for the recognition by the corona virus as observed for mers-dpp4 receptor binding property [8] . moreover it has been observed that, there are several ace2 receptor variants present in different human populations and several variant out of it may restrict or reduce the cov specific association with it. from the recent genetic analysis of the sars-cov-2 ace2 human receptor variation in different population shows that, the expression pattern of ace2 receptor is an important determining factor for the pathogen susceptibility. for example, among the asians specifically, the chinese population don't have the natural resistant mutated gene against cov infection and express high level of ace2 receptors in tissue [3] . so it is revealed that, not only the genetic uniqueness of the spike protein of pathogen, but also the receptor of host cell is equally important for the successful establishment of covid-19 outbreak. now the next question is how this unique host-pathogen interactive characteristic has been developed under the influence of host environment. from different recent research evidence based on phylogenetic analysis of complete genome sequence of sars-c0v-2 shows indication of the evolution of a rapid, diverse and sequential genome variability whichwe will analyze by molecular genetic perspective from four different angles. first we will analyses the genome variability in terms of the diversity of the sars-cov-2 genome in different host species. this is revealed that sars-cov-2 show overall 96% sequence similarity with the bat sars-cov like corona virus but the similarity differs in the spike protein receptor binding domain (rbd) [32, 35] . we got this kind of sequence similarity in other human corona virus where bat have been found as the common ancestral reservoir of the pathogen [10] . on the other hand, a similar kind of corona virus with sars-cov-2 has been identified in malayan pangolins, which shows strong and almost identical similarity with sars-cov in the spike protein rbd. thus these pangolins can be interpreted as the intermediate host for sars-cov-2 [34] . these evidences indicate toward the sequential evolution of the spike protein rbd by species spill over nature of the virus. the variability of sars-cov-2 viral genome in different species confirms of its animal origin and subsequent evolution of by jumping species nature.but none of the sequence similarity of sars-cov with bat or pangolins has been found based on the unique polybasic cleavage site, which can be considered as next level of determining criteria for sars-cov-2 human cell receptor specificity and pathogenic severity as observed in case of mers an avian influenza virus [1, 20] . the insertion of unique poly basic furin cleavage site in sars-cov-2 is probably acquired during human to human transmission. thus the second indication of molecular diversity and evolution will be analyzed in terms of different subtypes of the virus, which has been found in different human population throughout the world. most recent research work suggests three different genetically close sub types of the sars-cov-2 with small amino acid sequence variations which can also be linked with continental and ethnic specificity. this research shows that the a subtype is considered as the ancient form of sars-cov-2 which shows close similarity with bat corona virus and generates the other two different subtypes, the b and c. the sub type b, which is mainly profound in china and east asian continents is the genetic variant of the subtype a by two mutations, (synonymous and nonsynonymous) and not found outside asia. the b subtypes has been again mutated and generated a daughter subtype the c variant, which dominates in europe and represented among american populations. the c subtype differs from b by single nonsynonymous mutation [9] . this evidence of sequential development of different sub types from a single variant among different human population in different continents indicates the continuous single lineage evolution of the virus during human to human species spill over. moreover, the different subtypes of sars-cov-2 can be linked with different genetic setup of the host population in the world. now, as previously described, different sars-cov-2 infected population in the world shows genome variation and expression of ace2 receptor coding sequence which can affect the binding and susceptibility of the sars-cov-2, it can be predicted that, this ace2 receptor variation created intense selective pressure to the circulating sars-cov-2 genome and as a result of this the virus adapted to establish infection with its different genetic variants in a pandemic form throughout the world [3] .every disease when it becomes a pandemic it is revealed sequentially through several stages, which also indicates toward the evolutionary nature of the pathogen with the host body. so the third molecular genetic evolution of the covid-19 will be analysis based on the different phages of the pandemic. if we categories the covid-19 outbreak into different stages, it has been found that at the initial stage it is reported in some individuals in hunan market of wuhan, in hubei province of china. in the second phase, it has started to found as clustered form in different regions of china. then in the third stage, the disease has been disseminated in different parts of europe, america and other asian countries and resulted as a pandemic. now this different phase of disease progression covid-19 outbreak till now, can be linked with the evolutionary pattern of sars-cov-2 and its different subtypes (as previously described the a,b,c) emerged in different population of the world. the first emergence and case reports of sars-cov-2 is found in china which represents the b subtype genome setup and specific to this region only. the b type is reported to be originated from the ancestral betacorona virus showing close sequence similarity. the association of the virus to the live stock animal market in china supports decoding the global outbreak of covid-19: the nature is behind the scene this origin [35] . now the pangolin theory as intermediate host for the development of the unique receptor binding site (rbd) in the sars-cov-2 can be linked with the report of sars corona virus in dead pangolins from guangdong wild life resource in china during the period of covid outbreak in china [34] . this b subtype with the evolved genetic setup caused clustered infection in different parts of south asia soon after it infected a large population inside china. later, after a short lag period, the virus is mutated and emerged as a pandemic in different parts outside asia with another variant, the c subtype, profound in european and american countries. this step indicates another stage of variation with probable acquisition of the polybasic cleavage site under the influence of unique ace2 receptor specificity in these population. thus it is clear that the viral lineage of sars-cov-2 is constantly associated with evolutionary process that leads to the generation of different subtypes of the same species which is gradually revealed through different phases of the disease and spreaded among different population of the world causing pandemic.evidence form our fourth and last analysis, it has been observed that mutation of the viral genome and genetic recombination is another process which confirms the molecular genetic variability of the pathogen. several mutation and deletion of sars-cov-2 genome has been observed from different sars-cov-2 genome sequence references. it has been observed that mutation has been occurred in the different structural and non-structural glycoproteins like 5' orflabpolyprotein, envelop protein, matrix protein and most important determining factor the viral spike surface glycoprotein in rbd domain. on this note, no such change has been observed in the envelope protein. such type of mutation has been also observed in betacorona viruses. not only genetic mutation or deletion, events of genetic recombination has been observed in case of origin of sars-cov-2 spike protein rbd. genetic recombination events among bat, pangolin and human corona virus confirms this [16, 21, 26] .so it is clear from the above study that, generation of new versions of viral diseases in humans is acquired due to the continuous molecular genetic operations inside host body by continuous species transmission. this event can be supported by the evidence of acquisition of adapted character during repeated cell culture passagingof the sars-cov [23] . but on this note it should be pointed that, new disease may appear at any time, in any places, among any population which is unpredictable, because evolution is a collective action of genetic operation and environmental effect. in case of virus the host body is the key factor which actually gives this opportunity or favorable environment for these genetic operations to happen because the virus needs a host body as a resource to be functionally active. it is the normal tendency of a microbial species to find a convincible way to transmit and adapt itself to new environment for evolution. in case of virus, more specifically for the rna virus, the tendency is high where there is continuous circulation of the viral genome among different host species [28] . during this period, host environment creates intense selective pressure to the pathogen. the host body environment is acting as an influential factor for the virus to take a do or die decission.when the virusis successful,it is naturally selected and adapted to establish its character by gettingthe control over the host's genetic construction by exerting virulent effects. when this process continuously goes on by exposure to new environments, it can lead to an extent where it can cause a pandemic, otherwise it is the end of line for the pathogen to evolve. this is a gradual process, when the virus accumulate the required genetic makeup or prepare itself and takes several attempt for the big jump. during this preparatory phase the pathogen can generate mild infection or infection to a limited bunch of population or create silent carriers depending on the host body environment. these carriers don't show any symptoms but the infectious pathogen with its new genetic makeup is maintained here and can be transmitted to different suitable host environment for disease establishment. thus these carriers are very crucial, and might be another strategy of the virus for the evolution of new genetic setup. an evolved character is developed under environmental pressure [25] . in this case, the protective immune system of the host body environment helps the virus to evolve under selective pressure of infection rejection. identification of several asymptomatic carriers for sars-cov-2 can be a result of the above fact. thus virus is the player, but its' optimum molecular genetic fitness, distribution and evolution are shaped by the host body environment [12, 19, 24] . in case of sars-cov-2 its diverse genetic variability and evidence of its existence among different host species indicates towards its rapid ''jumping species'' nature which probably makes it extremely diverse and virulent. the host body environment gave the virus the opportunity to prepare for the battle where both the genetic manipulation and the natural selection process plays major role for its adaptability resulting the current uncontrolled pandemic.from another angle if we look over the two extremities of the origin and exposure of the sars-cov-2, they are bats and humans. both of the host environments can be considered as large population. bats is the reservoir of a large number of viral pathogens and inhabit in a giggling manner in a close contact thus enhances the chance of cross transmission and giving the pathogen a field to evolve. similarly, the modern human population is highly dynamic and exposed to various extreme environmental conditions. the large co habitation and lifestyle pattern enhances the chance of cross transmission of virus and make a susceptible environment for emerging new viral disease.after considering the impact of molecular genetic diversity and host body environment in the origin and development of a virulent strain, we need to understand the role of the external environmental factors in the stability and survival of the virus outside the host body conditions. during the process of evolution, intra or inter species transmission among the susceptible host community, external environment plays a critical role. though in the external environment, outside the host body, the virus cannot multiply and cause infection but different factors are crucial in the stability of the virus outside its host environment for the process of its transmission. specifically when we are dealing with a respiratory tract associated virus, the role of environmental factors must be emphasized because the respiratory outputs are directly exposed to the environment through cough, sneeze, and sputum. the role of different environmental factors like temperature, salinity, p h etc. for viral stability in aerosol, inert surface, water etc. needs to be discussed, because external environment is the connecting media between various host species during the viral transmission. in case of the other two common human corona virus super spread, sars-cov-1 and mers air transmission is well reported in form of droplet and aerosol.the evolutionary pattern of sars-cov-2 is associated with geographical continent specific subtype diversity with a tendency of rapid species spill over which indicate towards its huge external environmental adaptation. moreover social distancing is emphasized for covid-19 spread due to its highly contagious nature. thus understanding the role of external environmental factors in maintaining viral stability and capability to survive in different patient samples as well as certain inert or abiotic environmental substances, the fomite, by which it can spread needs to be analyzed very well. if we consider the clinical samples by which the virus is exposed to the environment, research shows that sars-cov-2 may present in different types of patient samples. high viral load is found mainly in the respiratory samples. presence of virus in blood samples proves its systemic spread. detection of live viral particle in feces indicates its fecal-oral route of environmental exposure [6, 30] . after the virus is exposed to environment by these clinical samples, sars-cov-2 shows various degree of fomite stability for different surfaces associated to those patient samples. in case of steel surface, the stability is maximum (approximately 2-3 days). it is also stable in polypropylene, card board and copper (show less degree of stability). in aerosol the virus shows three hours of stability [27] . in connection with the fecal-oral route the stability and sustainability of sars-cov-2 has been found in waste and sanitary water in infected area,is recently reported [18] .the stability of virus in different contaminated surfaces and in different patient sample outputs depends on the action of temperature and relative humidity percentage. it has been observed for corona virus that low temperature (4 degree) and low humidity (20%) is supportive for the viral stability, where gradual increase of both the parameters inactivates the virus more rapidly. it has been observed that lipid virus like covid can be inactivated by the interference of two mechanisms, the air water interphase and desiccation process. when the relative humidity is nearly 50%, the virus is accumulated by the air water interphase. then the desiccation process excretes water from the lipid layer by oxidation and simultaneously breaks the cross linking thus which effectively damage the lipid layer of the pathogen much rapidly [4] . on this note it must be pointed that mucus acts as the first protective barrier for invading respiratory virus. interaction of mucus layer glycoprotein with viral surface proteins have been well reported in influenza virus. recent research shows that the saliva or mucus substance may act as a protective barrier for the virus when it is exposed to the external environment. the aerosol also goes with the same flow, where it helps the virus from the hazardous effect of varying external environment by retaining its infectivity [11, 33] . so temperature inactivation or the air water desiccation mechanism, are not effective on the virus when the organic barriers acts as insulator.thus in case of sars-c0v-2, it is received by the environment through different clinical sample outputs mainly the respiratory secretions from an infected person whether it is a susceptible host or carrier, in form of droplets or aerosol and can survive in this form in various fomites. after the virus is received in the external environment, the patient sample itself protects it from adverse environmental conditions and helps it to survive or sustain for long time acting as maintaining media for the virus outside the host body. this is the probable reason why sars-cov-2 shows high degree of external environment stability. from the above analysis it is clear that the outside host environment acts as the intermediate player which receives, maintains, protects and transfers the pathogen using its various factors as weapon for covid-19 pandemic.decoding the global outbreak of covid-19: the nature is behind the scenefrom the above study it is clear that rapid evolving nature and high environmental stability of sars-cov-2 is responsible for the current outbreak of covid-19. the evolutionary process of this new version of the virus indicates the 'synthetic theory of evolution' or the 'neo-darwinism theory' where, the virus has gone through sequential multistep thorough process of molecular genetic variation which is shaped and established by the natural selection process. in this review the role of both the host body environment and the external environment in disease establishment is discussed from different angle (fig. 1) .the host body is the important factor for the covid-19 host-pathogenic interaction establishment where the molecular evolution happens. the rapid host body changing pattern helps the virus to be continuously exposed to new environmental conditions, which creates selective pressure to the virus. in order to struggle for existence and infection establishment inside host body, the virus undergo through several genetic manipulations and achieve its mutated characters. then genetically close different subtypes of sars-cov-2 develops unique spike protein receptor binding domain with high degree of receptor binding property to human cells and adapt itself to fit the character inside the host body. ultimately by the action of natural selection, specific host-pathogen interaction happens where the virus can establish the infection.the external environment acts as intermediate player in between one host to another, by providing suitable environment for stability and survival for sars-cov-2 outside its host body resulting high viability and higher transmissibility compared to other corona virus. it has been reported that the external environment also interacts with the host body environment and helps the stability of the virus inside the host body system and its infectivity. changing temperature and relative humidity contributes to the degree of host susceptibility to a certain pathogen, pathogen infiltration and survival inside the host body [22] . thus the outcomes from the whole study will help to understand the sudden emergence of covid-19 pandemic and its character. the findings emphasize to consider the interactive role of both of the two environments, the host body environment and the external environment as the source of genetic evolution of emerging viral diseases and its control. since its recognition in february 2003, sars has drawn enormous attention and triggered fears worldwide, especially in the asia pacific region. sars is a new and probably previously unencountered severe and highly contagious form of atypical pneumonia, caused by a novel coronavirus known as sars-cov. 1, 2 since february 2003, sars has spread to 28 countries and has affected 8202 individuals resulting in 725 deaths worldwide. 3 most of these cases occurred in hong kong, mainland china, taiwan and singapore, which totalled 1726, 5316, 585 and 206 cases, respectively. 3 other regions in the asia pacific are also affected, although the numbers remain low in malaysia (five cases) and thailand (eight cases). 3 although canada has had the only major outbreak outside asia (148 cases), and currently has largely contained sars, there are still sporadic cases at the time of writing. the economic impact to hong kong has been devastating although the morale of medical and other healthcare workers remains high. despite the declining incidence of sars worldwide, the possible emergence of future 'super-spreaders' should remind healthcare professionals and health authorities to stay vigilant, as only one or two of these index patients could trigger another major outbreak. [4] [5] [6] [7] despite the original optimism of a low mortality for sars, it is now believed that the mortality of sars is in the region of 10-15%. 5, [7] [8] [9] while there is still gross deficiency in the understanding of the pathogenesis, diagnostic, management and prognostic aspects of sars, altogether 647 articles have been published since february 2003, as listed in pubmed to date. the initial hopes of a speedy delivery of a rapid and reliable diagnostic test for sars have failed to materialize. consequently, sars requires a clinical diagnosis, at least in the initial but often critical stages of the illness. [10] [11] [12] treatment for sars is also controversial and prognosis for these patients is still unclear. this article attempts to summarize some of the recent developments in this newly recognized condition.while human metapneumovirus and chlamydia pneumoniae , might have some role in the exacerbation of the disease in some sars patients, it is now certain that sars is primarily caused by a novel coronavirus (sars-cov). 1,2 direct inoculation of two macaques with sars-cov has resulted in the production of comparable disease to human sars, reisolation of the virus, and detection of a specific immune response, thereby fulfilling koch's criteria. 13 this new virus is currently proposed to be of animal origin because the earliest cases in mainland china were chefs or handlers of wild game animals cooked as a delicacy. although sars-cov is likely to be predominantly transmitted by droplets, it is also likely to infect others via contaminated items, particularly as sars-cov can live outside the body for several days. 4, 14 a recent outbreak in amoy gardens, a densely populated residential estate in hong kong, also demonstrated that infected stools could transmit sars-cov via defective sewage systems.there are few histological studies into sars, as initial fatal cases did not undergo autopsy for fear of disease transmission. the prohibitory high infection risk to bronchoscopists also barred more widespread efforts at performing transbronchial biopsies and bronchoalveolar lavages on sars patients. nevertheless, an electronically published article describing the autopsy results on six sars patients described diffuse alveolar damage, macrophage infiltration and epithelial cell proliferation as the predominant features. 15 the earlier histological changes, performed on a ventilated patient by using video-assisted thoracoscopic lung biopsy on day 5 of the illness, also revealed mild to moderate diffuse alveolar damage, manifesting as patchy hyaline membrane changes lining the alveolar ducts and some air spaces, and alveolar septal infiltration by neutrophils and mononuclear cells. 4 there is therefore no diagnostic histological feature, other than identification of sars-cov by electron microscopy, which would provide a definitive diagnosis. nevertheless, efforts should still be made, with strictest safety precautions in mind, to obtain histological or cytological samples from the lower respiratory tract of these patients, not only to exclude other mimicking conditions, but also to advance our understanding of this new disease.although the pathogenesis is unclear, it is generally accepted that sars is predominantly an atypical pneumonic illness. the distribution of the pneumonic shadow is also predominantly in the lower lobes and peripherally distributed, 4,16,17 thus resembling bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia and some other interstitial lung diseases. 4, 16, 17 the rapid appearance of these changes, and their often remarkable and rapid clearance after corticosteroid therapy suggests that there is an element of virus-induced immune response, which could be selfperpetuating, leading to development of adult respiratory distress syndrome.the clinical features of sars are summarized in table 1 . the occurrence of upper respiratory tract symptoms is unusual, although by no means exclusive to sars. 4, 7, 18 patients with diarrhoea could potentially be highly infectious, particularly if debilitated and requiring nursing assistance after each episode. 18 it is of note that most patients in the asia pacific region with fever and chills without respiratory symptoms, or fever with diarrhoea do not suffer from sars. however, healthcare workers must remain vigilant to minimize their chances of being infected. 6, 7 haematological testing usually reveals a normal total leucocyte count, occasionally thrombocytopenia, and almost always lymphopenia. 4 liver function indices could be abnormal in about 50% of cases and usually show raised transaminases as well as lactate dehydrogenase from disease onset. 4 creatinine kinase has been reported to be elevated in some series when patients suffer from myositic symptoms. 7 as these patients usually have no sputum, nasopharyngeal aspirate has been used for rapid viral identification (especially for respiratory syncytial and influenza viruses) and viral cultures. collection of nasopharyngeal aspirate, however, has led to infection of nursing staff, and thus in some centres has been replaced by nasopharyngeal swabs. sputum culture is often nondiagnostic, but should be performed to ensure adequate screening for infection by mycobacteria, fungi and burkholderia pseudomallei , especially in the presence of rapidly deteriorating pneumonia in the asia pacific region. in suspected patients, especially in the presence of severe lymphopenia and rapidly deteriorating community acquired pneumonia (cap), hiv infection has to be excluded. serological testing for acute and convalescence antibodies against mycoplasma pneumoniae , chlamydia pneumoniae , and legionella pneumophilia is routinely performed in our centre.although invasive procedures such as bronchoscopy can provide lower respiratory tract specimens or tissue for microbiological, electron microscopic and histological examination, bronchoscopy is definitely associated with staff infection. as administration of nebulized b 2 -agonist to a sars patient was attributed to be the cause of a major hospital outbreak, such a mode for delivery of hypertonic saline to induce sputum production should be avoided. 7 radiological assessment is probably one of the most important investigations for suspected and confirmed sars patients. 4, 7 daily cxr are performed for all suspected and probable sars patients in most crackles and bronchial breath sound dyspnoea (60-80%) diarrhoea (20-70%) symptoms of respiratory failure (78%) 'less usual' symptoms rhinorrhoea or sneezing (probably < 5%) sore throat (23-30%) sputum production (10-29%) centres in hong kong. the most common early pattern is the presence of lower zone ground glass appearance and consolidation, which could rapidly progress to other lobes of the lung within 24 h (fig. 1a,b) . some patients also present initially with bilateral and fairly extensive consolidation, despite clinically being not markedly dyspnoeic. a very small proportion of patients display bilateral ground glass pattern on initial presentation, and more rarely, might even have nodular shadows over the 'background' ground glass patterns (fig. 1c) . up to 10% of our cases develop spontaneous pneumomediastinum, and this is often associated with the presence of fairly extensive disease and clinical deterioration (fig. 2) . while there is no definite pattern, most sars patients would show deterioration of cxr and unremitting fever despite antibiotic therapy. high-resolution ct scan ( fig. 3) , which should only be performed in doubtful cases, and in cases not showing improvement, characteristically shows subpleural airspace shadowing. 4, 7, 8, 16, 17, 19 mediastinal lymphadenopathy and pleural effusion are seldom encountered in sars. 4, 16 the diagnostic criteria, issued by the world health organization (who), centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), usa, and health authority head office of hong kong are summarized in tables 2-4 . [10] [11] [12] it is of note that only suspected and probable, but not confirmed, sars are defined by the who and cdc. the latter stipulates the presence of severe clinical respiratory illness and epidemiological contact as 'probable' sars, and moderate clinical respiratory illness and epidemiological contact as 'suspected' sars. 11 the diagnosis of probable or suspected sars therefore requires the presence of fever and respiratory symptoms, with or without radiographic evidence of consolidation. the other important prerequisite is the presence of contact or travel history, usually within the previous 10 days with a sars patient or to an area with known local transmission within the visit period. 11 none of these guidelines actually requires the presence of a positive identification of sars-cov, and thus the diagnosis of sars is ultimately based on clinical grounds. these guidelines are also rather loose in defining the conditions, and the clinical, investigative and radiological features described above should also be considered before making a diagnosis. several groups have reported the successful application of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) in the detection of sars-cov, 1, 6, 18, 20 although clinical application of this technique still remains to be validated. while serology of anti-sars-cov igg appears to be specific and sensitive, this only provides a retrospective diagnosis. there is a delay in this seroconversion, possibly secondary to the administration of high dose corticosteroid therapy, high-resolution computed tomography (hrct) of a 31-year-old woman with early sars who presented 3 days after the onset of fever and chills showing bilateral lower lobe and peripheral ground glass appearances, especially in the posterior aspects of the lower lobes. it is of note that her cxr showed much fewer changes therefore prompting the request for the hrct. suspect case 1. presenting with history of high fever (>38 ∞ c) and cough or breathing difficulty and history of exposure defined as:• close contact with a person who is a suspect or probable case of sars • history of travel to an area with recent local transmission of sars • residing in an area with recent local transmission of sars 2. unexplained death from an acute respiratory illness without an autopsy and one or more of the following exposures 10 days prior to onset of symptoms:• close contact with a person who is a suspect or probable case of sars • history of travel to an area with recent local transmission of sars • residing in an area with recent local transmission of sars probable case 1. a suspect case with radiographic evidence of pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome 2. a suspect case that is positive for sars-cov by one or more assays 3. a suspect case with autopsy findings consistent with the pathology of respiratory distress syndrome without an identifiable causea case should be excluded if an alternative diagnosis can fully explain their illness and anti-sars-cov igg positivity is less than 10% and 70% on days 14 and 21, respectively, although this reaches almost 100% on day 30. 18 as non-sars cap is much more likely to be the cause of fever and radiographic consolidation than sars, most of these cases in 'affected' areas could potentially satisfy the diagnostic criteria for 'suspected' sars cases. potential sars patients must be strictly isolated, and considerable infection control measures such as the use of appropriate protective devices (e.g. n95 masks, eye shields and gowns) and stringent infection control measures (e.g. negative pressure rooms) have to be deployed. in the absence of a reliable rapid diagnostic test, adoption of these measures could rapidly paralyze the daily running of many, if not most, busy general hospitals in this region. on the other hand, if strict infection control and stringent isolation measures are not taken, healthcare workers and fellow patients would be cross-infected. this would result in community out-breaks of sars, as exemplified by the recent experience in hong kong, singapore and toronto. [5] [6] [7] 9 management the management consists of three parts. these include strict isolation policy and preventive measures to minimize cross infection. patients with fever and cap generally do not have sars, and therefore should be treated with potent antibiotics and other measures to maximize their chances of rapid recovery. specific anti-sars therapy should only be commenced in cases that display typical and persistent haematological, biochemical, and radiological features of sars, who do not respond to antibiotics, and with an epidemiological link. in general, we would meticulously observe the clinical course of a patient, and would have to be convinced that the patient is not suffering from severe 'background pneumo- • asymptomatic or mild respiratory illness • moderate respiratory illness-fever >38 ∞ c, and one or more features of respiratory illness (e.g. cough, dyspnoea, difficulty breathing, or hypoxia) • severe respiratory illness-fever >38 ∞ c, and one or more features of respiratory illness as above, and radiographic evidence of pneumonia, or respiratory distress syndrome, or pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome at autopsy but no identifiable cause• travel (including airport transit) within 10 days of symptom onset to an area with community transmission of sars, or close contact within 10 days of onset of symptoms with a person known or suspected to have sars• confirmed (positive anti-sars-cov antibody during acute illness or >21 days after illness onset, or positive sars-cov rna by rt-pcr confirmed by a second pcr assay on a second aliquot of the specimen and a different set of pcr primers, or isolation of sars-cov) • negative (i.e. no serum anti-sars-cov antibody >21 days after symptom onset) • undetermined (i.e. not performed or incomplete)• an alternative diagnosis can fully explain the illness • the case was reported on the basis of contact with an index case that was subsequently excluded as a case of sars provided other possible epidemiological exposure criteria are not present criteria for probable case 1. radiographic evidence of infiltrates consistent with pneumonia, and 2. fever >38 ∞ c or history of such at any time in the past 2 days, and 3. at least two of the following:• history of chills in the past 2 days • cough (new or increased) or dyspnoea • general malaise or myalgia • known history of exposure to a suspected, probable or confirmed sars patientdoes not completely fulfill the above definition but still considered highly likely to be sars on clinical groundsthe presence of an alternative diagnosis, which can fully explain the illness nia', before we would commence anti-sars therapy (fig. 4) .since the middle of march 2003, our institute has been admitting to our isolation wards all cases who have radiographic pneumonia with fever (>38 ∞ c) or a history of such in the last 2 days. the organization and logistics are as shown in fig. 3 . our policy is to rapidly isolate and closely observe these patients for radiographic changes as well as their clinical responses, while waiting for the rt-pcr results of nasopharyngeal swab and stool specimens. most non-sars patients tend to become apyrexial after antibiotic therapy (e.g. combination of a third generation cephalosporin and a macrolide). as different areas within the asia pacific region have very different aetiological microbes for cap, it is imperative that local experience and data are used properly to provide adequate antimicrobial cover. sars is a very emotionally taxing condition, both for the healthcare workers, the patient and the patient's family. every effort must be made to communicate frequently and effectively with the patient and the patient's family, especially as we do not permit visitation throughout the entire hospitalization period. the wards have security officers outside to ensure strict adherence to isolation policy. we have a special phone set up for patients on each of the isolation wards, but the hong kong patients generally prefer to use their personal mobile phone to communicate with the outside world. all patients discharged from the isolation wards will still be managed with the same vigilance and are not permitted to have visitors. with regular and empathetic communication, and frequent contact with senior physicians, our patients appear to understand their responsibility to help contain sars, and we seldom encounter cases who are not willing to cooperate.the cdc (us) stipulates that 'no specific treatment recommendations can be made at this time' and suggests the use of empirical therapy directed against pathogens associated with cap including coverage of 'atypical organisms'. 21 the who also makes a similar recommendation 22 and clearly states the need to prevent aerosolization of respiratory secretions such as the use of nebulizer therapy, chest physiotherapy, bronchoscopy, gastroscopy, and any procedure or intervention that may cause irritation to the respiratory tract thereby resulting in coughing. when these high-risk procedures have to be performed on sars patients, very stringent personal protective equipment should be used. for intubation of patients, which carries an extremely high risk to the operator, we use even more stringent measures. standard protection for this procedure should at least consist of two full body (neck to ankle length) gowns (outer waterproof and inner cotton surgical gown), two surgical gloves, n95 or n100 masks, full face shield, goggles, two surgical hats, and surgical theatre boots. the physician and assistants (minimal number) are ushered to de-gown and shower as soon as the procedure is completed.in sars, numerous antibiotic therapies have been tried without any efficacy. 22 ribavirin, a broadspectrum antiviral agent, with or without concomitant use of corticosteroids has been used in an increasing number of patients. [4] [5] [6] [7] 17, 18, [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] in hong kong, a combination of corticosteroid and ribavirin is routinely used. ribavirin appears to exhibit no in vitro antiviral effect against sars-cov, but has an impressive list of adverse reactions. in the canadian series of 144 patients receiving ribavirin (1 g i.v. q.i.d. for 4 days followed by 500 mg t.i.d. for 3 days), 76% were found to have significant haemolytic anaemia. 9, 24, 25 in hong kong, ribavirin is used at a lower dosage (8 mg/kg i.v. t.i.d. for the first 5 days, followed by 1200 mg orally t.i.d. for a total of 10-14 days) and does not appear to cause such frequent or severe toxicities. future use of ribavirin should be carefully scrutinized.anecdotal experience from mainland china is very convincing on the benefit of administering high-dose corticosteroid to some patients with severe sars. naturally, the use of such therapy stirs anxiety in clinicians who face an overwhelming infection. respiratory physicians in hong kong have amassed experience in the recent outbreak and generally concur that the use of high-dose corticosteroids is beneficial in sars patients who show radiographic deterioration. needless to say, repeated use of such therapy in the later stages of the disease could be associated with severe secondary sepsis, notably fungal pneumonias (n. s. zhong, pers. comm., 2003). a number of regimens have been used in hong kong. these include: (i) hydrocortisone 2 mg/kg q.i.d. or 4 mg/kg t.i.d. i.v. followed by low-dose oral prednisolone; (ii) methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg q.i.d. or 4 mg/ kg t.i.d. i.v. followed by oral prednisolone, and (iii) pulse methylprednisolone 500 mg i.v. daily for 5 days followed by maintenance oral prednisolone 50 mg b.i.d. reducing to 20-30 mg daily on day 21. 4,7,26 a very small proportion of patients, despite suffering from probable sars and displaying virological evidence of acute sars-cov infection, appear to have an indolent course of illness. these patients could be treated initially with oral prednisolone 50 mg daily (gradually tapering to maintenance at, say, 20-30 mg daily over initial treatment with potent antibiotics improvement deteriorate or no betterstep down ward for continued treatment for >48hconsider sars treatment confirmed sars wardall admissions with radiographic consolidation and fever>38∞c 21 days) and oral ribavirin 1200 mg t.i.d. for 10 days. with more experience, our unit is increasingly more inclined to commence pulse methylprednisolone as the initial therapy for most patients who show progressive disease.low-pathogenic avian influenza virus (lpaiv h9n2) has circulated in domestic poultry since 1994 after emerging in china (kwon et al. 2006) . two major issues arose with lpaiv h9n2 1) due to persistent outbreaks and widespread vaccination programs it served as a barrier to poultry market economics and 2) from 1998 on, 15 reports of human infections were published suggesting an increasing likelihood of a pandemic (cox et al. 2017) . frequency of ai infections in different countries is affected by the structure of poultry sector, including density of poultry production, the infection status, biosecurity practices, and environmental conditions (paul et al. 2011 , sims et al. 2017 . lpaiv infections have been reported with varying mortality and morbidity in different developing countries. since the first iranian outbreak of h9n2 in 1998, mortality between 20 and 65% has been reported and endemic h9n2 ai virus has imposed a huge strain on the economy of poultry industry (nili and asasi 2002) .aiv, although relatively unstable in the environment, remains viable on condition that organic materials such as nasal secretions or feces as well as cool and moisture increase resistance of the virus to inactivation. aiv remained viable up to 105 d in liquid manure during winter, 30-35 d at 4°c in feces and 7 d at 20°c, and therefore it stands a better chance of dispersal (sims et al. 2017 ). in addition, transmission of aiv seems to occur through viruses shed from nares, mouth, conjunctiva, and cloaca, either by direct bird-to-bird contact or indirectly via aerosol droplets, contaminated food, water, fomites, and people. therefore, synanthropic animals such as rodents, wild terrestrial birds, and insects like flies may be possible vectors of aiv (velkers et al. 2017) . previously in areas with ai outbreak history, h5 highly pathogenic avian influenza (hpai) viruses were isolated from house flies, blow flies, black garbage flies, and small dung flies (brugh and johnson 1986, sawabe et al. 2006) .the house fly (musca domestica l.) is a ubiquitous synanthropic insect frequently associated with poultry waste. house flies undergo holometabolous metamorphosis with an approximate 10-day life cycle and 1-3 km flight range. transmission of pathogens occurs via mouth parts, vomit droplets, feces and dislodgement from exoskeleton, especially legs, through the ovipositing and feeding behavior (wanaratana et al. 2013) .more recently, transmission of influenza virus by flies arouses the interest of scientists. sawabe et al. (2006) , not only isolated h5n1 from internal organs in two species of blow flies in the vicinity of infected poultry farm but also detected viable h5n1 virus in the blow flies up to 48 h post-exposure (pe) to virus experimentally (sawabe et al. 2009 ). wanaratana et al. (2011) showed that infective h5n1 virus could be detected at least 72 h pe from house flies while viral rna was still found by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) 96 h pe. furthermore, their following study showed that sufficient amount of h5n1 virus for spreading disease to healthy chickens can be carried by house flies (wanaratana et al. 2013) . nielsen et al. (2011) revealed the potential of house fly as a carrier of hpai virus after investigating persistence of h5n7 and h7n1 virus in the digestive tract of infected house flies. the aim of this study was to investigate the acquisition of h9n2 aiv by the house fly under laboratory conditions and to determine virus persistence in external surface and within house fly using quantitative reverse-transcription pcr.the influenza virus, a/chicken/iran/sr110/2007 (h9n2) (ncbi genbank accession number eu157927.33) used in this study was propagated in the allantoic cavity of 10-d-old embryonated chicken eggs according to the oie guidelines (oie 2015) . after the third passage, allantoic fluid of inoculated embryonated chicken eggs was stored at −80°c until being used in virus exposure experiments. the virus titer was determined as 10 8 50% chicken embryo infective dose per milliliter (eid 50 /ml).house flies were captured by insect aerial net from rotten fish baits at a dairy farm. after transferring flies to the laboratory, the flies were identified based on morphological criteria outlined by carvalho and mello-patiu under a stereomicroscope (carvalho and mello-patiu 2008) . the mixed-sex adult house flies were placed and kept as a source in specially designed fly cages constructed from six 50 × 50 cm transparent acrylic glass boards. four sides of the cages were finely drilled. two extraholes (15 cm in diameter) were intended as entry and exit or to allow manipulation. all through the incubation periods, house flies were kept at constant room temperature with 25-40% humidity and a 12:12 (l:d) h cycle, in the entomology laboratory, veterinary school of ferdowsi university of mashhad. prior to commencing the experiments, ten flies were randomly examined to confirm the absence of ai h9n2 viruses by rrt-pcr. all samples were free of the ai h9n2 virus.experiment 1 (ability of house fly to acquire the aiv h9n2)one hundred adult house flies were randomly divided and housed in two sterile fly cages as control (n = 50) and treatment (n = 50) groups. flies in both groups were deprived of food and water for 24 h. the control group was then supplied with a cotton pad soaked with 10% sucrose diluted in the ultra-high-temperature (uht) processed milk (wanaratana et al. 2011) , while the treatment group was fed with 13.5 ml of the same meal plus 1.5 ml of allantoic fluid containing h9n2 virus doses equivalent to 10 8 eid 50 (nielsen et al. 2011) . water was also provided ad libitum using a soaked cotton pad in each cage. fifteen minutes pe, all flies in each group were immobilized at −20 • c for 2 min and then transferred into two 50-ml falcon conical tubes (spl life sciences co., ltd., pocheon, south korea). the external body surface of flies was washed up with 10 ml of sterile phosphate buffered saline (pbs; 135 mmol/liter nacl, 3 mmol/liter na 2 hpo4 12 h 2 o, and 13 mmol/liter nah 2 po 4 2h 2 o, ph 7.2). then the first wash fluid (s1) was transferred into the 1.5-ml microtubes. once again, the external body surface of flies was washed by vortexing with 10 ml of 70% ethanol and rinsed by 10 ml of distilled water after discarding the ethanol. thereafter, fly bodies were transferred to a new falcon tube by sterile forceps and again body surface of flies was washed up with 10 ml of sterile pbs. second body surface specimen (s2) from the last pbs washing was collected in microtubes. the washed bodies of all 50 flies were homogenized together by chilled and sterile mortar and pestle while 10 ml of pbs was gently added. the homogenate was taken in sterile microtubes and centrifuged at 3000×g for 5 min at 4°c (eppendorf centrifuge 5417r, hamburg, germany). the supernatant was collected in sterile microtubes (h1). s1, s2, and h1 specimens were refrigerated at −80°c to be subjected to rrt-pcr for detecting the h9-specific viral rna. the whole experiment 1 was repeated five times.all the steps were identically performed as described in the first experiment unless otherwise mentioned. house flies were randomly divided into control (n = 60) and treatment (n = 60) groups. following 15-min exposure of the treatment group to ai h9n2 virus, water, and food cotton pads were removed from both cages. for the rest of the experiment, flies consumed clean (virus-free) diet; 10% sucrose in uht milk, and water. five flies from each group were randomly taken using an aspirator at each time point; 0, 6, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h pe. after immobilization at −20°c for 2 min, two specimens were obtained by washing external body surface of flies with 1.5 ml of pbs inside falcons; s3 (first outer surface wash fluid before ethanol washing) and s4 (second wash fluid after disinfecting outer surface). the third specimen (h2) was also obtained after whole body homogenizing of house flies as described in first experiment, but with 1.5 ml of pbs. all samples were labeled with group, sample name, and time point, then were frozen until being subjected to rrt-pcr. the experiment 2 also had five replicates.total rnas of specimens were extracted using high pure viral rna kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (roche, mannheim, germany). briefly, 200 µl of wash fluids or homogenate was mixed with 400 µl of binding buffer supplemented with poly (a). the mixture was transferred to high pure filter tube assembly and centrifuged for 15 s at 8000×g. then, 500 µl of inhibitor removal buffer was added to the upper reservoir and centrifuged for 1 min. in the next step, 450 µl of wash buffer was added twice to the filter tube and centrifuged for 1 min after each washing. after each centrifugation, flow-through and the collection tube were discarded. finally, the filter tube was placed in a 1.5-ml microtube, 50 µl of elution buffer was added to the upper reservoir and centrifuged. extracted rna was stored at −80°c.in order to perform an absolute quantitation by rrt-pcr assay, a standard curve was plotted using the pcr product of h9 gene with determined copy number. firstly, the same primers of those used in real-time rt-pcr experiments were recruited in a conventional pcr amplification procedure. then pcr product was electrophoresed on the agarose gel to purify the h9 gene band. finally, its concentration was determined by epoch microplate spectrophotometer (biotek instrument, united states) as nanogram per microliter. the copy number of h9 gene in the standard was calculated according to the following formula: number of copies (molecules) = (x ng × 6.0221 × 10 23 molecules/mole)/ [(n × 660 g/mole) × 1 × 10 9 ng/g], where x is amount of amplicon (ng), n is length of dsdna amplicon and 660 g/mole = average mass of 1 bp dsdna. standard curve was generated using a decimal serial dilution of the pcr product of h9 gene and plotting the threshold cycle values (ct value) against the log concentrations of copy numbers (fig. 1 ).rrt-pcr was performed on rna samples in duplicate according to the procedure developed by monne et al. (2008) with some modifications, using the forward primer 5′-atggggtttgctgcc-3′, reverse primer 5′-ttatatacaaatgttgcac(t)ctg-3′ and probe fam-5′-ttctgggccatgtccaatgg-3′-tamra. oasig lyophilized onestep qrt-pcr mastermix (primerdesign ltd, united kingdom) and rotorgene 6000 thermocycler (corbett, australia) were utilized for rrt-pcr test. amplification protocol was 10 min at 55°c, 3 min at 95°c and 40 cycles of 95°c for 10 s and 57°c for 1 min. after optimization of the reaction, the regression coefficient (r 2 ) was 0.99. finally, the copy numbers in the samples were calculated by the standard curve method.viral rna was detected at 1.27 ± 0.51 (mean ± sd) copies×10 5 /fly in s1 samples which was significantly lower than 2.97 ± 0.86 copies × 10 5 /fly in h1 samples (p = 0.005; fig. 2) . no viral rna was found in s2 samples of treatment group. all samples of the control group were negative for ai.rna concentration of both s3 and h2 samples was regressed on time using a simple linear regression model (fig. 3) . s3 samples were positive only during first day after exposure at 0 (100%), 6 (80%) and 24 (40%) h pe with the average detection rate of 3.51, 2.3 and 0.95 log 10 copies/fly, respectively. the viral load measurement of h2 samples showed a time-dependent descending trend over 96 h following the logistic model (y = −0.0349x + 4.2899, r 2 = 0.7618). rrt-pcr results showed that ai h9n2 virus was detectable at 4. 47, 4.19, 3.27, 2.38, 1.65, and 1.19 log 10 copies/fly in 0, 6, 24, 48, and 96 h but not at 120 h pe. the ai virus was not detected in both s4 and samples of negative control group.h9n2 avian influenza has spread worldwide and oie has put it forward as one of the leading candidates for future influenza pandemics (oie 2015) . notwithstanding the official designation as lowpathogenic, h9n2 subtype can cause a broad range of signs, varying from subclinical infection to 100% mortality in poultry farms (nili et al. 2013 ) and poultry industry of countries such as iran suffer huge economic losses via reduction of body weight gain, vaccination costs, and sometimes high mortality in poultry farms. in order to reduce the risk and problems posed to both public health and poultry sector, dissemination routes of this subtype need to be clarified.insects, wild birds, humans, other mammals, and also inanimate objects like fomites are believed to be able to transmit ai virus (brugh and johnson 1986) . among them, house fly has been considered as a vector of many pathogenic agents including bacteria, viruses, fungi, protozoan, parasitic oocysts, and eggs (wanaratana et al. 2011 , junqueira et al. 2017 . the predominance of optimal conditions for population growth of house flies made them the most important insect in poultry farms (tyasasmaya et al. 2016) . in this study, the possibility of acquisition and retention time period of this virus in/on house fly were investigated.the results revealed that lpaiv could accommodate at external body surface of house fly and its persistency period was up to 24 h pe. these results are in accordance with those of wanaratana et al. (2011) and nazni et al. (2013) who respectively showed that h5n1 and h1n1 could be detectable up to 24 h on the outer body surface of house flies. our findings appear to be well substantiated by three facts about house fly: the habitat, the behavior, and the body structures. house flies inhabit manure, spoiled foods, carcasses, and synanthropic environments (sawabe et al. 2006 , junqueira et al. 2017 . additionally, surfaces are easily contaminated with virus particles due to fly foraging habits, regurgitation, and defecation (sawabe et al. 2009 ), depositing eggs (calibeo-hayes et al. 2003 and also grooming activities (tan et al. 1997) . anatomically, the fly's body is covered with hairs, the legs are bristled, the foot pads adhesive, and the proboscis are all well suited to being contaminated (tyasasmaya et al. 2016 , junqueira et al. 2017 .our important finding was detection of h9-specific rna within house flies up to 96 h, which was not detected any longer at 120 h after the exposure. these results are consistent with those of wanaratana et al. (2011) who observed the same length of time for positive rrt-pcr results of whole homogenate of house fly bodies pe to aiv h5n1. more recently, in 2016, a viral exposure experiment also showed the existence of aiv h5n1 for at least 24 h in gastrointestinal tracts of house flies (tyasasmaya et al. 2016) . in crop of house flies, live newcastle disease virus (ndv) was detected up to 96 h after initial exposure to ndv while it remained viable only 24 h in midgut and hindgut (watson et al. 2007 ). however, the h5n1 aiv was isolated from the feces of blowflies calliphora nigribarbis (vollenhoven 1863) (diptera: calliphoridae) at 48 h after exposure (sawabe et al. 2009 ). under experimental conditions, sugar was used in feeding meal and high sugar concentration correlates with meal storage in crop, even for several days (greenberg 1973) . thus, dissemination of virus through defecation and specially regurgitation seems more feasible. flies were not dissected in the current study; however, in order to elucidate different probable routes of virus transmission and spread by flies, we are currently in the process of discovering virus retention sites in each dissected body fractures comparatively.our result also showed that the outer surface of house fly during initial 24 h could carry less load of viral rnas than interior parts of flies which seems directly in line with the destructive effect of temperature and ultraviolet light on labile ai viruses (chumpolbanchorn et al. 2006 ), but the most important clinically relevant finding was the decline in concentration of viral rnas during the time after exposure to aiv h9n2 either outside or within house flies. the virus did not replicate inside the house fly, supporting the dominant paradigm of mechanical but not biological transmission of avian viruses; rotavirus, turkey coronavirus, reticuloendotheliosis virus, and ndv (tan et al. 1997 , calibeo-hayes et al. 2003 , davidson and braverman 2005 , barin et al. 2010 . although this is the first experimental study elucidating the dynamic of h9n2 aiv retention in flies, it did not evaluate the viability of virus post-exposure. but generally, the rna load probably is a high estimate of the viable virus that could be present and that when the samples are negative for rna, there should not be any viable virus present, however, particularly hpai h5n1 was shown to remain viable up to 72 h in a similar experiment (wanaratana et al. 2011) . further works, which take viability of the viruses into account, is intended to be undertaken using subsequent inoculation to culture media or chickens. the answer to the question 'if the number of viral particles suffice to be transmitted and to infect a chicken in different critical routes?' is deferred to our future work in controlled field conditions.in summary, the results of this study demonstrate the persistence of h9-specific rna up to 24 h on the surface and up to 96 h within the house fly post-experimental feeding of h9n2 aiv. in endemic countries, especially those with low quality of biosecurity practices, flies might be involved in intrafarm or close transmission which needs practical implications like reducing flies population as well as boosting biosecurity measures.avian infectious bronchitis virus (ibv) is a member of the family coronaviridae. the coronaviruses are large enveloped viruses with positive-stranded rna genomes (siddell et al., 1983 ). the pleomorphic virus particle is generally spherical in shape and contains three major protein structures: the membrane protein, the nucleocapsid protein and the surface projections which form the distinctive 'corona' (cavanagh. 1981) . the membrane or m protein comprises a polypeptide of molecular weight 23 000 (23k) which is glycosylated to different extents to form glycopolypeptides of molecular weights ranging from 26k to 34k (stern et al., 1982; stern and sefton, 1982b; cavanagh, 1983) . the oligosaccharides of the m polypeptide are of the high mannose type and are linked to the polypeptide by n-glycosidic linkages (stern and sefton, 1982b; cavanagh, 1983) . the major portion of the membrane protein appears to be embedded in the virion membrane (cavanagh, 1981) with about 20-40% projecting outside the lipid envelope. work on the membrane protein of the murine coronavirus mhv-a59 suggests that part of the molecule may also project from the inner surface of the membrane (sturman et al., 1980) . six major species of rna have been observed in ibv-infected cells (stern and kennedy, 1980a) . these include rna f. which is the same length as the viral genome, and five smaller species, rnas a-e, rna a being the smallest. these mrnas consist of a 3'-coterminal 'nested' set with each rna species containing all the sequences present in the smaller rnas in addition to some ' unique' sequences at its 5' end (stern and kennedy, 1980b) . in vitro translation studies of fractionated and gel-purified mrnas from ibv have shown that mrnas a and c code for the nucleocapsid and membrane polypeptides respectively and that rna e codes for a precursor polypeptide of the surface projection or spike (stern et al., 1982: stern and sefton, 1984) . the sizes of these primary translation products correspond well to the lengths of the 'unique' sequences at the 5' end of each mrna. thus it is probable that only the 5' portion of each messenger species is translated.in this paper we report the dna sequence of a cloned cdna copy of ibv genomic rna in the region corresponding to the 5' end of messenger rna c. translation of the sequence predicts a polypeptide of molecular weight 25.4k which is in agreement with the molecular weight of 23k reported for the unglycosylated form of the membrane polypeptide (stern et al., 1982) .the preparation of oligo(dt)-primed cdna clones has been previously described (brown and boursnell, 1984) . briefly, virion rna was isolated from ibv strain beaudette grown in embryonated eggs. cdna was produced by oligo(dt)-primed reverse transcription of the rna, followed by self-primed reverse transcription to generate the second strand. sl-treated cdna was dc-tailed using terminal transferase, annealed to dg-tailed pat153 (twigg and sherratt, 1980) and transformed into e. coli hblol. ampicillin-sensitive colonies were selected for further characterisation.viral clones were identified as described by hybridisation with a probe prepared by polynucleotide kinase labelling of alkali-treated, full-length ibv genomic rna. restriction sites were mapped on a series of clones and this enabled construction of a continuous map, 3.3 kb in length. hybridisation with a kinaselabelled poly(u) probe has confirmed that these clones include the poly(a) sequences at the 3' terminus of the viral genome.cdna clones a specific oligonucleotide primer, 13 bases long, complementary to a suitable sequence approximately 300 bases from the 5' end of the existing oligo(dt)-primed clones, was synthesised using the phosphotriester method (gait et al., 1982) . this was used to prime reverse transcription on ibv strain beaudette genomic rna. it was passed over a column of sephadex g-100 equilibrated in 10 mm tris-hcl ph 7.5, 1 mm edta. the excluded fractions were pooled and ethanol precipitated.the cdna/rna hybrids were further fractionated on a sepharose cl4b column equiiibrated in 0.3 m nacl, 10 mm tris-hcl ph 8.0, 1 mm edta. excluded fractions were pooled and ethanol precipitated.this material was dc-tailed (roychoudhury and wu, 1980) . the tailed cdna was annealed with dg-tailed pbr322 and transformed (hanahan, 1983) into e. cofi strain le392. viral clones were again identified by hybridisation with a kinase-labelled viral probe, and the overlap with the existing clones confirmed by dna sequencing after reckoning into puc9 (messing and vieria, 1982) . these additional clones enabled construction of a continuous map extending 3520 bases from the 3' end of the viral genome.formaldehyde-agarose gel analysis of ib v mrnas 1.5% formaldehyde-agarose gels were run essentially as described by maniatis et al. (1982) . total rna samples from ibv-infected chick kidney cell cultures were run overnight at 60 v on 16 cm vertical gels. ibv mrnas were detected by blotting onto nitrocellulose and probing with nick-translated cloned ibv sequences (maniatis et al., 1982) . molecular weights were calculated by comparison with the mobilities of dna restriction fragments and e. coli and chicken ribosomal rnas.sequencing was carried out essentially as described by maxam and gilbert (1980) . plasmid dna was prepared by a modification of the method of holmes and quigley (1981) . for sequencing some regions of the dna, restriction digests of the clones, or of the viral insert, were recloned into the plasmid puc9 allowing sequencing from adjacent vector restriction sites (messing and vieria, 1982) . fragments recloned included alu i digests of the c5.136 insert, and the complete inserts of the two clones c5.136 and 142. this latter procedure allowed sequencing in from the ends of both clones. dna restriction fragments were 3' end-labelled with ]cu-32p]dntps using klenow polymerase, or 5' end-labelled with [y-32p]atp using t4 polynucleotide kinase. the two labelled ends were separated by digestion with a second restriction enzyme, electrophoresis on 3.5% or 5% polyacrylamide gels and extraction of the fragments as described (maxam and gilbert, 1980) . the depurination reaction was carried out in 66% formic acid for 10 min at 2o*c, after which the samples were treated in the same way as the pyrimidine reaction. the products of the sequencing reactions were analysed on 0.3 mm, 8% polyacrylamide sequencing gels. additional sequencing was carried out by the dideoxy method of sanger et al. (1977) , after recloning of barn hl digests of (x.136 into the filamentous phage m13mp9, using the amersham ml3 cloning and sequencing kit (amersham international). [ff-] 32p datp was used in the sequencing reactions and the products were analysed on 0.3 mm, 6% polyacrylamide sequencing gels. all sequencing gels were dried down onto silane-treated glass plates as described by garoff and ansorge (1981) . sequence data were stored and analysed on an apple he microcomputer using the programs of larson and messing (1983) . the hydrophilicity plot from these programs was used with the hydrophilicity values of kyte and doolittle (1982) .results 1224 base pairs of dna sequence have been determined from two clones: c5.136 and 142. the positions of these two clones and of the region of sequence presented here are shown in fig. 1 . in fig. 2a the arrows show the direction and amount of sequence information determined from individual restriction sites. 97% of the sequence has been determined on both strands, all restriction sites used for the sequencing have been 'sequenced through' from other sites, and a large section has been sequenced by both enzymatic and chemical methods. fig. 2a also shows restriction sites used in the sequencing.sites marked above the line were used for maxam and gilbert sequencing directly from the clones. sequencing from the alu i sites marked below the line was carried out on fragments recloned into puc9 (see materials and methods). also shown below the line are the ends of the clones from which sequencing was carried out after recloning into puc9.a search was made for initiation and termination codons in the three possible reading frames. these initiation and termination signals are shown in fig. 2b with the main open reading frames marked. also shown is the 5' terminus of mrna b as determined by sl mapping (brown and boursnell, 1984) . sl mapping of the 5' terminus of mrna c, using clone 142, proved very difficult, probably due to the small size of the protected fragment. the lack of suitable restriction sites precluded the use of a procedure involving 5' end labelling. the approximate position of the 5' terminus of mrna c was therefore determined by mrna length measurements on formaldehyde-agarose gels. these measurements give an estimated iength of 3400 bases. coronavirus mrnas have a 5' leader sequence which is fused to the 'body' of the message during transcription (lai et al., 1983; baric et al., 1983; spaan et al_ 1983) . in the case of mrna c, therefore, the length of the ibv leader sequence, approximately 60 bases (brown and boursneli, manuscript in preparation), has been subtracted from the measured length of the mrna to give the length of the 'body' of the message which is present on genomic rna.the 1224 base pairs of sequence are shown in fig. 3 with a translation of the largest open reading frame. this open reading frame (orf) of 225 amino acids predicts a polypeptide of molecular weight 25 443. two smaller orfs, 4 and 5 (see fig. 2b ), which follow on directly from the large orf in the same reading frame, predict polypeptides of 5896 and 3055 daltons respectively. there are also two small orfs, 2 and 3, present within the sequences of the largest orf. the orf starting with the atg codon at position 1147 is the start of the putative 7500 dalton polypeptide encoded by mrna b (brown and boursnell, manuscript submitted). the organisation of the messenger rnas of coronaviruses and in vitro translation studies have led to the hypothesis that it is only the 'unique' 5' sequences of each mrna which are translated (stern and kennedy, 1980b; lai et al., 1981) . the sequence shown in fig. 3 predicts a large open reading frame (orf 1) of 225 amino acids. if translated this would code for a protein of molecular weight 25.4k. gel-purified mrna c, translated in vitro, gives a 23k polypeptide identical in size to the unglycosylated form of the membrane polypeptide (stern et al.. 1982; stern and sefton, 1984) . hence, the data is entirely consistent with this open reading frame being the coding'sequence for the membrane polypeptide. the sequence also predicts four other open reading frames (orfs) longer than 25 amino acids. two of these, orfs 2 and 3, of 32 and 45 amino acids, respectively, lie within the coding sequences for the membrane polypeptide. examination of the sequences flanking the initiation codon for the membrane polypeptide gene shows that they conform to one of the sequences preferred for functional eucaryotic initiation codons (kozak, 1983) . because of this, and because initiation at anything other than the first aug codon is known to be very rare (kozak, 1983) , it seems probable that the 25.4k product of the 225 amino acid open reading frame, orf 1, is the only polypeptide produced from mrna c. it is possible, however, that there are minor mrna species, intermediate in size between mrnas b and c, which would enable a product to be translated from one or both of the orfs which are present between the end of the membrane gene and mrna b. 85 bases before the initiation codon for the membrane polypeptide gene is the sequence cttaacaa which also occurs 101 bases before the first open reading frame of mrna a (probably the nucleocapsid gene) and 28 bases before 7.5k open reading frame encoded by mrna b (boursnell and brown, manuscript submitted). the point at which this sequence occurs is also known to mark the 5' termini of the 'bodies' of mrnas a and b (brown and boursnell, 1984) . thus it seems likely that this sequence also represents the 5' terminus of mrna c, and its position relative to the estimated position of the end of the body of mrna c helps to confirm this. it is interesting to note that there appears to be greater homology between the sequences present at the 5' termini of mrnas a and b than to that which we are postulating occurs at the end of mrna c (see fig. 4 ). there is, however, a 12-base homology, aaaacttaacaa, between the sequences at the 5' termini of mrnas b and c. the amino acid sequence of the membrane polypeptide reveals several interesting features. it is known that the carbohydrate side chains of the glycosylated forms of cl tatac~tatg~tagaa~actt~acaiatccgq~attaoaagc~gtt~ - fig. 4 . nucleotide sequences at the 5' termini of mrnas a, b and c. some sequence homologies are underlined. the 23k polypeptide are n-linked (stern and sefton. 1982b; cavanagh, 1983) . there are only two sites, asn-x-thr, in the amino acid sequence, at which n-linked glycosylation can occur (hubbard and ivatt, 1981) . these are at the nh,-terminus at amino acids 3 and 6. this agrees well with the data of stern et al. (1982) who have shown that glycosylation of the 23k polypeptide occurs at the nh,-terminus. a hydropathicity profile (fig. 5a) , which shows the local hydrophobic tendencies (positive values) or hydrophilic tendencies (negative values) of a polypeptide chain (kyte and doolittle, 1982) shows that there are several hydrophobic regions in the membrane polypeptide.in particular there are three stretches where the mean hydrophobicities taken over 19 amino acids greatly exceed the lowest value generally associated with membrane-spanning polypeptides (kyte and doolittle, 1982) . these regions, which are underlined in fig. 3 , each consist of a contiguous length of at least 20 uncharged amino acids which are highly enriched in hydrophobic residues. it is possible that each of these regions spans the membrane once, with the short hydrophilic sections separating them being at the surfaces of the membrane. however, since these hydrophilic sections are only very short, it may be that all the hydrophobic nh,-terminal region is buried in the membrane with only the hydrophilic cooh-terminal exposed. it is known that the membrane proteins of the 23k family do not undergo any major post-translational proteolytic processing (stern and sefton, 1982a) , and indeed there is no apparent hydrophobic signal sequence at the nh,-terminus which might be cleaved off. however, it is possible that one of the internal hydrophobic amino acid number regions acts as a signal sequence as may be the case for chicken ovalbumin (lingappa et al., 1979) . treatment of the viral particle with the protease bromelain reduces the molecular weight of all the glycosylated forms of the membrane polypeptide to a single polypeptide whose molecular weight is approximately lk less than the size of the unglycosylated membrane polypeptide (d. cavanagh, personal communication). thus, the protease appears to cleave at least the first six amino acids with their associated variable carbohydrate side chains from the nh,-terminus of the membrane protein. the fact that this is achieved by protease treatment of largely intact virus particles suggests that the carbohydrate side chains, and hence the nh,terminus, are located on the outside of the viral membrane.this would have been expected by analogy with the membrane (el) polypeptide of mhv and with other viral glycoproteins (sturman and holmes, 1977; rose and gallione, 1981) . the 75 or so amino acids of the cooh-terminal region of the polypeptide form a hydrophilic region which may protrude from the inner surface of the viral envelope. for mhv-a59 sturman et al. (1980) have shown that there is some interaction between the membrane (el) protein and the viral rna. if this is also the case for ibv it is interesting to note that of the 18 basic residues in the membrane polypeptide, 14 of them are in the cooh-terminal half of the molecule. it is possible that these basic residues are involved in binding to the rna.comparison of the sequence of the ibv membrane protein and the el protein of mhv-a59 (peter rottier, personal communication) at the rna sequence level reveals essentially no homology. however, comparison of the predicted amino acid sequences (fig. 6) shows a remarkable degree of homology especially in the amino terminal half of the molecule. in particular, the sequence within the first two potential membrane-spanning regions seem to be highly conserved, with 24 out of 44 ammo acids the same and most of the differences involving pairs of amino acids with similar properties. a region of even greater homology occurs in the hydrophilic stretch of residues at position 104 (fig. 6 ) in which 15 out of 19 residues are the same. these similarities at the amino acid levtsl are strikingly reflected in the hydropathicity profiles (fig. 5) . this protein sequence conservation in the hydrophobic nh,-terminal half of the polypeptide suggests a high degree of selective pressure for maintenance of the structure of the putative trans-membrane regions of coronavirus membrane proteins.in conciusion then, the sequence presented here shows good agreement with the observed and expected properties of the membrane polypeptide of infectious bronchitis virus,we are grateful to penny gatter, anne foulds, ian foulds and bridgette britton for excellent technical assistance. this research was carried out under research contract no. gbi-2-oil-uk of the biomolecular engineering programme of the commission of the european communities. we wish to thank dr. greg winter, mrc laboratory of molecular biology, cambridge, for help in the preparation of the synthetic oiigonuc~eotjde primer, and david cavanagh for valuable discussion during the writing of this paper. we would also like to thank dr. peter rottier for allowing us to use the unpublished sequence of the el protein of mhv-a59. some of this data was presented in a preliminary form at the embo workshop c~~o~~vj~~e~: ~ofec~l~r si&gy and ~ar~~ge~es~~, 1983, zeist, the netherlands.the current outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is an infection caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2)[12345678910] with the recently analyzed mortality of 5·7% (95% ci 5·5–5·9)[5] the initial reports of disease outbreak were reported in wuhan, hubei province of china, covid-19 followed by its worldwide expansion[367] owing to the highly contagious nature of the virus. in a meeting on january 30, 2020, as per the international health regulations (2005), the who declared the outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern as it has spread across 18 countries across the globe with four countries reporting human-to-human transmission.[8]phylogenetic analysis has indicated a zoonotic origin of sars-cov-2,[6] with person-to-person transmissibility.[10] sars-cov-2 is a β-cov with highly identical genome to bat cov, pointing to bat as the natural host.[911] covs belong to a large family of single-stranded rna viruses (+) with a broad distribution across humans, other mammals, and birds and cause respiratory, enteric, hepatic, and neurologic infections.[7] these rna viruses derive their name due to the crown-like or coronal appearance (coronam is the latin term for crown) given by the club-shaped glycoprotein spikes in the envelope. importantly, the past two decades have witnessed the emergence of three highly pathogenic, novel zoonotic covs – sars-cov (sars-cov now named sars-cov-1) discovered in november 2002, middle east respiratory syndrome (mers)-cov (mers-cov) in june 2012, and sars-cov-2, identified in december 2019 – and have been of global public health concerns.[27] these periodic emergencies occur due to frequent cross-species infections and increasing interfaces between humans and other animal interface.[712] these frequent emergences also derive from the high prevalence and wide distribution of covs, their large genetic diversity, and frequent recombination of their genomes.[12]sars-cov-2 causes a respiratory viral infection that represents the most prevalent and pathogenic forms of communicable infectious diseases.[613] in severe cases, wherein there is a delay or absence of early and effective antiviral treatment, the infection could manifest in a compromised systemic and local respiratory defense mechanisms leading to bacterial coinfection culminating into severe acute respiratory illness and occasionally into acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards).[789] the current estimates indicate a basic reproduction number (r0) of 2.2, implying that on an average, each infected person spreads the infection to an additional two persons.[14]the latest updates suggest that the pandemic of covid-19 has entered a new stage with rapid spread in countries outside china indicating the need of practicing the measures for self-protection toward the prevention of transmission of the infection to others.[4] as of march 16, 2020, a drastic escalation in the number of cases of covid-19 was observed outside china with a number of 143 affected countries, states, or territories reporting infections to the who.[15] the covid-19 outbreak is an indication of the prevailing challenge of the recurrent surfacing of the unprecedented pathogenic infections that demand regular monitoring and preparedness.[14] there is an urgent need of basic and clinical research efforts to aid in the understanding of the disease biology and development of robust combat measures.[14]sars-cov-2 primarily spreads by droplets, and is postulated to have higher transmissibility as compared to seasonal influenza. a major concern arises due to its likely spread via even asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic individuals who may not seek any clinical evaluation.[16] as reported by huang et al., patients with covid-19 primarily present with fever, fatigue, and dry cough.[17] most of the patients exhibit favorable prognosis, however, older patients and those with chronic underlying conditions may present with worse outcomes.[1718] in the early stages of infection, patients could be afebrile represented with only chills and respiratory symptoms.[19] the clinical spectrum varies from asymptomatic or mild symptomatic forms to severe forms characterized by respiratory failure that necessitates mechanical ventilation and support in an intensive care unit (icu) or multi-organ and systemic manifestations in terms of sepsis, septic shock, and multiple organ dysfunction syndromes.[8]effective prevention or treatment of covid-19 remains a top priority toward the curtailing of this pandemic. implementation of several infection control measures (e.g., social isolation, distancing, or quarantine of entire communities) have been posited for control and prevention of the covid-19 outbreak.[420] the most important and effective challenge seems to establish preventive intervening strategies before the human–pathogen interface. vaccination is the one of the most radical countermeasures to combat an infectious disease epidemic. although substantial progress has been made toward characterization of the causative virus for covid-19, a time period of probably a least 1 year to 18 months has been speculated for substantial vaccine production.[21] in the early stage of the pandemic, antiviral treatment is the most effective method. very recently hydroxychloroquine has been reported to be apparently effective against the treatment of covid-19-associated pneumonia in clinical studies.[2223] however, implementation of antiviral treatment and prophylaxis has several requirements, in particular an adequate stockpile of drugs along with the safety of the treatment and cost-effectiveness.[24] most importantly, the preventive/controlling measures should be implemented in a judicious and cost-effective manner.[24]yoga, an ancient mind–body technique, is defined as samatvam (balance/equipoise/homeostasis) at both mind and body levels to be achieved through mastery over the modifications of the mind (chittavrittinirodhah). the available evidence indicates that yoga/meditation facilitates the coordination among the set of homeostatic responses involving the interaction among the nervous, endocrine, and immune systems.[25] hence, the recent definition of yoga states it as a comprehensive skill set of synergistic process tools that aids in bidirectional feedback and modulation of autonomic nervous system outputs through integration between central nervous system (cns) and afferent and re-afferent inputs from interoceptive processes such as the somatosensory, viscerosensory, and chemosensory.[25] postures (sanskrit: asana), breath regulation (sanskrit: pranayama), and meditation along with the conceptual corrections comprise the integrative system of yoga techniques that could promote physical as well as mental well-being. the postures or asanas are purported to have different effects. some are stimulatory to the nervous and circulatory systems, some develop coordination and concentration, while others have a calming effect on the body. some postures such as the corpse pose are used for elongated periods of relaxation.clinically, these therapeutic techniques of yoga have been reported to be beneficial against the management of acute stress as in posttraumatic stress disorder after tsunami[26] or in chronically stressed people with depression or anxiety[262728] and in many noncommunicable diseases such as asthma,[2930] hypertension,[3132] heart disease,[33] and diabetes.[3435363738] in particular, yoga has been repeatedly reported to facilitate the attainment of glycemic control and mitigate the influence of other risk factors associated with the complications in patients with diabetes as compared to control conditions. it has been proposed that the abdominal pressure created during exhalation in kapalabhati improves the efficiency of β-cells of the pancreas.[35] it can be further viewed as modulated interoception or sensory modulation evoked by the vigorous practice of kapalabhati aids in the increased interoception of the abnormal glycemic control that is signaled through the sensory inputs of the cns that in turn modulates the autonomic outputs to the pancreas and other organs related to disease pathophysiology.there is evidence for the beneficial effects of yoga as an add-on strategy for the management of communicable diseases including influenza,[3940] tuberculosis (tb),[41] and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infection,[424344] wherein status of immune system is an important factor that determines the progression of the disease. the results from the meditation or exercise for preventing acute respiratory illness trial (mepari) trial indicated that training in meditation evoked a larger reduction in global acute respiratory infection (ari) severity as compared to exercise or the wait-list control participants.[3940] the findings of the study were found to be in concordance with prior literature on beneficial effects of moderate-intensity exercise against immune system and reduction in the incidence of ari illness.[39]similarly, a prospective, randomized trial compared the efficacy of two programs (yoga and breath awareness) as an add-on to anti-tb treatment in sputum-positive cases in a sanatorium in bangalore.[41] a total of 1009 pulmonary tb patients were screened and 73 were alternately allocated to yoga (n = 36) or breath awareness (n = 37) groups. at the end of 2 months, the yoga group showed a significantly better reduction in symptom score and an increase in weight and lung capacity with an improved level of infection control and radiographic image as compared to the nonyoga group.effect of 1 month of integrated yoga (iy) intervention has reported to significant improvement in the psychological states as well as in the viral loads in patients suffering from hiv-1 infection.[42] further, yoga has also been reported to be an effective intervention for stress management and improvement in psychological health among hiv/aids patients.[424344] these findings indicate toward a potential complementary role for yoga in the management of communicable diseases.the available evidence supports the potential of yoga as a complementary intervention for populations at risk or already suffering from diseases with an inflammatory component.[46] several evidences indicate that yoga might influence chronic inflammatory state and might optimize impaired immune function in stress-induced conditions.[46] the available evidence also uniformly supports that yoga practice could downregulate pro-inflammatory markers. among its influence on pro-inflammatory markers, significant decreases in interleukin-1 (il-1) beta, as well as indications for reductions in il-6 and tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-alpha, have been indicated.[46] cytokine storm represented by increased cytokine levels (il-6, il-10, and tnf-α), lymphopenia (in cd4+ and cd8+ t-cells), and decreased ifn-γ expression in cd4+ t-cells is associated with severe covid-19.[57] these findings support the utility of yoga as a complementary intervention for populations at risk or already suffering from covid-19. duration of the yoga intervention could significantly influence the effects of yoga practice on inflammatory markers. based on the findings of pullen et al.,[33] in populations with a high risk of increased inflammation such as heart failure, shorter course of interventions of only 8 weeks has been suggested to be sufficient to reduce inflammatory processes. the authors have indicated that a reciprocal influence of duration of intervention required depends on the severity or deviation from normal physiology.[33]respiratory tract infections are highly prevalent in patients with diabetes as compared to those without diabetes.[58] extending on the same note, prevalence of diabetes has also been reported to be one of the most distinctive comorbidities in patients with covid-19; in the study by xiaobo yang et al. 22% of the non-survivor critically ill covid-19 patients were reported to have diabetes.[59] this highly prevalent association between diabetes and covid-19 could be attributed to the compromised immune function, reduced t-cell response, reduced neutrophil function, and disorders of humoral immunity.[58] further, the hyperglycemic environment in these patients could also increase the virulence of pathogens, lower the production of interleukins in response to infection, with reduced chemotaxis and phagocytic activity, and immobilization of polymorphonuclear leukocytes.[58] as mentioned above, fear, uncertainty, and stigmatization are psychological stress factors during public health emergencies such as covid-19.[48] the stress-induced activation of the hpa axis could also significantly contribute to poor glycemic control (hyperglycemia),[35] thereby exacerbating the clinical symptoms. the stress-reducing aspects of yoga through modulation of hpa axis in patients with aberrant glycemic control (diabetes and prediabetes) could aid in the attainment of glycemic control as has been frequently reported.[3435363738] the practice of yoga might aid in reducing the exacerbations and clearance of virus infection in covid-19 patients with diabetes through reducing the influence of systemic hyperglycemic and inflammatory milieu.similarly, hypertension is also a distinct comorbidity of covid-19 infection.[60] a study by guan et al. on 1099 patients with confirmed covid-19 reported the high prevalence of comorbidities of hypertension (23·7%) and diabetes mellitus (16·2%) in 173 severe cases.[60] hypertension is typically treated with drug inhibitors that target the renin–angiotensin system (ras).[1861] these drugs are mainly the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) or angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs). these ras inhibitors have been well established against the effective management of blood pressure (bp) as well as protection from disease-associated inflammation. however, ras inhibitors have been postulated to affect the expression of ace2 mrna and the activity of ace2 in tissues.[1861] ace2 is a key counterregulatory enzyme of ace that degrades angiotensin ii to angiotensin-(1–7), thereby attenuating the effects on vasoconstriction, sodium retention, and fibrosis,[62] although there have been no definitive conclusions regarding the association of covid-19 with ras inhibitors. ace2 has been proposed to be a likely cellular receptor of covid-19,[62] and in vitro findings have been reported that the receptor mediates the entry of covid-19 virus into hela cells.[63] further long-term use of aceis might suppress the adaptive immune response, which is a key defense against viral infection.[61]yoga and meditation, in particular slow deep breathing, have been reported to decrease sympathetic nervous system activity, and increase the baroreflex sensitivity in hypertensive patients, thereby reducing their blood pressure values.[64] modulation of hpa axis and autonomic outputs including bp has also been reported to underlie its physiological effects of yoga.[64] however, there has been a lack of evidence on specific targeting of ras or its effector components through yoga. inflammatory systematic milieu in hypertensive patients with already altered autonomic regulations could exacerbate disease outcomes. based on the anti-inflammatory potential of yoga in hyperinflammatory settings such as hypertension, we further extend that yoga could reduce the clinical nonfavorable outcomes in hypertensive patients. further, a class ii-a level of evidence b recommendation for bp-lowering efficacy has been conferred on slow breathing.[65] hence, yoga/slow breathing techniques could provide a safe adjunct/complementary approach for the management of hypertension in covid-19 patients with hypertension.there is a plethora of evidence that breathing exercises have beneficial effects on the respiratory system.[66] pranayama, a yoga-based respiratory exercise, is a simple and cost-effective intervention that could be easily integrated in daily routine and has been proven beneficial in subjects across different age groups including the elderly.[67] yoga training has been reported to improve strength of expiratory as well as inspiratory muscles.[68] joshi et al. reported beneficial effects of a 6-week course of pranayama on ventilatory lung functions.[69] the authors reported improved ventilatory functions with respect to lowered respiratory rate (rr) and increased forced vital capacity (fvc), forced expiratory volume at the end of 1st s (fev1%), maximum voluntary ventilation (mvv), peak expiratory flow rate (pefr), and prolongation of breath-holding time.[69] repeated practice of pranayama has been shown to strengthen cardiorespiratory coupling and increases in the parasympathetic activity in healthy individuals.[64] the breathing practice called kapalabhati is comprised of powerful strokes of exhalations accompanied with the contraction of abdominal and diaphragmatic muscles followed by passive inhalations.[70] kapalabhati aids in appropriate training and toning of diaphragm and abdominal muscles. it also helps in removal of secretions from bronchial tree, cleansing up respiratory passages and the alveoli.[70] a combination of yogic breathing techniques improved the pulmonary functions in competitive swimmers.[71]there have been several reports of clinical trials that suggest an overall effect of yoga training toward improved pulmonary function in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd),[727374757677] an important cause of morbidity and mortality, and poses a major public health problem. when meta-analyzed, a significant clinical effect of yoga in copd patients with respect to fev1 was observed.[72] in addition, the studies reported training effects of yoga on improved exercise capacity, lung function decline, quality of life, and dyspnea in patients with copd.[72] several mechanistic factors have proposed to underlie the beneficial effects seen in the patients undergoing yoga such as increasing respiratory stamina, relaxing chest muscles, expanding the lungs, raising energy levels, and calming the body.[72] however, due to the lack of adequate data and insufficient clinical evidence provided by these studies, the clinical relevance of these findings needs further thorough robust experimental evaluations.[72]breathing exercises using the concepts of yoga could also be adopted to help during states of acute respiratory distress. we have previously taught an eight-stepped yoga breathing procedure consisting of very simple neck muscle relaxation movements and asanas with breathing exercises using the support of a chair during 110 episodes of acute airway obstruction in 86 bronchial asthma patients. there was a significant improvement in their pefr by >20% within 30 min of the practice with successful relief from the episode. the patients reported reduction in panic and anxiety element, cutting the vicious cycle of aggravating bronchial obstruction. based on the above discussed several beneficial aspects of yoga on the immune and respiratory systems against varied clinical settings including that of infectious diseases, we postulate a therapeutic potential of yoga towards covid-19 prevention and management [figure 1]. we have evolved age-specific sets of yoga modules [tables 1 and 2] based on our extensive experience of over past 35 years on clinical research on yoga. the modules have been made available for public use on our website https://svyasa.edu.in. to this end, a pilot study was conducted on request providing a 4-min video of very simple practices as a voluntary clinical aid to the hospitalized covid-19 patients in milano, italy, visited by 1000 people between march 17 and 20, 2020. the report by a cardiac surgeon who was also admitted in the intensive care unit of the italy based hospital due to severe covid-19 infection stated “we have reached scientific evidence that this simplified protocol sent by you is effective and we intend to disseminate to the overall scientific community”.nil.there are no conflicts of interest.2 quite (bhabha 1984) . lockdowns, to put it simply, will look different in all of its locales, its actuality being blurrier, messier and uncertain.thus, while in most cases it has been projected as the inscrutable science of social distancing, in the indian context, the possibility of a virus spillover gets embedded in a complex array of localized metaphors and meanings where its contemporary risks are historicized through particular metonyms, requiring different modes of making the unfolding panic intelligible. the uncharacteristic 'appeal' from prime minister narendra modi for a 14-hour janata curfew or people's curfew on sunday 22 nd march is therefore not surprising. there was, however, too much left unexplained in terms of the need for social distance as everyone was instructed to stay inside and not venture outside. an unreliable spate of oral information circulated as a result painting a nefarious picture of the outside where the killer virus lurks in the public, transmitting more rapidly through the interstices of rumour which threatened to become the new idiom of control. more importantly, it reinforces the persistent analytic dichotomy of the inside and the outside that continues to dominate our analysis of indian cities (chakrabarty 1991) . often seen as a pre-modern way of organising indian society, the strange admixture of the inside/outside binary with modernist categories of the private and the public challenges the way we perceive that 'disturbing' social entity -the crowd (freitag 1991 [few corrections were added on april 30, 2020 after first online publication.] 3 a billboard near a police station in chennai https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/india-coronavirus-lockdown-april-3-2020-liveupdates/article31243605.ecewhile scholars have reminded us about the need for a more nuanced reading (gandhi 2016) , conveying significant meanings through its very density, the crowd continues to be stigmatised through its association with dirt and danger (pathological and social). there is little acknowledgement of the economic rationale of the crowd in indian cities, essential to the 10 million street hawkers who ply their goods to a unique 'market of indian shoppers'. if we bother to unravel its constituents, we will find that the spatiality of the negotiated, and all kinds of sales/exchanges made. the crowd also presents the most democratic potential in indian cities whose 'promise of plenitude' displays a remarkable ability to absorb diversity of sentiments and opinions (amin 2008) . equally, contrary to western distinctions between the crowd and the public, in indian cities, the crowd is a critical characteristic of the public, demonstrating a remarkable sensitivity to not so easily discernible forms of social organisation. and more importantly, for the 1.3 million slum dwellers in a city like chennai living in a different kind of 'crowded' setting marked by a distinct lack of privacy (and other facilities), the (crowded) public is essential to their urban lifeworld. rao (2007) valorizes the crowd through a phenomenological reading of density and its experience of proximate distance that makes incessant interactions in the public possible and manageable. but in a period of lockdown with terms such as public, citizen, civil society, community and even population compromised in their (multiple) meanings, we struggle to redeem the crowd, as it is nothing less than a threat to sociobiological wellbeing.initial press reports drawing on google satellite imagery and on-street photography show that authorities have been successful to a large extent in achieving an impressive feat, i.e. emptying out prominent public landmarks of their 'crowd'. chennai's famed beaches are stripped bare and it is uncanny to see t nagar's usually congested ranganathan street without its characteristic mass of bodies. but, you need to only turn the corner to see that the crowd is not so easily deleted but only displaced. [few corrections were added on april 30, 2020 after first online publication.] 5 many cases, boldly under the gaze of the surveillance state. the re-emergence of the crowd in a locked-down city or its persistent presence is not a sign of a violation but a reflex that is precognitive rather than rational or conscious, guided by a compulsive routine of certain social practices that cannot be done away with. as an absolute lockdown encounters the ambivalence of everyday life in the city, it becomes equivocal, open to interpretation and negotiation. here, the defiant presence of the crowd despite the lockdown is not due to their inevitability but because it is contingent, limited to impossible choices with few alternatives. there is an ethos of adjustment and recalibration that characterises the indian crowd (rao 2007 ) and now comes in handy. it might not be entirely altruistic and even in a sense violent but in its ability to "adjust", to "make do", it finds an ingenious way to get by (dyson 2017) .through its unrelenting reappearance, this crowd eventually recasts lockdown as, not a necessity but, like itself, a contingency, placing it in tandem and commensurate with what is seen as an abnormalized narrative of confinement/containment. lockdown, under these circumstances, looks like a cheap imitation of what is happening elsewhere. providing a perfect foil to this crowd is another code of 'public' comportment that equally cunningly upholds while simultaneously undermining the lockdown, and that is the act of queuing (gandhi 2013) . since the lockdown, as exceptions are made by the state allowing diffusions into the highly regulated outside, you see people conforming their presence in the now forbidden public by diligent queueing at places, a surprising act for many, but tolerated as one that is less volatile than the crowd. in indian cities, the queue and the in chennai, queues could be seen outside institutions as lines were formed for obtaining 'curfew passes' or at pharmacies, especially 'siddha' medical shops where hearsay treatments are being promised through ayurvedic alternatives such as nilavembu kudineer or kabasura kudineer. despite being known as a city that is 'thick with health care' where some variety of hospital or clinic sits at every street corner ( [few corrections were added on april 30, 2020 after first online publication.] 8 door-to-door health survey of its 1,800,000 households. in addition, 90 'containment zones' have so far been demarcated around an 8km radius (with a buffer of 2-3km) of localities where known covid-19 patients live. this is eerily similar to foucault's (1995) description of disciplinary schemes of a seventeenth century order in a plague-ridden town and is disconcerting when you consider kong's (2018) man spraying a disinfectant in chennai https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/india-coronavirus-lockdown-april-15-2020live-updates/article31343872.ecein his prescient exploration of fear and fascination with the "next pandemic", lynteris (2020) reflects on the post-pandemic condition and how it operates in the pandemic imaginary. for him, it is not post-apocalyptic or a variant of the many "after the end" scenarios but an end of mastery, where we will be forced to inhabit a masterless world.his pessimism about post-pandemic humans as he prophesies an inability to develop a meaningful way of being human is offset somewhat by some hope in identifying a key [few corrections were added on april 30, 2020 after first online publication.] 10 trope of the new condition -a rather mythic-cosmological re-naturalised city. this is perhaps the challenge of any critical reflection on pandemic futures. while no longer speculative, in the next few years, we will all be busy thinking, teaching and writing about this pandemic to various audiences (mostly ourselves). one clear gauntlet is how we write about a 'global pandemic' from here to elsewhere. even as scientists will be occupied with harnessing elusive trends and patterns and reworking models as well as algorithms, could we build a narrative of some significance out of the smaller-scale, oneoff trends without invoking that much-harassed excuse of cultural distinctiveness? do we need to provincialize it? if so, how? would it be enough if we signpost the particular and the singular to expose its global fault lines? while investing it with an ethnographic ethos seems to be one obvious way, could we attempt to construct a pandemic palimpsest of particular places? it will involve building an 'historiography of the present' beyond a linear temporal framing, one that will, no doubt, disrupt the narratives we tend to come up with.delivering the royal historical society lecture in 2018 on the centennial anniversary of the 1918-19 influenza epidemic in india, david arnold (2019) asked what exactly are we seeking to investigate through such a scrutiny and what do we wish to recuperate as he displayed caution in exploring india's own (colonial) specificity against temptations of casting it as the first global pandemic. and, this is what he was wary about -our interest in the past might be simply about reconstructing a more accurate forecasting of the future instead of making sense of the fine-grained materiality of a past pandemic to understand the present. can a grounded analytic of the pandemic "now" help here, and how do weresults: there are 33 covid-19 patients (16 male, 17 female), and the median age was 46 years. nineteen patients (48%) were associated with a family cluster outbreak. seventeen patients (52%) had traveled or lived in hubei province. these patients are early mild cases, most common symptoms are fever [23 (70%)] and cough [13 (39%)]. most patients' white blood cell counts are normal, while they manifest as significant reduction in lymphocytes [17/28 (61%)]. the levels of c-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate suggest a typical viral infection. procalcitonin did not increase and d-dimer increased slightly. lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) levels have elevated in most patients. ct images of these patients showed bilateral multiple plaques or nodular ground-glass opacities (68.4%). fecal nucleic acid results were positive in eight covid-19 patients accompanied with diarrhea. tear nucleic acid results were negative in six covid-19 patients. and four asymptomatic patients were infected with sars-cov-2. conclusions: the clinical symptoms, laboratory results and imaging reports of patients with covid-19 in hunan area are significantly different from those in wuhan area. for non-wuhan epidemic areas, more attention should be paid to nucleic acid test results of throat swabs and stools, and it is not easily to diagnose based on clinical symptoms and ct results. reduced whole blood lymph count can be used as an adjuvant diagnosis of early sars-cov-2 infection. attention should be paid to asymptomatic carriers, which is of great significance for the control of the global epidemic. the purpose of this case series is to describe the clinical manifestations and epidemiological characteristics of patients with sars-cov-2 infection in hunan, china, then compared with wuhan's. we reviewed the care records, laboratory test results, and chest x-rays and ct reports of laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2 infected patients.admission data for these patients were from january 9, 2020 to february j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 9, 2020. the two researchers also independently reviewed data collection forms to confirm repeatedly.continuous variables are expressed as median (iqr) and compared using the mann-whitney u test. categorical variables are expressed as numbers (%) and compared by chi-square test or fisher's exact test. a twosided α of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. spss version 25.0 software (spss, inc., chicago, il, usa) was used to analyse the datas.by feb 9, 2020, 33 admitted hospital patients were identified as laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2 infection in hunan. the patients infected with sars-cov-2 were aged from 27 to 78, and the median age of the patients was 46 years (iqr 31.5-65). as of feb 9, in our cohort of 33 patients no child was infected and no gender distribution in infected patients. (table. 1)the clinical and laboratory data of patients in wuhan area originated from the article of huang, c. (table. 3)many patients with covid-19 in hunan region showed significant symptoms of diarrhea. by testing nucleic acid levels in stool of these patients, we found that the virus was present in both the respiratory tract and the stool of eight patients. of these patients, there is no statistical difference between cycle threshold of respiratory tract and stool (p=0.893).the expression amount of nucleic acid is not related to diarrhea (p=0.285) (table.4 ). however, by testing nucleic acid levels in tears, we found the virus in 6 patients' respiratory tract while their tears were negative (table.5 ).within weeks after the outbreak of the covid-19, china quickly developed a nucleic acid detection protocol for this virus. this is the first time we have proposed a preliminary screening program for covid-19 patients in hunan. we detected sars-cov-2 in oral swabs and stools, because infected patients may release this pathogen through the respiratory tract, feces or body fluids.the white blood cell counts of most newly diagnosed patients with covid-19 in hunan area were normal. even so hey will be accompanied by significant decrease in lymphocyte counts and electrolyte disturbances. sars-cov-2 may be faecal-oral. in our study, it was found that patients outside hubei may have up to 15% of their first symptoms as diarrhea. it is worth mentioning that more patients in hunan suffer from the diarrhea, and the stool nucleic acid positive rate is higher. all of the above phenomenon may be related to regional differences. therefore, every doctor needs to be alert to such a phenomenon, whether to perform sars- j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the world is witnessing the wide spread of the new coronavirus , as many countries have had thousands of infected cases and deaths due to the epidemic, such as italy and spain, which recorded the largest number of deaths up to march 2020. people can become infected with covid-19 disease by other people who have the virus, as this virus spreads by direct contact. it may spread through respiratory droplets when the person coughs or sneezes. it may also spread if a person touches a surface on which the virus is present and then touches his mouth, nose, or eyes [1] . this virus poses a major risk, especially for the elderly and people with chronic diseases such as high blood pressure, heart disease, and diabetes [2] . as a result of the outbreak of the new coronavirus, most hospitals around the world are experiencing problems to tolerate a large number of infected people, as this virus has started to spread among the medical and paramedical teams of these hospitals, and this can cause a great risk to the health of patients staying in hospitals. in addition to the spread of this virus, the world is also witnessing a significant increase in the number of elderly people. where according to the world aging and health report 2015 of the world health organization, the number of people aged 60 and over will increase from 900 million to about 2 billion between 2015 and 2050. this significant increase in the number of elderly people increases patient dependency, chronic diseases, and disability [3] in addition to the large financial burdens that will be incurred by the economies of the countries concerned, as spending on hospital accommodation will increase [4] .given this significant increase in the number of elderly people who often suffer from chronic diseases and who often need hospitalization, and the rapid spreading of the new coronavirus (covid- 19) , we believe that home hospitalization must be adopted by governments to limit the spread of this virus and maintain the health of patients who require a hospital stay.home hospitalization is a smart and pioneering model of health care and is one of the most promising health services that aim to alleviate the suffering of patients, especially the elderly, by avoiding the trouble of moving to hospital institutions for treatment and allowing them to receive continuous care in the comfort of their homes [5] [6] [7] [8] . this hospitalization aims to alleviate the burden of the disease in two ways, one of which is medical and human, given that receiving treatment in the family environment is of great importance and positively affects the benefit of medicines. the second aspect is the economic aspect, especially since the cost at hospitals has witnessed a significant increase, whereas home hospitalization greatly reduces the cost of health care.for the success of the home hospitalization process, the patient must adhere to the doctor's recommendations, and his or her health also must be monitored periodically for medical intervention in case of health turbidity. likewise, the environmental factors of the hospitalization room must be monitored, since these environmental factors can hinder the patient's recovery process and also can cause a risk to health. among these environmental factors that must be monitored is the temperature, whose high or low rise can lead to many risks, and significantly for the elderly it can affect the brain, heart, cardiovascular and respiratory systems, and it can also lead to death in some cases [9] . humidity also can cause health problems for patients suffering from respiratory diseases such as asthma or allergies [10] ; not to forget the dangers of smoking to the patient and human health in general, as well as gas leaks that have health effects on the eyes and respiratory system and can cause deaths.nowadays, with the great evolution in the iot area, it is expected that many smart objects and devices will have a tremendous ability to gather and share information between them [11] . the iot has been relied upon in many applications and its use has seen wide acceptance in almost all fields, including the field of health care, where it is extensively applied in monitoring patient health remotely [12, 13] , and its different technology provides a solid approach to improving safety, health, and the wellbeing of humanity [14, 15] . cloud computing in recent years has provided many of the resources that are supported to take advantage of the iot in terms of processing, ubiquitous computation and storage, and to share these resources in easy and simple ways [16] . many cloud and iot-based solutions have been suggested in the literature [17, 18] , which add to the many benefits of cloud computing to support ever-increasing data volumes. however, moving to the iot cannot be considered a simple application of cloud computing. recently, a new concept of computing has emerged that is attracting much attention as compared to cloud computing, because of its ability to meet requirements that have not yet been addressed through cloud computing; it is termed fog computing [19] . fog computing extends the computing resources of the cloud to the network edge of the iot, allowing many connected devices to offer services such as storing and processing data to their users. its structure also provides support for real-time data analysis for all geographically distributed devices with limited capacity for data storage and processing, thereby reducing the amount of data exchanged between devices and the cloud [20] .this paper aims to contribute to finding new and innovative solutions to develop the healthcare systems in light of the problems experienced by most healthcare institutions during this period, like the congestion and the lack of resources, as a result of the rapid spreading of the new coronavirus (covid-19) through the development of a low-cost, reliable, and safe home hospitalization system based on important modern technologies, that is, the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing. this system enables patients to recover and receive treatment in their homes and between their families, and avoids them the risk of infection with the new coronavirus, especially for elderly people who often suffer from chronic diseases and weak immunity, and find it difficult to move to hospitals. the main contributions of this paper are:� proposing a home hospitalization system based on iot, fog computing, and cloud computing. � developing an environmental sensing unit and a mobile application that plays the role of the fog server and enables the viewing and analysis of the environmental factors of the hospitalization room in real-time.� developing a vital signs sensing unit and a mobile application that plays the role of the fog server and enables the nurses to measure patients vital signs and prepare medical reports. � developing a mobile application for doctors that enable them to monitor the environmental status of hospitalization rooms and the health status of patients and provide recommendations to nurses and patients and their relatives. � developing a mobile application for patients and their relatives that enables them to follow the hospitalization process, the environmental status of the hospitalization rooms, and doctors' recommendations. � evaluating the proposed home hospitalization system by the patients and doctors.the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. section 2 presents related works to the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper. a detailed description of the proposed system is presented in section 3, while section 4 explains the implementation and results. finally, the conclusion and future works are presented in section 5.this paper proposes a home hospitalization system in which patient vital signs, and environmental factors of hospitalization rooms are monitored using the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing. this section presents the most important works based on these technologies, which offer systems and solutions to monitor patient health and environmental factors.in recent years, the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing have been utilized to monitor patient health as described in many research works, due to the ability of these technologies to provide quick, safe, and low-cost solutions [21] [22] [23] . at [24] for example, an iot-based smart healthcare system is designed that collects patient information from different sensors and allows a doctor to monitor patient physiological parameters remotely, and diagnose diseases quickly, and also provides alerts to both the guardian and the doctor by sending sms or emails in a timely manner. in refs. [25] an e-health system for elderly's health monitoring based on iot and fog computing was proposed, where this system periodically collected physiological and public health parameters of the elderly using the mysignals hw v2 platform and an android application that plays the role of fog server and enables the elderly and their families to monitor their health and communicate with health care providers. an iot-based application has been proposed that explains the benefits of the concept of fog computing [26] . this application aims to provide reliable, accurate, and immediate heart rate monitoring via embedded wearable devices, mobile edge devices, and cloud services. in recent years, the use of smartphones and tablets has increased in health monitoring applications, where they are used as mobile computing devices and as fog servers that process data and send it to the cloud [27] [28] [29] [30] . a mobile application was used at [31] to monitor the patient's heart in real time as an application through the pulse rate sensor, which measures the patient's pulse and then sends it to storage in a remote database. this application also sends notifications to the doctor if a problem is discovered in the heartbeat. a mobile application was also used to develop a system for monitoring vital signs at work [32] .as for monitoring environmental factors, it has been discussed in many studies. at [33] for example, guidance was provided on how to use technology for environmental monitoring. at [34] a complex event processing engine (cep) was introduced to monitor the environment based on iot that detects anomalies in real-time. in ref. [35] is offered a smart system for monitoring and internal environmental management based on environmental sensors and cloud computing, where this system collects data related to internal gases and then it stores and processes environmental data in the cloud, and this system enables users to monitor the environment and receive warnings if air quality exceeds the legal limit, through a web-based monitoring platform. at [36] an environmental monitoring system for internal thermal comfort has been proposed to explore the thermal comfort of people in indoor environments, depending on the iot.as we have seen in this section, there are many studies done based on the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing to monitor patient health and monitor environmental factors, but we did not find works that merged monitoring patient's health and monitoring environmental factors in one system despite the significant impact of environmental factors on patient health; also most of these systems rely mainly on the internet to send data to the cloud, and when the internet is interrupted, these systems become useless and for this, we believe that these systems will not be implemented and accepted in most developing countries because these countries do not have a good infrastructure for the internet in all regions. in the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, we will merge monitoring the health status of patients and monitoring environmental factors in one system, as this system will allow patients to recover in their homes and avoid the difficulties and risks of moving to health institutions. the problem of the internet outage will be overcome also by relying on fog computing along with cloud computing.this section describes the proposed home hospitalization system based on iot, fog computing, and cloud computing. this section will be divided into two parts, the first part presents the proposed system's architecture, while the second part presents the architecture of the cloud computing used in this system.in this paper, we propose a home hospitalization system based on the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing, whereby in this proposed system the environment of the hospitalization room is monitored in addition to monitoring patient health remotely to ensure a good hospitalization process. fig. 1 illustrates the architecture of this proposed system. in this proposed system, the hospitalization room's environment is monitored through an environmental sensing unit and a mobile application that plays the role of the fog server and enables the viewing and analysis of the environmental factors of the hospitalization room in real time, while the patient's health is monitored through a vital signs sensing unit and a mobile application that plays the role of the fog server and enables the nurses to measure the patients' vital signs and prepare medical reports. this proposed system also provides a mobile application for the doctors that enable them to monitor the environmental status of hospitalization rooms and the health status of patients and provide recommendations to nurses and patients and their relatives, and a mobile application for patients and their relatives that enable them to follow the hospitalization process, the environmental status of the hospitalization rooms, and doctors' recommendations. for data storage, we chose the nosql database due to their ability to solve relational database problems such as the problem of heterogeneity of data and its ability to deal with large amounts of data, as it has great scalability and high flexibility [37] [38] [39] . below is a detailed description of the hospitalization room's environmental monitoring and patient's health monitoring process.in hospitals, the environmental factors are often suitable for the hospitalization process, but in the home hospitalization process, these factors can be outside the limits of ideal values and therefore adversely can affect the hospitalization process and can also represent a risk to the patient's health and for this, we consider that environmental monitoring of the hospitalization room is necessary for the home hospitalization process. as shown in fig. 1 , the proposed architecture of the hospitalization room's environmental monitoring is mainly based on the environmental sensing unit and a mobile application installed on a tablet fig. 1 . the general architecture of the proposed home hospitalization system. device that plays the role of a fog server.the proposed environmental sensing unit is composed of three modules for the detection of environmental factors. the modules used are the temperature and humidity detection module (dht11 sensor), the gas leak detection module (mq5 sensor), and the smoke detection module (mq2 sensor). these three detection modules are connected to the nodemcu v3 board, which collects the values of environmental factors and then sends them to the fog server via the wifi periodically. the temperature and humidity detection module (dht 11) returns numerical values and for this, it is directly connected to the nodemcu v3 board; however, the gas leak detection module (mq5 sensor) and the smoke detection module (mq2 sensor) return analog values and for that we use an analog/digital converter (adc) to convert the values of these modules. table 1 presents the components of the proposed environmental sensing unit in detail.the fog server receives the data sent by the environmental sensing unit and then displays it in real time. it also analyzes this data if it is within the limits of ideal values or not. if this data is outside the limits of ideal values, the fog server sends an alert to all actors in this system in real time, otherwise, it stores this data locally and processes it and then sends it to the cloud via the internet through the rest api for permanent storage and further processing and analysis.in the hospitalization process in hospitals, patient health is continuously monitored, with a nurse visiting the patient to monitor and record vital signs and compare them with previously captured data. the frequency of visits is related to the suggested schedule from the patient's doctor. electronic instruments are generally used to measure patient vital signs; these instruments are generally large and are not easily transmitted. vital signs are usually recorded in the form of a graph, which doctors often see daily during their visits.in the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, the patient's health is monitored almost the same way as the patient's health is monitored in hospitals, where the nurse visits the patient according to the appointment schedule provided by the supervising doctor. during these visits, the nurse verifies the patient's health, measures vital signs, and prepares a medical report that is sent to the doctor for every visit made. the process of measuring patient vital signs is carried out through the sensing unit and a mobile application installed on a tablet that plays the role of fog server, as shown in fig. 1 .the vital signs sensing unit of this system is the mysignals hw v2 platform, which is a development platform for medical devices and ehealth applications. the mysignals hw v2 platform is the most complete on the market, as it supports many biomedical sensors to measure biometric parameters such as ecg signals, blood pressure, blood oxygen, pulse, respiratory rate, and body temperature. it is small in size and can be carried easily to the patient's home to measure vital signs. the mysignals hw v2 platform relies on the atmega 328 (arduino uno) microcontroller to manage various sensors and also allows tablets and smartphones to communicate with it, via built-in wifi and ble modules.the process of measuring vital signs is done by the patient's wearing the vital signs sensors to be measured; then the mobile application installed on the tablet plays the role of fog server and communicates with the mysignals hw v2 platform via wifi to measure these vital signs, where it sends a request to the mysignals hw v2 platform to measure the required vital signs. mysignals hw v2 measures these vital signs and then sends the measurements to the mobile application. the mobile application analyzes these measurements, and displays and stores them locally. based on the results of the measurements, and some oral questions that the nurse asks the patient and his relatives, the nurse writes a medical report through the mobile application and then sends the measurements and the report to the cloud for permanent storage and further analysis via rest api. through these measurements and medical reports stored in the cloud, the supervising doctor can, through a mobile application, monitor the patient's health status and provide recommendations and instructions to the nurse and the patient and his relatives to ensure a good hospitalization process and timely intervention if there is a risk to the patient's health.cloud hosting represents a radical change of the traditional hosting options such as shared hosting and dedicated hosting, where it has many advantages that improve it as compared with traditional hosting [43] . cloud hosting has a strong and flexible infrastructure that allows expanding the used resources easily, and also ensures the availability of data permanently, in addition to providing a high level of protection. it is also a low-cost hosting, where the cost of hosting is calculated against the amount of use of the cloud resources, unlike the traditional hosting whose cost often exceeds the cost of resources used. the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper relies on cloud computing to host the rest api and data storage where the microsoft azure cloud platform will be used, which is one of the most prominent cloud computing platforms [44] . fig. 2 shows the cloud table 1 the components of the proposed environmental sensing unit. this module is an analog-to-digital converter (adc) that converts an analog quantity into a digital value (coded over several bits), proportional to the ratio between the input analog quantity and the maximum value of the signal. since we have in this system analog sensors (gas sensor mq2 and gas sensor mq5) then we need an analog-to-digital converter because the nodemcu v3 contains a single analog input and for that, we will use the mcp3008-i/p analog-digital converter from microchip technologie inc. the mcp3008-i/p communication with the nodemcu v3 is performed using a simple serial interface compatible with the spi protocol.for the power supply to the nodemcu v3, the voltage must be between 3.3 v and 9 v. under no circumstances should this input voltage be exceeded. it can thus be seen that the card is powered by connecting a 3.3 v power source to one of the 3.3 v terminals, by connecting to a micro usb with a usb cable or by connecting a source to vin. for this, we used a 5 v power supply to power the nodemcu v3 and the other modules of the system. computing architecture proposed in this system. the microsoft azure cloud platform is a provider of cloud services that include infrastructure as a service (iaas), platform as a service (paas), and software as a service (saas) created by microsoft using its network of data centers that it is constantly expanding all over the world, as it provides a variety of cloud computing, storage, and application services for all types of users from the business sector and institutions. it allows the creation of applications and services, examination, management, and dissemination over a huge global network using the unique tools and frameworks it provides. security and privacy are also included on the azure platform. the microsoft azure cloud platform provides the ability to store data securely with ready access, while providing the possibility to increase the storage space at any time depending on the user's business activity. as in the case of cloud computing services, the cost is only based on the space consumed, and the total cost is calculated depending on the hours of access and data usage. it also provides the possibility to create applications with ease, and publish compatible applications globally on all web platforms and mobile phones spread, and be able to develop and respond very quickly with the ability to manage web applications and examine and publish them widely with ease.for data storage in this proposed system, we have relied on azure cosmos db, which is a globally distributed and multi-model database service of microsoft that provides flexible storage and fast data access with implementation of wire protocols for common nosql databases including azure tables storage, gremlin, cassandra and mongodb.mongodb was chosen as a data storage system, which is a system of databases of the category called nosql, or more accurately, the non-relational database management system, and it utilizes bson (binary json) files. likewise, mongodb considers schema-less as it does not adhere to a specific schema, so the content of files may vary from time to time. mongodb is also considered a scalable system as it can cope with thousands of requests simultaneously without affecting the speed of performance [45] . as in mysql, which consists of tables, mongodb is also composed of collections, which in turn contain documents, so that the size of the collection depends on the number of documents contained within it. we can say that one of the most important differences between mongodb and mysql is that the file structure does not adhere to certain rules, as we find that the rows' components are the same in one table. they must be subject to the schema rules that have been defined as mongodb does not support any scheme and therefore the file structure can change from time to time within the same collection [46] .node.js was chosen to develop the rest api due to its superiority over other web development technologies such as php/nginx in computational performance and its great use in real-time and high-speed applications [47, 48] . node.js is a free software platform in javascript oriented towards highly competitive event network applications that must be able to scale up. it uses the v8 virtual machine, the libuv library for its event loop, and implements the commonjs specifications under the mit license. among the native modules of node.js, there is http which allows the development of http server. it is, therefore, possible to do without web servers such as nginx or apache when deploying websites and web applications developed with node.js. concretely, node.js is a low-level environment for executing server-side javascript. node.js is used in particular as a web server platform; it is used by linkedin, microsoft, yahoo, and paypal.rest api connects between the proposed system's applications and the database, where the applications can store, retrieve, and manage data through web services using http requests and json data model [49] . to develop the rest api will use the express.js framework, which is a helpful web application framework for node.js released as a free and open-source program designed to build web applications and apis [50] . in addition to the mongoose library, an object data modeling (odm) for mongodb and node.js, it is used to manage the relationships between the express.js framework and the mongodb database [51] . this section explains the process of implementing the proposed home hospitalization system, where an in-depth look is given to the implementation of the hospitalization room's environmental monitoring process and the implementation of the patient's health monitoring process, and the display of the mobile applications for different actors in this system, in addition to discussing the characteristics and advantages of this proposed system and its evaluation using the system usability scale (sus).monitoring the environmental factors of the hospitalization room is very important in the home hospitalization process, given the impact of these factors on the patient's health. to monitor these environmental factors we have developed an environmental sensing unit based on the nodemcu v3 board that senses environmental factors and an android application that plays the role of the fog server, where this application communicates with the nodemcu v3 board and collects the sensed data of the environmental factors and then processes, analyzes, displays them in real-time, and stores them locally, and sends the information to the cloud for permanent storage and further analysis. fig. 3 shows the fig. 3 . the environmental sensing unit and the android application interfaces. environmental sensing unit and the home interface of the android application developed to monitor the environmental factors of the hospitalization room.the environmental sensing unit senses the temperature and humidity via the dht11 sensor, the smoke via the mq2 sensor, and the lpg gas via the mq5 sensor. the mq2 sensor and mq5 sensor are analog sensors, the nodemcu v3 board contains only one analog input pin, so we used the mcp3008-i/p analog-digital converter to connect these analog sensors to the nodemcu v3 board. whereas the dht11 sensor is a digital sensor, so we connected it directly to the nodemcu v3 board that has 10 gpio pins which can be used for digital input and output operations.to sense these environmental factors and communicate with the android application, we have programmed a cþþ script using the arduino ide. this script makes the nodemcu v3 board work as an http server using wifi access point mode for making the android application installed on the tablet communicate with the nodemcu v3 board via wifi without having to connect to a router. in this script we have developed, an ssid name and password are assigned to access the nodemcu v3 board as well as to install its ip address. with this ip address, the nodemcu v3 board can deliver web pages and web services to all connected devices within its network. this script returns the environmental factors that are sensed in json format consumed by the android application, where the android application sends http requests to the nodemcu v3 board. the nodemcu v3 board senses the environmental factors and then returns the sensed data to the android application in json format. this is, of course, after the tablet device on which the android application is installed has connected to the nodemcu wifi access point by entering the ssid name and password and doing the necessary settings.the android application periodically collects environmental factors and displays them in real-time, it also stores these environmental factors locally and processes and analyzes them. for example, if these factors are outside the scope of health factors such as recording a gas leak or sensing smoke in the room or a significant increase or decrease in the degree of humidity or room temperature, the android application gives a sound alert and also sends an alert to the relatives of the patient, the supervising doctor, and the system administrators. this alert is a notification sent to each of them arriving via their applications, in addition to an sms message that arrives in real time to intervene to save the patient if these factors represent a real risk to patient health.the android application also sends the sensed environmental data to the cloud for permanent storage and further analysis, and this data is also stored locally for a specified period, to be displayed if the application is not able to send the data to the cloud.initially, our idea was for the nodemcu v3 board was to send the sensed data directly to the cloud via the internet, and through mobile applications, this data would be accessed, but we retreated on this idea because it will increase system cost, as we will need a router to connect the nodemcu v3 board to the internet. in addition to that, in many regions, especially in developing countries, there is no internet connection, and even when present, internet speed is often low, so that we chose to rely on an android application installed on a tablet device that plays the role of a fog server to collect this data and send it to the cloud via 3g/4g. even if the android application is unable to send this data to the cloud, it stores the data locally and alerts the patient if environmental factors represent a danger to him or her through this application, and the patient's supervisors are then alerted via sms. fig. 3(a) shows the android application interfaces dedicated to the settings where the environmental sensing unit id is determined, the ideal ranges for environmental factors, and the phone numbers of the patient's supervisors are also imported. fig. 3(b) shows the android application interfaces dedicated to displaying measurements of the hospitalization room's environmental factors.the patient's health monitoring in this proposed system is carried out by the nurse who periodically visits the patient according to the schedule set by the supervising doctor to measure vital signs and prepare a medical report that is sent to the doctor on every visit made. the process of measuring patient vital signs and writing the medical report is done through an android application installed on a tablet device. fig. 4 illustrates some interfaces of this application, where the nurse can after logging in by entering the login and password see the schedule of visits for all the patients to be visited. after that, the nurse chooses the relevant visit to perform the health monitoring process (measuring the patient's vital signs and preparing the medical report). the nurse can also view the reports of previous visits, the recommendations of the supervising doctor, and the patient profile.the patient's vital signs are measured through this android application that plays the role of the fog server, and the vital signs sensing unit which is the mysignals hw v2 platform in this system.in this system, spo2, heart rate, body temperature, and electrocardiogram (ecg) are measured. this system can be expanded to measure other patient data such as airflow, blood pressure, blood sugar, galvanic skin response, and electromyography (emg). a cþþ script is programmed using the integrated development environment arduino ide to make the mysignals hw v3 platform able to measure these vital signs and send them to the android application via wifi connection. fig. 5(a) shows the process of measuring spo2 and heart rate, where the sensor is placed on the index finger of the patient, and through the android application, a request for measuring spo2 and heart rate is sent to the mysignals hw v2 platform. this platform measures spo2 and heart rate and then sends the measurements to the android application to store locally before sending to the cloud. regarding the patient's body temperature measurement, the sensor is placed on the index finger or on the part where the temperature is measured, and through the android application a request for measuring the body temperature is sent to the mysignals hw v2 platform. this platform measures the body temperature and then sends the measurements to the android application to store locally before sending to the cloud, as shown in fig. 5(b) .as for the electrocardiogram (ecg), fig. 6 shows its measurement process where the sensors are connected to the patient's chest, and through the android application, an ecg measurement request is sent to the mysignals hw v2 platform, this platform measures the ecg and visualizes the data in real time on its screen and through the android application is done to evaluate the obtained ecg measurements results.after performing the patient vital signs measurement process, the nurse prepares and saves the medical report as shown in fig. 7 . after saving the medical report, this android application deletes this visit from the nurse's visit list, and encrypts the measurements and the medical report and sends them to the cloud for permanent storage and more analysis through the rest api via the internet. if there is no internet connection, this data will be stored locally and sent to the cloud automatically at the first internet connection.in the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, there are four groups of actors, which are the doctors, the nurses, the patients and their relatives, and the system administrators. each of them plays a specific role in this system through its android application. in the previous subsection, we presented the nurses' android application that allows them to measure the patients' vital signs and prepare the medical reports. in this subsection, we will present the android applications for the doctors, the patients and their relatives, and the system administrators. react native has been used to develop the various applications of this system it is an open-source mobile application framework created by facebook that is used to develop android and ios applications using reactjs, and it allows developers to use all the native functionality of these platforms [52] . fig. 8 illustrates some android application interfaces for the doctors, where after logging in, each doctor can view the profiles of patients and follow the environmental condition of the hospitalization rooms ( fig. 8  (a) ), and the health status of patients by viewing the measurements and medical report for each patient (fig. 8(b) ). through this android application, the doctor also manages each patient's medications, determining the time to take each type of medicine, in addition to providing recommendations to patients and their relatives to ensure a good hospitalization process. this android application also provides notifications to the doctors when adding any medical report for one of the patients or when the environmental condition of any hospitalization room poses a risk to the patient's health. fig. 9 (a) shows some android application interfaces for patients and their relatives, where the patient or a member of his relatives after logging in can view the list of visits that the nurse will make to the patient to follow his or her health, in addition to viewing the list of the patient's medications and the time to take each type of them, the recommendations of the supervising doctor, and the environmental condition of the hospitalization room. this android application also provides notifications when the nurse's visit is approaching, the date of taking the medications is approaching, when the supervising doctor sends a recommendation, or when the environmental condition of the hospitalization room poses a risk to the patient's health. fig. 9 (b) illustrates some android application interfaces for system administrators, where this android application enables them to manage the patient and their relatives' accounts, manage doctors' accounts, and manage nurses' accounts in addition to managing the home hospitalization process. the start and end date of each hospitalization process are determined for each patient, and scheduling the visits of the nurses to the patients, and the management of the environmental sensing units for each hospitalization room are done by adding an id and code pin for each environmental sensing unit and linking it with the patient's account, and determining the ideal values for each environmental factor. this android application also allows for following the environmental factors of each hospitalization room and receiving notifications when the environmental condition of a specific room poses a risk to the patient's health.the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper represents a paradigm shift for smart healthcare systems. this system allows patients to recover and receive treatment in their homes and between their families and avoids for them the difficulties of moving to hospitals and the risk of infection with the new coronavirus, which is especially important for the elderly, who often suffer from chronic diseases and weak immunity. this system also addresses the problems of congestion and lack of resources suffered by most health institutions and hospitals during this period. through this system, the health of the patients and the environmental condition of the hospitalization rooms are monitored remotely and periodically throughout the hospitalization period, which allows doctors to follow the processes of hospitalization and supervise the patients remotely.this proposed system is distinguished from other smart health care systems proposed in the literature, as it is easy to apply, of low cost, reliable and safe, and it also integrates monitoring the health of patients and the environmental factors of the hospitalization rooms in one system, which allows doctors to diagnose the state of their patients. furthermore, it can be applied in rich and developed countries, as in poor and developing countries.most of the smart healthcare systems proposed in recent years primarily monitor patients' health remotely using sensors and electronic devices connected to the internet, that send patients' vital signs measurements to doctors in real time. at [24] for example, a smart iot-based healthcare system is designed to allow measuring, viewing, and monitoring the patient's vitals using a set of sensors. this system also sends an alert to the doctor and the patient's family whenever the vitals reach or exceeds a certain limit. the data recorded in the form of an excel sheet is also collected in google drive for future analysis, as it can be viewed through a web application and a mobile application. in ref. [25] , an e-health system was also proposed to monitor the health of the elderly based on iot and fog computing. this system allows the collection of physiological and public health parameters for the elderly periodically. it uses the mysignals hw v2 platform and an android application that plays the role of fog server and enables the elderly and their families to monitor the health state, and communicate with healthcare providers. the problem with these two proposed systems is that they are based primarily on the internet, and since in many regions, especially in developing countries, there is no connection to the internet, and even if it exists, the speed of the internet is low, we believe that such systems will not be implemented and accepted in most developing countries. they do not have good infrastructure for the internet in all regions due to limited financial capabilities to provide smart sensors to monitor patient health remotely for all patients, unlike the developed and rich countries that can overcome these obstacles.concerning the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, we believe that it can be easily implemented and accepted in developing countries and developed countries alike due to its solution to the internet infrastructure problem and its low cost. in this proposed system, we will not need a vital signs sensing device for each patient to monitor its health, but we will need one device (vital signs sensing unit) for each nurse and a mobile application that plays the role of fog server communicating with the vital signs sensing unit, through which the nurse measures the vital signs of patients and prepares medical reports at each visit. this application solves the internet connection problem wherein case the internet coverage does not reach the patient's home, this application will store data locally and send it to the cloud at the first internet connection. the environmental sensing unit is also distinguished by its low cost, as the cost of making its prototype is just a few dollars. this unit is installed in the hospitalization room at the start of each home hospitalization process, and at the end of the hospitalization process it is used for another patient hospitalization process; this of course reduces the cost of this system. this unit collects environmental factors data for the hospitalization room and sends it to the cloud via the internet through a mobile application installed on a tablet device that plays the role of fog server. the data is stored also locally in this application. the patient is alerted if these environmental factors represent a danger to him or her through this application (fog server) without the need to connect to the internet, and all supervisors of the patient are alerted via sms. alerts are sent to their mobile applications via the fog server if there is an internet connection. for data storage, cloud computing platforms provide reliable storage that maintains data security and with low cost. this is why we chose the microsoft azure cloud platform for data storage and the hosting of the applications of the proposed system.to evaluate the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, we have used the system usability scale (sus), as this scale provides a fast and reliable tool for measuring ease of use [53, 54] and allows the evaluation of a variety of services and products, including mobile devices, mobile applications, and websites. to detect most usability problems, it is acceptable to evaluate with five users as described in ref. [55] ; based on this, five hospitalized patients between the ages of 45 and 61 years and five doctors were selected to conduct usability testing. to evaluate the proposed home hospitalization system, the system model was explained and a demonstration was made of its various applications for both patients and doctors, after which they were asked to complete the sus questionnaire. the questionnaire is composed of 10 questions to assess system usability, where each of the questions is classified based on the amount of agreement, from one (strongly disagree) to five (strongly agree), as shown in fig. 10(a) . after patients and doctors have finished answering questions, the sus scores are calculated as shown in fig. 10(b) . table 2 displays the values of the sus questionnaires provided by each patient, the sus value per patient, and the average sus calculated for all patients. table 3 shows the values of the sus questionnaires provided by each doctor, the sus value per doctor, and the average sus calculated for all doctors.the evaluation score obtained in the sus evaluation for patients is 91.0, while for doctors it is 93.0. according to theory [53] and as shown in fig. 10(c) , the usability is excellent, because we need to score above 80.8 to get a degree a, which is the higher degree in usability.as seen in the evaluation, the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper was very well accepted by patients and doctors alike, but we believe this system must be improved and some adjustments made for it to be applied to coronavirus patients safely, among these changes and improvements, the patient was made to measure vital signs by him or herself, and video communication was added between patients and doctors. however, for these changes and improvements, we believe that poor and developing countries will not be able to implement the system due to the cost increase and the lack of good internet coverage in all regions.in this paper, a home hospitalization system based on the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing have been proposed. this system allows patients to recover and receive treatment in their homes and among their families, where the patients' health and the environmental factors of the hospitalization rooms are monitored periodically, through a vital signs sensing unit and environmental sensing units that are installed in the hospitalization rooms and mobile applications developed for this purpose. this system also enables doctors, patients, and their family members to manage and monitor hospitalization operations through their mobile applications. the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper is distinguished by its low cost, reliability, and safety in addition to its ability to solve the problems currently witnessed in hospitals, as it can substantially reduce the burden on them. this system has received very good acceptance by patients and doctors alike according to the results of the usability evaluation.as future work, changes will be made to this system to make it more appropriate to the quarantine operations of coronavirus patients, as we will develop the patients' mobile application to enable them to measure vital signs by themselves, and we will add video communication between the patients and their supervising doctors via this application. we will develop also a smart bracelet that the coronavirus patients will wear. this bracelet measures the patient's temperature and pulse in real time and sends them to the cloud for storage and analysis, to rescue the patient quickly in case his or her health condition is disturbed. this bracelet also sends the coordinates of the patient's location via gps to the cloud in real time to interfere if the patient violates the quarantine. this project is carried out under the mobidoc scheme, funded by the eu through the emori program and managed by the anpr. the world is witnessing the wide spread of the new coronavirus , as many countries have had thousands of infected cases and deaths due to the epidemic, such as italy and spain, which recorded the largest number of deaths up to march 2020. people can become infected with covid-19 disease by other people who have the virus, as this virus spreads by direct contact. it may spread through respiratory droplets when the person coughs or sneezes. it may also spread if a person touches a surface on which the virus is present and then touches his mouth, nose, or eyes [1] . this virus poses a major risk, especially for the elderly and people with chronic diseases such as high blood pressure, heart disease, and diabetes [2] . as a result of the outbreak of the new coronavirus, most hospitals around the world are experiencing problems to tolerate a large number of infected people, as this virus has started to spread among the medical and paramedical teams of these hospitals, and this can cause a great risk to the health of patients staying in hospitals. in addition to the spread of this virus, the world is also witnessing a significant increase in the number of elderly people.where according to the world aging and health report 2015 of the world health organization, the number of people aged 60 and over will increase from 900 million to about 2 billion between 2015 and 2050. this significant increase in the number of elderly people increases patient dependency, chronic diseases, and disability [3] in addition to the large financial burdens that will be incurred by the economies of the countries concerned, as spending on hospital accommodation will increase [4] .given this significant increase in the number of elderly people who often suffer from chronic diseases and who often need hospitalization, and the rapid spreading of the new coronavirus , we believe that home hospitalization must be adopted by governments to limit the spread of this virus and maintain the health of patients who require a hospital stay.home hospitalization is a smart and pioneering model of health care and is one of the most promising health services that aim to alleviate the suffering of patients, especially the elderly, by avoiding the trouble of moving to hospital institutions for treatment and allowing them to receive continuous care in the comfort of their homes [5, 6, 7, 8] . this hospitalization aims to alleviate the burden of the disease in two ways, one of which is medical and human, given that receiving treatment in the family environment is of great importance and positively affects the benefit of medicines. the second aspect is the economic aspect, especially since the cost at hospitals has witnessed a significant increase, whereas home hospitalization greatly reduces the cost of health care.for the success of the home hospitalization process, the patient must adhere to the doctor's recommendations, and his or her health also must be monitored periodically for medical intervention in case of health turbidity. likewise, the environmental factors of the hospitalization room must be monitored, since these environmental factors can hinder the patient's recovery process and also can cause a risk to health. among these environmental factors that must be monitored is the temperature, whose high or low rise can lead to many risks, and significantly for the elderly it can affect the brain, heart, cardiovascular and respiratory systems, and it can also lead to death in some cases [9] . humidity also can cause health problems for patients suffering from respiratory diseases such as asthma or allergies [10] ; not to forget the dangers of smoking to the patient and human health in general, as well as gas leaks that have health effects on the eyes and respiratory system and can cause deaths.nowadays, with the great evolution in the iot area, it is expected that many smart objects and devices will have a tremendous ability to gather and share information between them [11] . the iot has been relied upon in many applications and its use has seen wide acceptance in almost all fields, including the field of health care, where it is extensively applied in monitoring patient health remotely [12, 13] , and its different technology provides a solid approach to improving safety, health, and the wellbeing of humanity [14, 15] . cloud computing in recent years has provided many of the resources that are supported to take advantage of the iot in terms of processing, ubiquitous computation and storage, and to share these resources in easy and simple ways [16] . many cloud and iot-based solutions have been suggested in the literature [17, 18] , which add to the many benefits of cloud computing to support ever-increasing data volumes. however, moving to the iot cannot be considered a simple application of cloud computing. recently, a new concept of computing has emerged that is attracting much attention as compared to cloud computing, because of its ability to meet requirements that have not yet been addressed through cloud computing; it is termed fog computing [19] . fog computing extends the computing resources of the cloud to the network edge of the iot, allowing many connected devices to offer services such as storing and processing data to their users. its structure also provides support for real-time data analysis for all geographically distributed devices with limited capacity for data storage and processing, thereby reducing the amount of data exchanged between devices and the cloud [20].this paper aims to contribute to finding new and innovative solutions to develop the healthcare systems in light of the problems experienced by most healthcare institutions during this period, like the congestion and the lack of resources, as a result of the rapid spreading of the new coronavirus (covid-19) through the development of a low-cost, reliable, and safe home hospitalization system based on important modern technologies, that is, the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing. this system enables patients to recover and receive treatment in their homes and between their families, and avoids them the risk of infection with the new coronavirus, especially for elderly people who often suffer from chronic diseases and weak immunity, and find it difficult to move to hospitals. the main contributions of this paper are:• proposing a home hospitalization system based on iot, fog computing, and cloud computing.• developing an environmental sensing unit and a mobile application that plays the role of the fog server and enables the viewing and analysis of the environmental factors of the hospitalization room in real-time.• developing a vital signs sensing unit and a mobile application that plays the role of the fog server and enables the nurses to measure patients vital signs and prepare medical reports.• developing a mobile application for doctors that enable them to monitor the environmental status of hospitalization rooms and the health status of patients and provide recommendations to nurses and patients and their relatives.• developing a mobile application for patients and their relatives that enables them to follow the hospitalization process, the environmental status of the hospitalization rooms, and doctors' recommendations.• evaluating the proposed home hospitalization system by the patients and doctors.the remainder of this paper is organized as follows. section 2 presents related works to the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper. a detailed description of the proposed system is presented in section 3, while section 4 explains the implementation and results. finally, the conclusion and future works are presented in section 5.this paper proposes a home hospitalization system in which patient vital signs, and environmental factors of hospitalization rooms are monitored using the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing. this section presents the most important works based on these technologies, which offer systems and solutions to monitor patient health and environmental factors.in recent years, the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing have been utilized to monitor patient health as described in many research works, due to the ability of these technologies to provide quick, safe, and low-cost solutions [21, 22, 23] . at [24] for example, an iot-based smart healthcare system is designed that collects patient information from different sensors and allows a doctor to monitor patient physiological parameters remotely, and diagnose diseases quickly, and also provides alerts to both the guardian and the doctor by sending sms or emails in a timely manner. in [25] an e-health system for elderly's health monitoring based on iot and fog computing was proposed, where this system periodically collected physiological and public health parameters of the elderly using the mysignals hw v2 platform and an android application that plays the role of fog server and enables the elderly and their families to monitor their health and communicate with health care providers. an iot-based application has been proposed that explains the benefits of the concept of fog computing [26] . this application aims to provide reliable, accurate, and immediate heart rate monitoring via embedded wearable devices, mobile edge devices, and cloud services. in recent years, the use of smartphones and tablets has increased in health monitoring applications, where they are used as mobile computing devices and as fog servers that process data and send it to the cloud [27, 28, 29, 30] . a mobile application was used at [31] to monitor the patient's heart in real time as an application through the pulse rate sensor, which measures the patient's pulse and then sends it to storage in a remote database. this application also sends notifications to the doctor if a problem is discovered in the heartbeat. a mobile application was also used to develop a system for monitoring vital signs at work [32] .as for monitoring environmental factors, it has been discussed in many studies. at [33] for example, guidance was provided on how to use technology for environmental monitoring. at [34] a complex event processing engine (cep) was introduced to monitor the environment based on iot that detects anomalies in real-time. in [35] is offered a smart system for monitoring and internal environmental management based on environmental sensors and cloud computing, where this system collects data related to internal gases and then it stores and processes environmental data in the cloud, and this system enables users to monitor the environment and receive warnings if air quality exceeds the legal limit, through a web-based monitoring platform. at [36] an environmental monitoring system for internal thermal comfort has been proposed to explore the thermal comfort of people in indoor environments, depending on the iot.as we have seen in this section, there are many studies done based on the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing to monitor patient health and monitor environmental factors, but we did not find works that merged monitoring patient's health and monitoring environmental factors in one system despite the significant impact of environmental factors on patient health; also most of these systems rely mainly on the internet to send data to the cloud, and when the internet is interrupted, these systems become useless and for this, we believe that these systems will not be implemented and accepted in most developing countries because these countries do not have a good infrastructure for the internet in all regions. in the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, we will merge monitoring the health status of patients and monitoring environmental factors in one system, as this system will allow patients to recover in their homes and avoid the difficulties and risks of moving to health institutions. the problem of the internet outage will be overcome also by relying on fog computing along with cloud computing.this section describes the proposed home hospitalization system based on iot, fog computing, and cloud computing. this section will be divided into two parts, the first part presents the proposed system's architecture, while the second part presents the architecture of the cloud computing used in this system.in this paper, we propose a home hospitalization system based on the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing, whereby in this proposed system the environment of the hospitalization room is monitored in addition to monitoring patient health remotely to ensure a good hospitalization process. figure 1 illustrates the architecture of this proposed system. in this proposed system, the hospitalization room's environment is monitored through an environmental sensing unit and a mobile application that plays the role of the fog server and enables the viewing and analysis of the environmental factors of the hospitalization room in real time, while the patient's health is monitored through a vital signs sensing unit and a mobile application that plays the role of the fog server and enables the nurses to measure the patients' vital signs and prepare medical reports. this proposed system also provides a mobile application for the doctors that enable them to monitor the environmental status of hospitalization rooms and the health status of patients and provide recommendations to nurses and patients and their relatives, and a mobile application for patients and their relatives that enable them to follow the hospitalization process, the environmental status of the hospitalization rooms, and doctors' recommendations. for data storage, we chose the nosql database due to their ability to solve relational database problems such as the problem of heterogeneity of data and its ability to deal with large amounts of data, as it has great scalability and high flexibility [37, 38, 39] . below is a detailed description of the hospitalization room's environmental monitoring and patient's health monitoring process.in hospitals, the environmental factors are often suitable for the hospitalization process, but in the home hospitalization process, these factors can be outside the limits of ideal values and therefore adversely can affect the hospitalization process and can also represent a risk to the patient's health and for this, we consider that environmental monitoring of the hospitalization room is necessary for the home hospitalization process. as shown in figure 1 , the proposed architecture of the hospitalization room's environmental monitoring is mainly based on the environmental sensing unit and a mobile application installed on a tablet device that plays the role of a fog server.the proposed environmental sensing unit is composed of three modules for the detection of environmental factors. the modules used are the temperature and humidity detection module (dht11 sensor), the gas leak detection module (mq5 sensor), and the smoke detection module (mq2 sensor). these three detection modules are connected to the nodemcu v3 board, which collects the values of environmental factors and then sends them to the fog server via the wifi periodically. the temperature and humidity detection module (dht 11) returns numerical values and for this, it is directly connected to the nodemcu v3 board; however, the gas leak detection module (mq5 sensor) and the smoke detection module (mq2 sensor) return analog values and for that we use an analog /digital converter (adc) to convert the values of these modules. table 1 presents the components of the proposed environmental sensing unit in detail.the fog server receives the data sent by the environmental sensing unit and then displays it in real time. it also analyzes this data if it is within the limits of ideal values or not. if this data is outside the limits of ideal values, the fog server sends an alert to all actors in this system in real time, otherwise, it stores this data locally and processes it and then sends it to the cloud via the internet through the rest api for permanent storage and further processing and analysis. this sensor-based module provides a digital output proportional to the temperature and humidity measured by the sensor. the technology used to produce the dht 11 sensor guarantees high reliability, excellent long-term stability and very fast response time.this module is based on the mq2 gas sensor to detect smoke, hydrogen, lpg, i-butane, propane, methane and alcohol. it provides high sensitivity, which is adjustable by a potentiometer, and fast response time.this module is based on the mq5 gas sensor to detect (for demotic and industrial uses) gas leaks. it can detect lpg, natural gas, city gas... with a fast response time, it is ideal for quickly detecting the presence of a gas. it is equipped with a potentiometer to adjust the sensitivity.this module is an analog-to-digital converter (adc) that converts an analog quantity into a digital value (coded over several bits), proportional to the ratio between the input analog quantity and the maximum value of the signal. since we have in this system analog sensors (gas sensor mq2 and gas sensor mq5) then we need an analog-to-digital converter because the nodemcu v3 contains a single analog input and for that, we will use the mcp3008-i/p analog-digital converter from microchip technologie inc. the mcp3008-i / p communication with the nodemcu v3 is performed using a simple serial interface compatible with the spi protocol.for the power supply to the nodemcu v3, the voltage must be between 3.3v and 9v. under no circumstances should this input voltage be exceeded. it can thus be seen that the card is powered by connecting a 3.3v power source to one of the 3.3v terminals, by connecting to a micro usb with a usb cable or by connecting a source to vin. for this, we used a 5v power supply to power the nodemcu v3 and the other modules of the system.in the hospitalization process in hospitals, patient health is continuously monitored, with a nurse visiting the patient to monitor and record vital signs and compare them with previously captured data. the frequency of visits is related to the suggested schedule from the patient's doctor. electronic instruments are generally used to measure patient vital signs; these instruments are generally large and are not easily transmitted. vital signs are usually recorded in the form of a graph, which doctors often see daily during their visits.in the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, the patient's health is monitored almost the same way as the patient's health is monitored in hospitals, where the nurse visits the patient according to the appointment schedule provided by the supervising doctor. during these visits, the nurse verifies the patient's health, measures vital signs, and prepares a medical report that is sent to the doctor for every visit made. the process of measuring patient vital signs is carried out through the sensing unit and a mobile application installed on a tablet that plays the role of fog server, as shown in figure 1 .the vital signs sensing unit of this system is the mysignals hw v2 platform, which is a development platform for medical devices and e-health applications. the mysignals hw v2 platform is the most complete on the market, as it supports many biomedical sensors to measure biometric parameters such as ecg signals, blood pressure, blood oxygen, pulse, respiratory rate, and body temperature. it is small in size and can be carried easily to the patient's home to measure vital signs. the mysignals hw v2 platform relies on the atmega 328 (arduino uno) microcontroller to manage various sensors and also allows tablets and smartphones to communicate with it, via built-in wifi and ble modules.the process of measuring vital signs is done by the patient's wearing the vital signs sensors to be measured; then the mobile application installed on the tablet plays the role of fog server and communicates with the mysignals hw v2 platform via wifi to measure these vital signs, where it sends a request to the mysignals hw v2 platform to measure the required vital signs. mysignals hw v2 measures these vital signs and then sends the measurements to the mobile application. the mobile application analyzes these measurements, and displays and stores them locally. based on the results of the measurements, and some oral questions that the nurse asks the patient and his relatives, the nurse writes a medical report through the mobile application and then sends the measurements and the report to the cloud for permanent storage and further analysis via rest api. through these measurements and medical reports stored in the cloud, the supervising doctor can, through a mobile application, monitor the patient's health status and provide recommendations and instructions to the nurse and the patient and his relatives to ensure a good hospitalization process and timely intervention if there is a risk to the patient's health.cloud hosting represents a radical change of the traditional hosting options such as shared hosting and dedicated hosting, where it has many advantages that improve it as compared with traditional hosting [43] . cloud hosting has a strong and flexible infrastructure that allows expanding the used resources easily, and also ensures the availability of data permanently, in addition to providing a high level of protection. it is also a low-cost hosting, where the cost of hosting is calculated against the amount of use of the cloud resources, unlike the traditional hosting whose cost often exceeds the cost of resources used. the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper relies on cloud computing to host the rest api and data storage where the microsoft azure cloud platform will be used, which is one of the most prominent cloud computing platforms [44] . figure 2 shows the cloud computing architecture proposed in this system.the microsoft azure cloud platform is a provider of cloud services that include infrastructure as a service (iaas), platform as a service (paas), and software as a service (saas) created by microsoft using its network of data centers that it is constantly expanding all over the world, as it provides a variety of cloud computing, storage, and application services for all types of users from the business sector and institutions. it allows the creation of applications and services, examination, management, and dissemination over a huge global network using the unique tools and frameworks it provides. security and privacy are also included on the azure platform. the microsoft azure cloud platform provides the ability to store data securely with ready access, while providing the possibility to increase the storage space at any time depending on the user's business activity. as in the case of cloud computing services, the cost is only based on the space consumed, and the total cost is calculated depending on the hours of access and data usage. it also provides the possibility to create applications with ease, and publish compatible applications globally on all web platforms and mobile phones spread, and be able to develop and respond very quickly with the ability to manage web applications and examine and publish them widely with ease.for data storage in this proposed system, we have relied on azure cosmos db, which is a globally distributed and multi-model database service of microsoft that provides flexible storage and fast data access with implementation of wire protocols for common nosql databases including azure tables storage, gremlin, cassandra and mongodb.mongodb was chosen as a data storage system, which is a system of databases of the category called nosql, or more accurately, the non-relational database management system, and it utilizes bson (binary json) files. likewise, mongodb considers schemaless as it does not adhere to a specific schema, so the content of files may vary from time to time. mongodb is also considered a scalable system as it can cope with thousands of requests simultaneously without affecting the speed of performance [45] . as in mysql, which consists of tables, mongodb is also composed of collections, which in turn contain documents, so that the size of the collection depends on the number of documents contained within it. we can say that one of the most important differences between mongodb and mysql is that the file structure does not adhere to certain rules, as we find that the rows' components are the same in one table. they must be subject to the schema rules that have been defined as mongodb does not support any scheme and therefore the file structure can change from time to time within the same collection [46].node.js was chosen to develop the rest api due to its superiority over other web development technologies such as php/nginx in computational performance and its great use in real-time and high-speed applications [47, 48] . node.js is a free software platform in javascript oriented towards highly competitive event network applications that must be able to scale up. it uses the v8 virtual machine, the libuv library for its event loop, and implements the commonjs specifications under the mit license. among the native modules of node.js, there is http which allows the development of http server. it is, therefore, possible to do without web servers such as nginx or apache when deploying websites and web applications developed with node.js. concretely, node.js is a low-level environment for executing serverside javascript. node.js is used in particular as a web server platform; it is used by linkedin, microsoft, yahoo, and paypal.rest api connects between the proposed system's applications and the database, where the applications can store, retrieve, and manage data through web services using http requests and json data model [49] . to develop the rest api will use the express.js framework, which is a helpful web application framework for node.js released as a free and open-source program designed to build web applications and apis [50] . in addition to the mongoose library, an object data modeling (odm) for mongodb and node.js, it is used to manage the relationships between the express.js framework and the mongodb database this section explains the process of implementing the proposed home hospitalization system, where an in-depth look is given to the implementation of the hospitalization room's environmental monitoring process and the implementation of the patient's health monitoring process, and the display of the mobile applications for different actors in this system, in addition to discussing the characteristics and advantages of this proposed system and its evaluation using the system usability scale (sus).monitoring the environmental factors of the hospitalization room is very important in the home hospitalization process, given the impact of these factors on the patient's health. to monitor these environmental factors we have developed an environmental sensing unit based on the nodemcu v3 board that senses environmental factors and an android application that plays the role of the fog server, where this application communicates with the nodemcu v3 board and collects the sensed data of the environmental factors and then processes, analyzes, displays them in real-time, and stores them locally, and sends the information to the cloud for permanent storage and further analysis. figure 3 shows the environmental sensing unit and the home interface of the android application developed to monitor the environmental factors of the hospitalization room.the environmental sensing unit senses the temperature and humidity via the dht11 sensor, the smoke via the mq2 sensor, and the lpg gas via the mq5 sensor. the mq2 sensor and mq5 sensor are analog sensors, the nodemcu v3 board contains only one analog input pin, so we used the mcp3008-i/p analog-digital converter to connect these analog sensors to the nodemcu v3 board. whereas the dht11 sensor is a digital sensor, so we connected it directly to the nodemcu v3 board that has 10 gpio pins which can be used for digital input and output operations.to sense these environmental factors and communicate with the android application, we have programmed a c++ script using the arduino ide. this script makes the nodemcu v3 board work as an http server using wifi access point mode for making the android application installed on the tablet communicate with the nodemcu v3 board via wifi without having to connect to a router. in this script we have developed, an ssid name and password are assigned to access the nodemcu v3 board as well as to install its ip address. with this ip address, the nodemcu v3 board can deliver web pages and web services to all connected devices within its network. this script returns the environmental factors that are sensed in json format consumed by the android application, where the android application sends http requests to the nodemcu v3 board. the nodemcu v3 board senses the environmental factors and then returns the sensed data to the android application in json format. this is, of course, after the tablet device on which the android application is installed has connected to the nodemcu wifi access point by entering the ssid name and password and doing the necessary settings.the android application periodically collects environmental factors and displays them in realtime, it also stores these environmental factors locally and processes and analyzes them. for example, if these factors are outside the scope of health factors such as recording a gas leak or sensing smoke in the room or a significant increase or decrease in the degree of humidity or room temperature, the android application gives a sound alert and also sends an alert to the relatives of the patient, the supervising doctor, and the system administrators. this alert is a notification sent to each of them arriving via their applications, in addition to an sms message that arrives in real time to intervene to save the patient if these factors represent a real risk to patient health.the android application also sends the sensed environmental data to the cloud for permanent storage and further analysis, and this data is also stored locally for a specified period, to be displayed if the application is not able to send the data to the cloud.environmental sensing unit home interfacecode pin interface settings interface measurements history interfacehumidity interface initially, our idea was for the nodemcu v3 board was to send the sensed data directly to the cloud via the internet, and through mobile applications, this data would be accessed, but we retreated on this idea because it will increase system cost, as we will need a router to connect the nodemcu v3 board to the internet. in addition to that, in many regions, especially in developing countries, there is no internet connection, and even when present, internet speed is often low, so that we chose to rely on an android application installed on a tablet device that plays the role of a fog server to collect this data and send it to the cloud via 3g/4g. even if the android application is unable to send this data to the cloud, it stores the data locally and alerts the patient if environmental factors represent a danger to him or her through this application, and the patient's supervisors are then alerted via sms. figure 3(a) shows the android application interfaces dedicated to the settings where the environmental sensing unit id is determined, the ideal ranges for environmental factors, and the phone numbers of the patient's supervisors are also imported. figure 3(b) shows the android application interfaces dedicated to displaying measurements of the hospitalization room's environmental factors.the patient's health monitoring in this proposed system is carried out by the nurse who periodically visits the patient according to the schedule set by the supervising doctor to measure vital signs and prepare a medical report that is sent to the doctor on every visit made. the process of measuring patient vital signs and writing the medical report is done through an android application installed on a tablet device. figure 4 illustrates some interfaces of this application, where the nurse can after logging in by entering the login and password see the schedule of visits for all the patients to be visited. after that, the nurse chooses the relevant visit to perform the health monitoring process (measuring the patient's vital signs and preparing the medical report). the nurse can also view the reports of previous visits, the recommendations of the supervising doctor, and the patient profile.visits list interface visit patient interface figure 4 : some android application interfaces for patient health monitoring.the patient's vital signs are measured through this android application that plays the role of the fog server, and the vital signs sensing unit which is the mysignals hw v2 platform in this system.in this system, spo2, heart rate, body temperature, and electrocardiogram (ecg) are measured. this system can be expanded to measure other patient data such as airflow, blood pressure, blood sugar, galvanic skin response, and electromyography (emg). a c++ script is programmed using the integrated development environment arduino ide to make the mysignals hw v3 platform able to measure these vital signs and send them to the android application via wifi connection. figure 5 : measurement process of spo2, heart rate, and body temperature. figure 5 (a) shows the process of measuring spo2 and heart rate, where the sensor is placed on the index finger of the patient, and through the android application, a request for measuring spo2 and heart rate is sent to the mysignals hw v2 platform. this platform measures spo2 and heart rate and then sends the measurements to the android application to store locally before sending to the cloud. regarding the patient's body temperature measurement, the sensor is placed on the index finger or on the part where the temperature is measured, and through the android application a request for measuring the body temperature is sent to the mysignals hw v2 platform. this platform measures the body temperature and then sends the measurements to the android application to store locally before sending to the cloud, as shown in figure 5 (b).as for the electrocardiogram (ecg), figure 6 shows its measurement process where the sensors are connected to the patient's chest, and through the android application, an ecg measurement request is sent to the mysignals hw v2 platform, this platform measures the ecg and visualizes the data in real time on its screen and through the android application is done to evaluate the obtained ecg measurements results.after performing the patient vital signs measurement process, the nurse prepares and saves the medical report as shown in figure 7 . after saving the medical report, this android application deletes this visit from the nurse's visit list, and encrypts the measurements and the medical report and sends them to the cloud for permanent storage and more analysis through the rest api via the internet. if there is no internet connection, this data will be stored locally and sent to the cloud automatically at the first internet connection. figure 6 : measurement process of ecg.health monitoring interface medical report interface home interface figure 7 : the medical report creation process.in the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, there are four groups of actors, which are the doctors, the nurses, the patients and their relatives, and the system administrators. each of them plays a specific role in this system through its android application. in the previous subsection, we presented the nurses' android application that allows them to measure the patients' vital signs and prepare the medical reports. in this subsection, we will present the android applications for the doctors, the patients and their relatives, and the system administrators. react native has been used to develop the various applications of this system it is an open-source mobile application framework created by facebook that is used to develop android and ios applications using reactjs, and it allows developers to use all the native functionality of these platforms [52] . figure 8 illustrates some android application interfaces for the doctors, where after logging in, each doctor can view the profiles of patients and follow the environmental condition of the hospitalization rooms (figure 8(a) ), and the health status of patients by viewing the measurements and medical report for each patient (figure 8(b) ).through this android application, the doctor also manages each patient's medications, determining the time to take each type of medicine, in addition to providing recommendations to patients and their relatives to ensure a good hospitalization process. this android application also provides notifications to the doctors when adding any medical report for one of the patients or when the environmental condition of any hospitalization room poses a risk to the patient's health. medical report interface figure 8 : some android application interfaces for the doctors. figure 9 (a) shows some android application interfaces for patients and their relatives, where the patient or a member of his relatives after logging in can view the list of visits that the nurse will make to the patient to follow his or her health, in addition to viewing the list of the patient's medications and the time to take each type of them, the recommendations of the supervising doctor, and the environmental condition of the hospitalization room. this android application also provides notifications when the nurse's visit is approaching, the date of taking the medications is approaching, when the supervising doctor sends a recommendation, or when the environmental condition of the hospitalization room poses a risk to the patient's health. figure 9 (b) illustrates some android application interfaces for system administrators, where this android application enables them to manage the patient and their relatives' accounts, manage doctors' accounts, and manage nurses' accounts in addition to managing the home hospitalization process. the start and end date of each hospitalization process are determined for each patient, and scheduling the visits of the nurses to the patients, and the management of the environmental sensing units for each hospitalization room are done by adding an id and code pin for each environmental sensing unit and linking it with the patient's account, and determining the ideal values for each environmental factor. this android application also allows for following the environmental factors of each hospitalization room and receiving notifications when the environmental condition of a specific room poses a risk to the patient's health.login interface home interface hospitalization interface figure 9 : some android application interfaces for the patient and their relatives and the administrators.the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper represents a paradigm shift for smart healthcare systems. this system allows patients to recover and receive treatment in their homes and between their families and avoids for them the difficulties of moving to hospitals and the risk of infection with the new coronavirus, which is especially important for the elderly, who often suffer from chronic diseases and weak immunity. this system also addresses the problems of congestion and lack of resources suffered by most health institutions and hospitals during this period. through this system, the health of the patients and the environmental condition of the hospitalization rooms are monitored remotely and periodically throughout the hospitalization period, which allows doctors to follow the processes of hospitalization and supervise the patients remotely.this proposed system is distinguished from other smart health care systems proposed in the literature, as it is easy to apply, of low cost, reliable and safe, and it also integrates monitoring the health of patients and the environmental factors of the hospitalization rooms in one system, which allows doctors to diagnose the state of their patients. furthermore, it can be applied in rich and developed countries, as in poor and developing countries.most of the smart healthcare systems proposed in recent years primarily monitor patients' health remotely using sensors and electronic devices connected to the internet, that send patients' vital signs measurements to doctors in real time. at [24] for example, a smart iotbased healthcare system is designed to allow measuring, viewing, and monitoring the patient's vitals using a set of sensors. this system also sends an alert to the doctor and the patient's family whenever the vitals reach or exceeds a certain limit. the data recorded in the form of an excel sheet is also collected in google drive for future analysis, as it can be viewed through a web application and a mobile application. in [25] , an e-health system was also proposed to monitor the health of the elderly based on iot and fog computing. this system allows the collection of physiological and public health parameters for the elderly periodically. it uses the mysignals hw v2 platform and an android application that plays the role of fog server and enables the elderly and their families to monitor the health state, and communicate with healthcare providers. the problem with these two proposed systems is that they are based primarily on the internet, and since in many regions, especially in developing countries, there is no connection to the internet, and even if it exists, the speed of the internet is low, we believe that such systems will not be implemented and accepted in most developing countries. they do not have good infrastructure for the internet in all regions due to limited financial capabilities to provide smart sensors to monitor patient health remotely for all patients, unlike the developed and rich countries that can overcome these obstacles.concerning the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, we believe that it can be easily implemented and accepted in developing countries and developed countries alike due to its solution to the internet infrastructure problem and its low cost. in this proposed system, we will not need a vital signs sensing device for each patient to monitor its health, but we will need one device (vital signs sensing unit) for each nurse and a mobile application that plays the role of fog server communicating with the vital signs sensing unit, through which the nurse measures the vital signs of patients and prepares medical reports at each visit. this application solves the internet connection problem wherein case the internet coverage does not reach the patient's home, this application will store data locally and send it to the cloud at the first internet connection. the environmental sensing unit is also distinguished by its low cost, as the cost of making its prototype is just a few dollars. this unit is installed in the hospitalization room at the start of each home hospitalization process, and at the end of the hospitalization process it is used for another patient hospitalization process; this of course reduces the cost of this system. this unit collects environmental factors data for the hospitalization room and sends it to the cloud via the internet through a mobile application installed on a tablet device that plays the role of fog server. the data is stored also locally in this application. the patient is alerted if these environmental factors represent a danger to him or her through this application (fog server) without the need to connect to the internet, and all supervisors of the patient are alerted via sms. alerts are sent to their mobile applications via the fog server if there is an internet connection. for data storage, cloud computing platforms provide reliable storage that maintains data security and with low cost. this is why we chose the microsoft azure cloud platform for data storage and the hosting of the applications of the proposed system.to evaluate the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper, we have used the system usability scale (sus), as this scale provides a fast and reliable tool for measuring ease of use [53, 54] and allows the evaluation of a variety of services and products, including mobile devices, mobile applications, and websites. to detect most usability problems, it is acceptable to evaluate with five users as described in [55] ; based on this, five hospitalized patients between the ages of 45 and 61 years and five doctors were selected to conduct usability testing. to evaluate the proposed home hospitalization system, the system model was explained and a demonstration was made of its various applications for both patients and doctors, after which they were asked to complete the sus questionnaire. the questionnaire is composed of 10 questions to assess system usability, where each of the questions is classified based on the amount of agreement, from one (strongly disagree) to five (strongly agree), as shown in figure 10 (a). after patients and doctors have finished answering questions, the sus scores are calculated as shown in figure 10 (b). table 2 displays the values of the sus questionnaires provided by each patient, the sus value per patient, and the average sus calculated for all patients. table 3 shows the values of the sus questionnaires provided by each doctor, the sus value per doctor, and the average sus calculated for all doctors.the evaluation score obtained in the sus evaluation for patients is 91.0, while for doctors it is 93.0. according to theory [53] and as shown in figure 10 (c), the usability is excellent, because we need to score above 80.8 to get a degree a, which is the higher degree in usability.as seen in the evaluation, the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper was very well accepted by patients and doctors alike, but we believe this system must be improved and some adjustments made for it to be applied to coronavirus patients safely, among these changes and improvements, the patient was made to measure vital signs by him or herself, and video communication was added between patients and doctors. however, for these changes and improvements, we believe that poor and developing countries will not be able to implement the system due to the cost increase and the lack of good internet coverage in all regions.1 1 i think that i would like to use this system frequently.2 i found the system unnecessarily complex.3 i thought the system was easy to use. 4 i think that i would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this system. 5 i found the various functions in this system were well integrated. 6 i thought there was too much inconsistency in this system. 7 i would imagine that most people would learn to use this system very quickly. 8 i found the system very cumbersome to use. 9 i felt very confident using the system. 10 i needed to learn a lot of things before i could get going with this system.• for each of the odd-numbered questions, subtract 1 from the score. • for each of the even-numbered questions, subtract their value from 5.• take these new values which you have found, and add up the total score. then multiply this by 2.5. • then we get a general value of usability on a scale between 100 (excellent usability) and 0 (ease of use-free). average sus score 93.0in this paper, a home hospitalization system based on the iot, fog computing, and cloud computing have been proposed. this system allows patients to recover and receive treatment in their homes and among their families, where the patients' health and the environmental factors of the hospitalization rooms are monitored periodically, through a vital signs sensing unit and environmental sensing units that are installed in the hospitalization rooms and mobile applications developed for this purpose. this system also enables doctors, patients, and their family members to manage and monitor hospitalization operations through their mobile applications. the home hospitalization system proposed in this paper is distinguished by its low cost, reliability, and safety in addition to its ability to solve the problems currently witnessed in hospitals, as it can substantially reduce the burden on them. this system has received very good acceptance by patients and doctors alike according to the results of the usability evaluation.as future work, changes will be made to this system to make it more appropriate to the quarantine operations of coronavirus patients, as we will develop the patients' mobile application to enable them to measure vital signs by themselves, and we will add video communication between the patients and their supervising doctors via this application. we will develop also a smart bracelet that the coronavirus patients will wear. this bracelet measures the patient's temperature and pulse in real time and sends them to the cloud for storage and analysis, to rescue the patient quickly in case his or her health condition is disturbed. this bracelet also sends the coordinates of the patient's location via gps to the cloud in real time to interfere if the patient violates the quarantine.while readers familiar with china may have little trouble recognizing the city i call tianmai, i use this pseudonym in the interest of providing some basic protections to my informants, who in other work have disclosed potentially sensitive information that they did not want directly linked to them or their place of work. 2 i conducted participant observation, as well as semi-structured, open-ended, and life history interviews, with over 100 informants at over a dozen government-affiliated public health institutions at the provincial, city, district, and community levels in tianmai and the nearby city of guangzhou between 2008 and 2009. followup research was conducted in august 2010, january 2014, and august 2014. by bgovernment-affiliated^i mean that these institutions were neither arms of the government per se nor were they independent of the government. rather, they were funded by and overseen by local (municipal, district, and bstreet^-level) governments while maintaining a quasi-independent status as a btechnical work unit^(shiye danwei).cantonese-speaking population largely blamed for sars, and the rural-to-urban migrants who crowded into tianmai and other prd cities looking for work.public health workers both inside and outside of china have long employed the racialization of foreign, immigrant, or ethnic minority populations as a means to separate out the infectious from the non-infectious (briggs and mantini-briggs 2003; hyde 2007; farmer 1999; shah 2001) . mobile people in particular have often been the target of racialization discourses aimed at keeping them from crossing boundaries guarded by those in power (massey 1994; markel 1997; briggs and mantini-briggs 2003) . in the contemporary chinese case, however, tianmai public health professionals' racialization of certain groups thought to be infectious joined with the racialization of the infections themselves. h1n1 could not easily infect most chinese because both the virus and its hosts were racially alien.this dual racialization process functioned as a tool with which chinese public health professionals attempted to stabilize and contain viral threats. by inscribing geographical stability onto infected bodies in motion through the languages of race and genetics, my informants sought to constrain the mobility of infection and, in doing so, to contain the symbolic and material threats to china's modernity and development that flu-like infections, and the people who carried and spread them, had come to represent.during the early days of the h1n1 pandemic, those working on disease control in tianmai, along with the local media, took pains to emphasize the virus' non-chinese genetic genealogy (palsson 2007) . health education videos and posters featured cartoon pigs and birds combining viral material in north america that then skipped across the ocean to china. several informants told me that the apparent increased virulence of the virus among those infected in mexico, and the failure of the virus to spread quickly to china, could be directly attributed to racial-genetic differences between chinese and mexicans (renzhong bu yiyang), as well as to the genetic origins and characteristics of the virus itself. a microbiologist, for example, explained to me, look at how many cases there are in the us. i think it's because the virus' genes have been found to be of euro-american origins-so it is more virulent in people with those genes, in the us and mexico and europe-it passes more easily between people because they are better adapted to these genes. but in china it doesn't pass very easily-it's because our genes are different. so although it keeps spreading in the us, after a few generations here it gets weak-that's why all our cases are imported. said a leader in tianmai's influenza control department:the virus genes are euro-american genes, so it's easier for americans to catch-it needs to mutate to suit our genes more closely before it can infect chinese people on large scale. so after it gradually circulates here and develops chinese genes maybe it will adapt to infect us. but right now it is not going to spread quickly. you can see that in asian countries it is not spreading, i don't think it is adapted to infect asians.the genetic immunity to h1n1 that chinese in general supposedly enjoyed was contrasted with genetic compatibility between chinese bodies and the sars coronavirus. explained one middle-aged infectious disease specialist, b[h1n1] hasn't really spread to asia-it's been almost all foreigners. sars was the opposite, it didn't really get to europe or north america, right?^when i reminded her that there was a major outbreak of sars in toronto, she continued, bright, but there it was mostly huaren [people of chinese descent], right? i think it has something to do with race [renzhong] . because in sars it was all asians and few europeans, and now it's the opposite.during the sars outbreak, according to most of my interlocutors, chinese people who immigrated to toronto 30 years prior to the appearance of sars were still genetically bchinese,^and thus were vulnerable to a virus incubated in china in a way that white canadians were not (if not quite as vulnerable as those who had never left china). conversely, when h1n1 appeared in mexico and then spread to the usa, it might travel to tianmai and infect mexican and american expatriates, but because of its origins in north america, chinese people would, at least initially, be mostly immune.bmexicans^-members of a brace^that most chinese had previously thought little about-were during the h1n1 outbreak both grouped with other north americans as beuro-american^and at the same time singled out as unique. one lab biologist, upon assigning a euro-american and then a mexican race to the new virus, paused to reflect on this classification decision before asking: bwhat race are mexicans, anyway?( moxigeren daodi shi shenme renzhong?). a young epidemiologist from shanghai who was training in tianmai told me that as soon as h1n1 had spread to nearby hong kong and threatened to cross the border into tianmai, the mayor of tianmai called her infectious disease team and insisted that they track down all the mexicans living in tianmai and test them for h1n1, regardless of whether they had recently been to mexico. their mexicanness automatically made them suspect, victims of their inherent compatibility with a mexican-born virus.thus for all that global pandemic preparedness rhetoric emphasized the universal vulnerability of humanity to emerging infectious diseases (chan 2007; king 2002; lakoff 2008) , h1n1 and sars were, for chinese public health professionals, remarkably discriminating. this is one reason why early in the initial h1n1 outbreak my informants displayed great confidence that h1n1 in fact could be both kept out of china and quickly brought under control. for them, the preferential infection of bodies associated with a virus' home region assured that though a virus may leave its originating space, the harm it could inflict on foreign spaces would be limited. sars spread around the world, and it went to toronto, but it remained chinese through its genetic makeup and ability to target chinese genes. and so when h1n1 came, it was this tendency to travel with a racial group that my informants imagined would protect them.while discursive connections between infection, geography, and race have broad historical and global echoes, the particular racialization process that i describe here contrasts sharply with present-day epidemiological and immunological understandings of infectious disease. these biomedical understandings generally hold that those native to a place where a virus emerges and circulates are less, rather than more, likely to be infected because long-term exposure allows the body to adapt and learn how to defend itself. by repeatedly being exposed to local pathogens, natives of a particular place build up partial immunity to those pathogens. insofar as genetics may be involved, the same principle applies: sharing a common geographic ancestry with a pathogen allows for genetic adaptation over time.the gene for sickle cell anemia, for example, which also provides some protection against malaria, is thought to be more common in populations that have historically been exposed to malarial parasites. exposure to this pathogen over time, the story goes, selected for a genetic adaptation that protected against malaria infection but had the unfortunate side effect of causing another debilitating disease. thus, populations labeled as bblack^in the usa are categorized as more at risk for sickle cell anemia than caucasian populations, due to an assumed link between blackness and genetic african ancestry (see fullwiley 2007 fullwiley , 2011 wailoo 2001) . as with h1n1 and sars, in the case of genetic malaria protection, shared geographical origins link an infection to a genetic population through the language of race. the difference in the case of the former is that shared geographic ancestry with a pathogen implied adaptive susceptibility to that pathogen, rather than protection.from a biomedical standpoint, then, tianmai's epidemiologists might seem very confused indeed. according to immunological principles, h1n1 and sars hadn't circulated nearly long enough to effect a genetic adaptation in any particular human population. insofar as general immunological adaptation might occur, the longer h1n1 circulated in north america and not in asia, the less susceptible those living in north america should become relative to asians-and this should apply to asian americans and white americans alike. so how was it that public health professionals with degrees in epidemiology, microbiology, and genetics all espoused views of infectious disease spread that seemed so contrary to epidemiological teachings?one way of understanding this disconnect is to look at it as a sort of epidemiological bilingualism akin to the medical bilingualism common among chinese biomedical practitioners and laypeople (scheid 2002) . that is, my informants subscribed to standard epidemiological explanations of infectious disease spread at the same time that they subscribed to the views described in the previous section. as volker scheid (2002) has shown, most chinese patients and doctors move fluidly between western and traditional chinese medicine (tcm) explanations for disease, and modern chinese medicine has not only mapped the chinese body onto the western anatomical body but has also mapped western diseases onto the chinese body (kuriyama 1999) . a similar type of fluid movement between languages and interpretations was evident in my conversations with tianmai's public health professionals. in the same conversations in which they warned me that i had to exercise more caution than they did when interacting with h1n1 contact cases (because as a white american, i was more susceptible than they were to catching the virus), they would also trot out the latest epidemiological models from who and cdc to show me how the disease was moving from continent to continent.the racialization of viruses and people in china fed at least two deep anxieties on the part of many of tianmai's public health professionals: anxiety about the instability of china's positioning as a modern, developed nation, and anxiety about their own unstable place in that nascent chinese modernity. the 2003 sars epidemic made clear that an infectious epidemic could threaten china's goals of becoming bmodern( xiandai) and bdeveloped^(fazhan)-two tropes that the central chinese government had been heavily promoting since the communist revolution and had explicitly made the cornerstone and raison d'etre of nearly all of its economic and social reforms since the death of chairman mao in 1976 (cf. greenhalgh and winckler 2005; solinger 1999 ).it is difficult to overstate the extent to which these twin goals of development and modernity-supported by a third goal of building a stable (wending) and harmonious (hexie) society-were central to chinese politics in the 2000s when i was doing my fieldwork. this was not just empty rhetoric espoused by the central government. spurred by memories of what they referred to as the bchaotic^(luan) and bbackward( luohou) mao years, the professionals who worked in local public health institutions, like other members of china's newly emergent middle class, both publicly and privately articulated fierce commitments to creating a prosperous nation that would adhere to accepted norms of modernity and would not be plagued by the kinds of instability that characterized its past.sars threatened all of this. on one level, it endangered china's burgeoning modernity on a symbolic level by blaming chinese consumers' insufficient grasp of modern norms for the launch and spread of the sars virus. scientists both inside and outside of china blamed the zoonotic emergence of the sars virus-that is, the virus' leap from animals to humans-on chinese consumption of civets, a raccoon-like mammal sold as a delicacy in some local bwet markets^in the pearl river delta region (kan et al. 2005; lau et al. 2005; brookes 2005) . 5 although scientists later cleared civets of culpability-finding that humans infected civets, rather than the other way around (janies et al. 2008 )-a western presumption of chinese culpability in starting the sars epidemic through the production, sale, and consumption of strange animals that do not belong on modern dinner tables never quite disappeared. as mei zhan points out in her 2005 analysis of sars, bthe story of 'zoonotic [animal] origin' did not blame nature itself for the sars outbreak; what went wrong was the chinese people's uncanny affinity with the nonhuman and the wild^ (zhan 2005, p. 37) .as charles briggs points out, the american media sensationalized this so-called exotic consumption, such that bvisual images powerfully link racialized bodies with descriptions of the disease … featur[ing] images of cooks cutting up animals not found on u.s. plates and customers selecting live, seemingly exotic animals for their meal (briggs 2005, p. 276) .^in a widely cited article in the new york times published at the height of the epidemic in may 2003, for example, keith bradsher and lawrence altman wrote of bexotic animals^being sold as delicacies^in bfilthy, crowded markets in guangdong [province] .^civets, bradsher and altman said, were btrapped in the wild for chinese kitchens^-setting up an implicit comparison with non-chinese kitchens, where such abominations would never enter (2003, p. 1). the sale of civets inside crowded chinese cities represented matter deeply out of place, as mary douglas would put it (2002): live animals, including strange, exotic animals not usually consumed by modern urbanites, were being sold in some of china's most modern cities (see also wald 2008) .and yet the relatively widespread sale and consumption of civets was a product of the same modernity that it seemed to threaten. civets are not cheap. despite the association of civet consumption with traditionalism, markets offering wild animals as culinary fare have proliferated only recently, and primarily only in southern china, as a result of bincreasing affluence^among largely south chinese consumers (peiris et al. 2004, p. s89) . in other words, the consumption of civets-and therefore the purported origin of sars-was a paradoxical product of both traditional food choices and of recent modern monetary means to more frequently make those choices.beyond this powerful symbolism of a corrupted modernity, sars also threatened china's place as a political and economic powerhouse in the modern world economy. racism against chinese-looking people and the restaurants they owned led to losses during the epidemic of up to 60 % in new york city's chinatown (asiasource 2003). the more significant economic impact was felt in china itself. at the height of the epidemic, people panicked, trade and tourism nearly ground to a halt, and both the local and central chinese governments suffered debilitating losses of face under a torrent of international criticism for their early mishandling of the crisis. the epidemiological mobility of a virus and its resultant racialization had shut down the productive mobility of china's economic machine. in this way, the sars epidemic of 2003 frightened tianmai's public health professionals more in its capacity for economic and political destruction than in its biological virulence.my informants expressed these fears through the redirection of racial blame to enemies both internal and foreign. several public health professionals theorized that foreign forces had exploited the predilection of sars for chinese bodies for evil purposes. following popular conspiracy theories that circulated widely during the sars outbreak, others told me that sars was actually a biological weapon constructed for the purposes of harming the chinese nation-state, via a targeted biological assault on chinese bodies. bmany people don't like china and want to attack us,^one such informant explained. bthey don't want us to be strong.ŵ en-ching sung (2010) notes that a best-selling book published in 2003, entitled the last line of defense, suggested that sars was an american invention that was designed to recognize bchinese genes^(zhongguoren jiyin) in order to specifically target the bchinese race^(zhongguo renzhong). in addition to preferentially killing off chinese, some saw the stigma and discrimination against chinese abroad that became associated with sars as further evidence of a racialbiological attack with the intended consequence of holding back the success of biologically chinese people, no matter where they lived. 6 racially specific biological weapons in this imaginary were impressively powerful. by casting viral dna as racially specific, my informants gave biological weapons the crucial power that has so far (at least according to mainstream theories) prevented them from being used widely: the ability to distinguish between self and enemy within the same space, to infect the bad guy and keep the attacker safe.a few interlocutors surmised that h1n1, like sars, also resulted from a bioterrorist attack-but that this time the attack was directed toward the former aggressor. they pointed to the timing of the origins of the disease in mexico with president obama's trip there in april 2009 as evidence that terrorists had perhaps released the virus in a failed attempt to assassinate the president. though it was targeted at obama's bmixed black and white genes,^however, h1n1's mexican origins ended up making it more deadly to mexican natives, they told me. h1n1 was a euroamerican virus but also a specifically mexican virus, due to its origins in a mexican environment. it could have infected obama, but it was unsurprising that it infected local mexicans more effectively. sars, too, had a dual genetic identity: it was a chinese virus that those both inside and outside of the public health world widely believed was adapted to infect members of the han chinese race. but it was also a specifically cantonese virus, due to its origins in guangdong province-home to tens of millions of cantonese, a racialized subpopulation of the han. a common thread that runs through both biomedical and tcm origin stories of the sars outbreak provided a basis for the diversion of racial blame to the cantonese. microbiologists and epidemiologists associated the emergence and spread of the sars virus not just with chinese people as a general category, but more specifically with the cultural practices and urban environments associated with southern chinese people, especially cantonese-speaking people from guangdong province. similarly, practitioners of tcm blamed the sars outbreak on the peculiar geography, culture, and type of body that tcm teachings also associate with southern china. both origin stories promoted the view that the region of south china in which sars originated fostered the development and the spread of infectious diseases, and both implied that these diseases might preferentially attach to south chinese bodies. the resonance between these two origin stories promoted a logic of like-infects-like, with the originating continental and regional environments of both virus and carrier being the critical risk factors for infection. thus, the internal racialization of chinese subpopulations became a key component of the racialization of both chinese and foreign viruses.chinese revolutionaries first began promoting the concept of a unified chinese bhan race,^as part of their opposition to the qing dynasty, which fell in 1911, ending thousands of years of imperial rule. the leaders of the revolution considered the qing to be outsiders due to their identity as members of the manchu, an ethnic group concentrated in northeastern china. anti-manchu revolutionaries promoted han nationalism as a way to define china in opposition to this hated imperial power, as well as in opposition to japanese and western colonial powers that vied for control of a weakened chinese state. han identity quickly became rooted in the presumption of a shared biological ancestry. leibold argues that anti-manchu revolutionaries in the late qing transformed earlier dissidents' ideas about a non-manchu han ethnicity into a bnew hard boundary of blood cast around the 'unsullied descendants of the yellow emperor'^(qingqing baibai huangdi zhi) (2011, p. 352; see also dikotter 1992) .the problem with a biologically rooted han-based nationalism, as some reformers soon realized, was that the idea that china belonged only to an immutable han race threatened to alienate minority groups. building upon the ideal of an inclusive bchinese nationality^(zhonghua minzu), republican era leaders in the 1930s thus declared china to be a brepublic of five peoples^(wuzu gonghe): han, manchu, mongolian, tibetan, and hui (chinese muslim) (mullaney 2011; leibold 2011) . supporters of this approach described china as a single nation (minzu) with both racial (zhongzu) and ethnic (minzu) diversity.the nationalist (gmd) and communist (ccp) parties, which were fighting for control of china in the 1930s and 1940s, promoted different concepts of chinese racial unity and diversity-the gmd promoting strict bmonogenic similarity^as mullaney puts it (2011, p. 54) with the ccp promoting polygenic diversity. in 1943, the gmd published a political manifesto, bchina's destiny,^in which, according to leibold, ball non-han minorities were recast as 'lineage branches' (zongzu/zhizu) of a single, consanguineous zhonghua minzu (chinese nationality/race)^(2011, p. 360). this unified chinese race was in turn the most significant member of an even more inclusive byellow race^(huangzhong) common to all of asia. thus, han, tibetans, manchus, and others all became racially chinese and asian at the same time, while also maintaining some elements of intra-chinese ancestral uniqueness. the yellow race was described in opposition to other continentally based races, including black (hei) and white (bai).when the ccp won control of china in 1949, however, internal diversity became the focus of chinese ancestry studies, and the language of race blended into the language of bnationality^(minzu, sometimes translated as bethnicity^). seeking to bolster the concept of china as a bunified multiethnic nation-state^(tongyi de duo minzu guojia), researchers set to work classifying the nationalities, or ethnic groups, living within the new republic. as mullaney describes, however, bthe communists unwittingly stumbled upon a remarkably complex problem: if china was home to multiple minzu, who were they?^(2011, p. 56).teams of social scientists spent decades trying to answer this question, eventually completing a list of 56 officially recognized minzu. of these, 55 were shaoshu minzu (minority nationalities), in contrast to a han majority. notably, the cantonese were categorized as an integral part of the han population and were not considered for minzu status (carrico 2012) . steve harrell has argued that, bhanness is like whiteness in the united states; it is an unmarked characteristic that can be delineated only in contrast to an ethnic other.^(2001, p. 295). as karin brodkin describes for jews in the usa (1998), cantonese blended into the dominant han population even as they recognized themselves, and were recognized by others, as both culturally and biologically distinct.though the minzu categories quickly took on racial connotations, with those claiming han status frequently citing differences in physical features and bio-genetic ancestry as indicative of membership in different minzu groups (see sung 2010) , researchers at the time did not turn to biology or physiology in categorizing the 56 nationalities. instead they drew upon stalin's model of the bfour commonalities^: common language, territory, mode of economic production, and psychology (mullaney 2011) . the importance of common territory formed the basis for the establishment of five autonomous regions in the western part of china where single minority groups were concentrated in high proportions (tibet (tibetan or zang), xinjiang (uyghur), ningxia (hui), guangxi (zhuang), and inner mongolia (mongol or meng)). the establishment of the autonomous regions helped to reinforce a spatial and geographical dichotomy of center and periphery-the center being the han, symbolically and physically located in china's major population centers; the periphery being the other 55 nationalities, symbolically and physically located in the peripheral parts of the nation-state. at the same time, the naturalization of the 56 number became a means of permanently tying the periphery to the center: if tibetans are one of the 56 that make up china, that made tibet an inalienable part of a multi-ethnic whole and a greater chinese race (litzinger 2000; harrell 2001; mullaney 2011) .the minzu categorization process immobilized most racial-ethnic minority groups in china, keeping them, along with their diseases, securely in their proper places. sandra hyde, for example, describes how the hiv virus in china was imagined as residing specifically in certain regions of china considered the bperiphery^and attaching to shaoshu minzu bodies. the unique environments of southwestern china, combined with the exoticized and sexualized behaviors and dispositions attributed to minority peoples, were jointly associated with the emergence and spread of hiv. the virus seemed to preferentially infect these not-quite-chinese bodies living in their not-quite-chinese home locales (hyde 2007) .on the other hand, the shaoshu minzu rarely emerged as particularly at-risk populations in tianmai. most migrants to tianmai were han, and most minorities that did live in tianmai had the ability to bpass,^thus rendering their minority status somewhat invisible (see harrell 2001) . their minzu identities placed them on the frontier, their frontier status assured that they would stay put, and when they did not abide by this for the most part, shaoshu minzu migrants ceased to be identifiable as minorities at all.thus for public health professionals in tianmai, the official 55 minority groups were relatively inconsequential to local disease spread or control. far more significant were two populations that were officially members of the han majority: southern, or more specifically, cantonese populations, and rural-to-urban migrant workers.wen-ching sung describes how scientists working on the human genome diversity project in china, in addition to documenting genetic differences among minzu groups, also breported a clear genetic distinction between southern and northern chinese populations.^(2010, p. 277; see also reardon 2004) . leibold (2011) noted that while ba group of chinese geneticists now argue that 'y chromosome and mitochondrial (mt)dna data have demonstrated a coherent genetic structure of all han chinese,'t his structure still bexhibits a distinct pattern of variation among northern and southern han people.^and gladney (2004) points out that most people in china distinguish physiologically between northern and southern chinese, and especially between northerners and cantonese. public health professionals hailing from both southern and northern regions frequently spoke of racialized differences in facial features and stature between northern and southern chinese, the latter (especially the cantonese) being described generally as darker, shorter, and less beautiful than their northern brethren, but also more bclever^(congming) and, historically, more mobile. gladney points out that these attributes are given racial-genetic significance, despite official assertions that the han is racially homogenous (2004, p. 433) . according to carrico, some cantonese have embraced this claim of genetic difference, asserting that they have a separate ancestry from ordinary han and even declaring themselves to be ban independent race^(2012, p. 39).these kinds of racialized distinctions between southern and northern chinese also applied to the diseases from which they suffered. for example, traditional chinese medicine has long linked so-called bwarm diseases^(wenbing)-which include acute upper respiratory infections like sars-with southern china and in particular with southern chinese bodies (hanson 2011) . southern bodies were thought to be constitutionally weak and soft, and southern people were described in tcm texts as tending toward indulgence and excessiveness. foreigners and those from outside the south chinese region did not become ill with wenbing as easily because their constitutions were not as well adapted to local disease patterns. wenbing was a southern chinese disease.historian marta hanson details how, given this background, tcm practitioners explained the emergence of sars in these terms: bin southern china, a warm damp climate keeps the defensive and constructive qi [vital energy] of the local population at the surface.^(2010, p. 245). but because of a cold snap that occurred in the spring of 2003, the warm constitutions of the southern (especially cantonese) population was out of step with the unusually cold environment, rendering them more susceptible to the entrance of bheat-wind,^(refeng) which could bring on flu-like symptoms. hanson explains, baccording to some tcm physicians, this susceptibility was increased by the allegedly sedentary habits and rich diet of guangdong's modern urbanites.^(2010, p. 242). the congruence of southern chinese bodies, habits, environments, and climates together created the disease that became known as sars.hanson's account resonates with biomedical understandings of sars' origins; together the two accounts reinforced a racialized narrative of blame that centered around the deficient behavior and bodies of cantonese people who ate strange animals. racial distinctions within china were, in an international context, usually erased by the more easily observable racial distinctions between chinese and non-chinese. because foreign media rarely differentiated between chinese bodies in general and cantonese bodies in particular, the supposed sins of the cantonese quickly spread to anyone who looked chinese, leading to discrimination against chinese and chinese-looking people in the usa and elsewhere (kleinman and lee 2006, p. 181) . however, the cantoneseness of sars was very important to those of my informants who were not themselves cantonese.tianmai's non-cantonese public health professionals acknowledged that sars was chinese, but insisted that it was also cantonese; its origins could be found not in ordinary chinese behavior, but rather in the practices of a racialized subgroup that they both admired and reviled. cantonese consumers, more so than most other chinese, had enough money to enjoy a middle-class lifestyle-a valued aspect of bdevelopedŝ ocieties. it was how they chose to pursue this lifestyle that did not sit well with normative western concepts of what developed societies should act like-norms that many chinese were trying to attain. at the same time, in keeping with tcm explanations for sars, the decadent practices of cantonese people rendered them more likely to spark, spread, and suffer from local pestilences. kevin carrico notes that instances of bscapegoating cantonese hedonism^occurred throughout china during the sars epidemic, with one commentator referring to the sars outbreak as bthe revenge of the heavens' for the cantonese people's decadent lifestyles^ (2012, p. 35) . because they were weak and indulgent, cantonese people both ate civets and fell victim to them. unsurprisingly, the public health professionals i knew who had cantonese origins tended to ignore or underplay this specificity and instead emphasized the unity of chinese as common victims.in keeping with these patterns of blame, some of tianmai's non-cantonese public health professionals attributed the relative resistance of their entire city to sars to its status as a bcity of immigrants^(yimin chengshi). though surrounded on all sides by cantonese communities, tianmai was not a cantonese city. while it had its share of cantonese residents, a large majority of the population had migrated to the region from other parts of china. according to some of my informants, its migrant status helped to keep the city resistant to sars: non-cantonese simply were not very susceptible to a cantonese disease. thus, the leaders of tianmai's public health institutions, most of whom were not cantonese, boasted that tianmai, despite being what one leader called bthe filling in the cookie^between guangzhou (canton city) and hong kong, was the only one of the three cities to have had no deaths and only 56 cases during the sars epidemic-compared with at least 1,000 cases each in guangzhou and hong kong, along with many deaths.some of my informants applied the same logic to h1n1. as h1n1 infections began appearing inside tianmai in june 2009, some of the epidemiologists and flu virologists i knew asserted that all of the cases in tianmai were shuruxing bingli, or bimported cases,^which they opposed to the bcommunity outbreaks^that nearby cities were experiencing by that time. drawing upon the legacy of sars, they told me that tianmai's immigrant identity would, at least in part, protect the city.though the h1n1 virus was labeled as north american, once it began circulating inside china, some still saw it as having a stronger affinity for cantonese bodies than for other chinese bodies-thus explaining why guangzhou had homegrown cases while tianmai did not. a few of the northern public health professionals i interviewed vaguely blamed the emergence of h1n1 on the same type of dangerous cantonese predilections that had given birth to sars, even while insisting that it was a north american disease. for example, dr. gong, a public health professional from shandong province in northern china who headed a small department in one of tianmai's disease control institutes, told me soon after h1n1 arrived in china, bthis new virus is a result of nature getting angry with us, and us not treating animals right, having them be too cooped up, and we eat too many of them-i mean cantonese people eat everything-is that really necessary?^she went on to emphasize again that h1n1 was spreading within guangzhou and not tianmai.here, gong picks up on a theme from the sars epidemic, in which the overindulgent cantonese consumer launches an epidemic through his unnatural appetites. in this case, however, she extends the logic of cantonese culpability to viruses that everyone agreed cantonese behaviors did not create. for gong, h1n1 was a north american virus, but it still somehow adhered more readily to cantonese people than to other chinese, due to a common origin story in the mistreatment of animals and nature. gong also used this story to place herself-she may be living in a cantonese region, but she was not cantonese. instead, like other transplants that migrated to tianmai from the north, she carried with her more civilized customs and more sanitary cuisine. this time, mobility protected rather than exposed. in racializing herself through her own mobility, gong allowed place to travel through space with her, protecting her from infection through a set of northern genes that were perhaps a bit less compatible with the diseases of animals.as the case of tianmai shows, the hypermobility of bodies, things, and microbes that has accompanied china's rapid development and rapid integration into global flows meant that the geographical distinctiveness of racialized groups-as implied by the racial categories of beuroamerican^and bchinese,^as well as bnorthern^and bsouthern^-was highly tenuous. sars may have arisen in a cantonese region , but cantonese people might live anywhere in china or even anywhere in the worldtransforming geographical spaces that might have once seemed safe from cantonese diseases into places at risk. in the epidemiological imaginary, mobility was by definition infectious. where mobile people moved, and stayed, they brought the viruses that had attached to them. at first, their racial compatibility might contain the virus, but eventually, if they stayed long enough, new diseases might take hold and circulate in places they did not originally belong. northerners might well begin to suffer from hot winds.the cantonese brought sars out of canton, their racialization both emerging from their mobility and serving as a tool with which to symbolically hold them in place. but it was another mobile subgroup of han that seemed most capable of allowing the 2009 h1n1 virus to take hold inside tianmai and to eventually transform into a bchinese virus^: the city's floating population of rural-to-urban migrant workers.of tianmai's estimated 20 million population, 60 to 80 % are considered part of the bfloating population^(liudong renkou) of rural-to-urban migrant workers who began flooding china's large cities in the 1990s and 2000s, looking for economic opportunity (mason 2012 ). the hukou system of household registration, established in the 1950s as a means for the communist government to control the mobility of chinese citizens, impeded the floating population's ability to migrate permanently, effectively creating a class of illegal internal immigrants within all of china's major cities. violating one's hukou to move to the cities without a proper permit could, until very recently, subject a rural migrant to deportation back to the countryside. 7 in addition to the floating population, tianmai also had a sizable population of permanent, middle-class, hukou-holding migrants, many of whom came from the same parts of china from which the floating population came, and many of whom also had 7 since the advent of the economic reforms in china in the 1980s, hukou restrictions have been progressively relaxed and legal (non-hukou) residence cards have become more widely available. in 2014, chinese president xi jinping launched a reform process specifically aimed at expanding access to hukous. and migrant workers are now rarely deported, though they are still subject to harassment and fines. still, urban hukous remain difficult to obtain for those who are uneducated, and even just registering for legal residency can be a bureaucratically complex and undependable process with questionable benefits for many migrants (see xu 2009 ). as a result, much of the floating population remains unregistered. rural backgrounds. it was this latter group that included most of the public health professionals i knew in tianmai. however, as migrants themselves who had only recently escaped poverty into the middle class, many of those who worked in public health in tianmai felt that their own identities as bmodern^and bdeveloped^urban citizens-statuses they had obtained through a combination of education, skills, connections, and luck-were frighteningly unstable. the large numbers of rural migrants who filled their clinics and crowded into tenement housing seemed chaotic, unruly, and backwards; they represented both that which they had fled and that which they feared they still in a sense were. tianmai's public health professionals reactively maligned this backward threat as dirty, dangerous, and backwards (see mason 2012) . even as floating migrants contributed much of the labor crucial to the chinese development project and were officially included in this project's vision (lee 2014) , they also were cast as that project's achilles heel, the piece capable of bringing the whole structure tumbling down. tianmai thus became a site where boundaries between bgood,^modern migrants like public health professionals and bbad,^backward migrants like the floating population were widely drawn and carefully guarded (mason 2012 ; infectious change: reinventing chinese public health after an epidemic (unpublished)). one of the ways that middle class tianmai citizens like my informants guarded these boundaries was through a process of racialization.my own introduction to the racialization of floating migrants came when i was teaching english at a university in guangzhou in 2001. a student who resided in tianmai invited me to tour a china folk culture village (zhongguo minsu wenhua cun) in her hometown. we boarded a bus mostly full of what i only several years later was able to identify as rural migrant workers bound for the city. as we approached the city limits, two police officers boarded the bus, checked my passport, and checked everyone else's identification cards. two dark-skinned men with short stature, carrying battered plastic plaid tote bags, were quietly escorted off the bus. i was young, i was not yet an anthropologist, and i did not think about why these men were headed to tianmai, what they might plan to do there, or why their id cards were scrutinized so thoroughly. dong han argues that the racial profiling of han migrant workers that i observed on the bus that day is common to many chinese cities, in which poor migrants have become the most visible racial other, a stand-in for all that is threatening to the chinese middle class. han writes, bby relying on bodily features to identify subjects of hukou enforcement, policing sets up direct links between physical appearance and particular social, economic and political status^(2010, p. 603). as brodkin has argued in the case of the usa, the construction of race among immigrant populations goes hand and hand with the construction of class, such that differentiating by color or appearance provides a means of justifying the oppression of a working underclass (1998; see also omi and winant 1994) . smaller and darker on average than urban chinese due to a history of outdoor labor and poor nutrition, and cast as dirty and blow quality^(suzhi di), the rural han trying to circulate into and out of chinese cities formed a massive racial underclass that was paradoxically composed of members of the dominant han race (see han 2010; solinger 1999) .at the china folk culture village, however, this massive underclass was nowhere to be seen. instead, all 55 of china's ethnic minorities were on proud view here. as small children pointed excitedly the way they might point at elephants in a zoo, young women declaring themselves to be miao, yi, and hui dressed in colorful traditional costumes, danced, and played instruments (chio 2014) . as we watched the spectacle, my student leaned over and whispered that all of the performers were likely really han. in tianmai, there were very few miao, yi, or hui people to play the parts, she explained. there were, however, many millions of han migrants like the ones who were taken off of the bus, looking for work. the rural-to-urban migrants dressed in minority costumes illustrated how officially recognized racial or ethnic categories often diverged from, and at the same time merged with, the categories that took on the most significance in practice. here, two different kinds of racialized others merged into each other, the mundane but highly mobile other coming to stand-in for the exotic that never quite managed to leave home.the racialized mobility that characterized the floating population seemed to my tianmai informants to be putting their city at risk. while bgood^migrants provided resistance to cantonese infections, the floating migrants, in their failure to become permanent residents or to embody modern citizenship, carried susceptibility. due to their huge numbers, harsh working and living conditions, and the inability of government officials to control their mobility, cantonese and non-cantonese public health professionals alike saw the members of the floating population as out-of-control viral vectors, capable of spreading even foreign diseases to tianmai's permanent, legal population of middle-class migrants.what was most unsettling to some of my informants was that unlike the shaoshu minzu or even the cantonese, the true bhome^of the floating migrants was exceptionally difficult to identify. because they were a mix of han from all over china, the floating population's racialization explicitly did not translate to a coherent genetic or ancestral difference. it also did not necessarily translate to a difference in geographical location: the floating population was officially rural, but it also made up a large proportion of the populations of most major urban centers in china. what's more, its members often hailed from the same areas of rural china from which my now-middleclass informants-both cantonese and non-cantonese-once migrated. this was especially the case for older public health professionals, almost all of whom had experienced deep rural poverty during their childhood and young adult years, and thus shared more with the migrants than they cared to admit. thus, the racialization of the floating migrants remained incomplete. other than the very fact of their continued mobility, it was difficult to differentiate between us and them, when us and them came from the same places and were thought to share the same genes.the blow quality,^lack of education, and poor living and working conditions of the floating population made rural-to-urban migrants seem more susceptible to h1n1 than even the cantonese. at the same time, presumed racial-genetic and ancestral similarities between floating migrants and middle-class migrants to tianmai allowed for the transfer of foreign germs from bbad^migrants to bgood.^the floating population was like an inverted trojan horse-other on the outside, but on the inside dangerously the same. i was told over and over again during this time period that because rural-to-urban migrants were uniquely capable of spreading h1n1 widely inside tianmai, containment efforts had to be focused on keeping the virus out of this population:said one epidemiologist:[the migrants] are a really special problem here-everyone is terrified of them! because there is no way to keep track of them, no one has any idea where they are, and if there is really a pandemic, then we're in big trouble! their wenhua [cultural level] is low, a lot are from the countryside, they don't understand basic biological facts, and they don't have any responsibility, no sense of that at all, and so if we come looking for them to check up if we think they have flu, they'll just think, 'you're trying to do what??' and they'll run away to some other place and go find work there.another epidemiologist in tianmai who himself had grown up in a poor rural village told me, bif the virus got into that population, we would never be able to control it. so we have to work hard to keep the disease out of the floating population. you know, we are still quite backwards^(emphasis added). the floating population represented the backwardness within on two levels: the backwardness within a modern china, and the backwardness within my informants' own modern selves. tianmai's public health professionals feared that with the arrival of h1n1, both might come to subvert and destabilize china's modernization project.the racialization of humans and viruses in china inscribed relative geographical place onto racialized groups and in the process served to partially immobilize mobile infectious threats. most racial others could not infect the han majority because their similarly racialized viruses had never quite left the place that it was imagined made them other in the first place. the shared geographical origins of virus and carrier not only provided both with racial identities but also tethered them both to a common racial home through deep biological ties that transcended physical space. infectiousness thus became a test of racial purity, and vice versa. foreign viruses could cross geopolitical borders inside the bodies of mobile others, but in the chinese public health imaginary, they were least likely to cross into the bodies of those who truly belonged.but this immunity of dissimilitude was partial, and it was time-limited. chinese public health professionals, many of them having earned degrees in epidemiology from western institutions, knew that viruses spread, and that they adapted. if they were not careful, if they did not take great care to stop carriers of the newest foreign virus from spreading the disease inside china's borders, and from replicating inside the hybrid bodies of those han-who-were-not-quite-han, it would only be a matter of time before h1n1 did transform into a chinese virus.when h1n1 finally landed in tianmai, it arrived in the lungs of two chinese american tourists, who had come to china for the first time, to visit relatives in a nearby city. my informants referred to the girls as bamerican chinese^(meiguo huaren), who had caught the virus by virtue of their americanness and now stood to spread it to tianmai by virtue of their chineseness. as mobile bodies with a cantonese heritage that had nevertheless adapted to a foreign virus, they were uniquely wellpositioned to transform the h1n1 virus from a foreign into a chinese pathogen, their bodies serving as figurative and literal bridges between america and china. genetically and physiologically han, they were geographically and culturally foreign. they were raced as chinese, and yet their bodies had known only north american terrain, and only north american viruses-representing a radical divergence of genetics and geography. as cantonese who were foreign to china, as mobile people twice over, they were an especially dangerous form of hybrid.faced with the arrival of h1n1 at their doorstep, tianmai's public health professionals threw themselves into the containment of h1n1 to a degree that few others in china or elsewhere were willing to do. all other disease control work ground to a halt. young public health workers were sent to the border with hong kong, and to the receiving hospital, where they lived in dormitories and remained on-call to interview suspect cases all night long. contacts of suspect cases were placed in quarantine, and workers were assigned to long shifts at these facilities as well. even after the virus began spreading inside tianmai, public health professionals spent long weekends calling up every person who had crossed the border from hong kong and listed tianmai as their destination, just to make sure that he or she wasn't feeling sick.all of these measures together created the impression of an overreaction to what in the end the world health organization characterized as a relatively minor pandemic. international organizations and foreign governments criticized china for quarantining people unnecessarily and subjecting travelers to unnecessary tests and harassment. and yet in the end, though h1n1 did eventually spread inside china, and though it did infect and kill people from all regions of china, it killed fewer people overall, and wrought less damage, than in many other parts of the world (wong 2009; lurie 2009 ). though china's modernity was again briefly questioned under a barrage of criticism about the use of bnineteenth century^quarantining techniques (mason 2010) , it would seem that, perhaps thanks to the efforts of tianmai's public health professionals, h1n1 never did become a chinese virus. bthis virus is no sars,^a tianmai epidemiologist explained to me as the pandemic wound down and life began to return to normal. bit is nothing for us chinese to be afraid of.â cknowledgments the author thanks dan smith, jenna johnson-hanks, lisa messeri, two anonymous reviewers, and all of the members of the brown workshop where this paper was first presented for their constructive feedback. the work on which this paper was based was funded by the social science research council, wenner-gren foundation, fulbright-iie program, association for asian studies, and harvard university asia center. the robert wood johnson foundation health and society scholars program provided funding during the write-up. the author also thanks all of her chinese interlocutors.coronavirus (covid-19) started spreading in december 2019 and was noticed in early january 2020. it started spreading in china in mid-to late-january. among the different types of confusion and information challenges, we need to recognize that covid-19 is first and foremost a humanitarian challenge [1] . as of 24 march, 2020, the virus has caused the death of over 16,600 people worldwide with more than 380,000 people are confirmed as infected by it, of which more than 10,000 are serious. as many as 184 out of 195 countries are affected. solving the humanitarian challenge is the key priority through proper preventive measures to stop its spread, as well as curative measure to develop a vaccine. the impact of this public health emergency has affected countries and communities in terms of economic, socio-psychological issues, as well as international relations."we're not just fighting an epidemic; we're fighting an infodemic", said who director-general tedros adhanom ghebreyesus at the munich security conference on 15 february 2020. who information network for epidemics (epi-win) was launched as a new information platform after who declared covid-19 as a public health emergency of international concern (pheic). the goalthe data on coronavirus are changing on daily basis, and it is difficult to provide current statistics for the affected, recovered and casualties. however, based on some initial studies, a few characteristics are emerging for this virus. it is reported that the case-fatality-rate (cfr) for coronavirus was 2.3%, initially; however, the age group of 70 to 79 has an 8% cfr, and cfr is 14.6% for those more than 80 years old [3] . this means that the virus has a stronger impact on the aged population.the other characteristic of the virus is its speed in spreading. when dr. zhong nan shan made a public announcement of this virus in cctv on the 20th of january, the virus had already spread in different provinces in china, as well as outside china. every day, some new countries are added to the list, which has already reached more than 100 countries and regions. it took only 30 days to spread from one city to the entire country of china. the early cases may have been spread from the wuhan seafood market, while later cases were spread from person to person, the speed of which surprised the health workers in wuhan city and hubei province. the epidemic curve shown in [4] as well as presented later in this paper, shows that the second to the third week of january was the most crucial time, when the spread was very high.there are some similarities and differences among covid-19, severe acute respiratory syndrome: 2002-2003 (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome: 2012-ongoing (mars). sars also had a zoonotic transmission in markets in guangdong province, china. it is said that covid-19 is likely to have been transmitted from bats via palm civets. similarly, mers was also traced to zoonotic transmission of a novel coronavirus (likely from bats via dromedary camels) in saudi arabia. all three viruses have similar syndromes like fever and cough, which frequently lead to lower respiratory tract disease. however, sars has a higher cfr of 9.6%, while mars is even higher at a rate of 34.4%. despite much higher cfrs for sars and mers, covid-19 has led to more total deaths due to the large number of cases.projection shows a significant recession in the global economy due to coronavirus spread [1] . the global surge reflects a new inflection point in this epidemic. four 'major transmission complexes' (i.e., china, east asia, middle east, europe) are now active, while the us is already at a tipping point. the analysis says that continued spread within established complexes plus community transmission in new complexes drives a~0.3%-0.7% reduction in 2020 global gdp growth. the impact on demand slows down the growth of the global economy by between 1.8%-2.2%, instead of the 2.5% growth envisioned at the start of the year. sectors are impacted differently. certain sectors (e.g., aviation, tourism, hospitality) see lower demand for a longer duration. for others (e.g., consumer goods), demand is initially lower but expected to rebound quickly. the report also argues that 24th of february 2020 was a turning point, when the cases outside chine exceeded in-china cases for the first time. south korea, italy, iran, japan and singapore are the top five countries outside china which have reported a maximum number of cases, with iran reporting the largest number of casualties outside china.to focus on the key word "information", which is crucial for any invisible disaster, a series of different types of data were analyzed. primary data sources include:(1) sina weibo's (chinese social media) hot search list (in which a key word has been accessed every day for how many times as well as how many hours) [5] (2) corona virus timeline data in china (which are compiled by the authors from different data sources like sina, tiki-toki, caixin, baidu, tencent and provincial and municipal government data) [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] (3) csm media research data on the use of different types of media to acquire information [22, 23] ; and (4) mob-tech research institute data of use of internet during the corona virus spread [24, 25] . four specific types of analysis were made based on the above-mentioned data sources:(a) timeline narrative, number of affected people and public concern: the timeline narrative is developed based on the sequential events in the country, and important measures taken, which is also juxtaposed to the major public concerns. weibo's data (2020) have been analyzed for the top 206 to 360 hits per topic (depends on the daily variation) over a period of three months, from 1 december 2019 to 1 march 2020 [24] . tiki-toki's data [9] is the chinese government big data platform, and provides information on different government measures, news, policies, and also is linked to major global milestones in the related topic (here, coronavirus-related topics). sina's data was on (1) the number of affected people (confirmed cases, recovery, and death) at both the country level and in hubei province, (2) sina weibo data to analyze social media information. figure 1a ,b show the growth in the number of affected and recovered people and casualties in hubei province and the whole of china, which is referred to in a later section. figure 2 was also prepared as an original diagram to highlight different phases of this disaster. specific attention was made on the day to day changes in numbers, any significant policy actions taken, and any significant incidence (positive or negative) reported on social media or a website. social media/website information (both government official sites as well private sites) were used to draw the timeseries narrative. word cloud analysis was made using the key words used in social media for all the five phases mentioned in the text, and the top five most commonly used words are picked to highlight the key discussion in the social media, as well as to understand citizens' agony. (b) media use during/after coronavirus spread and information types: this is mainly derived from the analysis of [23] on february 20-21, 2020, with more than 1500 residents from all 31 provinces in china, to understand the use of media to acquire information related to corona virus. the analysis used the data of csm survey to draw original graphs and diagrams with its interpretation; (c) positive impact on certain online industries: the data from [24] are based on the analysis of 2019 and 2020 analysis, but more specific intensive analysis of the use of the internet during the period of 22 january 2020 to 6 february 2020. these data were used to understand the proliferation of certain online services compared to others, which is correlated to people's interest in different topics available online. (positive or negative) reported on social media or a website. social media/website information (both government official sites as well private sites) were used to draw the timeseries narrative. word cloud analysis was made using the key words used in social media for all the five phases mentioned in the text, and the top five most commonly used words are picked to highlight the key discussion in the social media, as well as to understand citizens' agony. new confirmed and recovered cases in china and hubei province; (source: these graphs were prepared by the authors using original data from: sina news [5] ). b) media use during/after coronavirus spread and information types: this is mainly derived from the analysis of [23] on february 20-21, 2020, with more than 1500 residents from all 31 provinces in china, to understand the use of media to acquire information related to corona virus. the analysis used the data of csm survey to draw original graphs and diagrams with its interpretation; c) positive impact on certain online industries: the data from [24] are based on the figure 2 shows the timeline of key events in five phases. authors extracted the key events from different news and social media reports. in each phase, five top public concerns are highlighted, which is prepared through word cloud analysis in each phase using the key social media data, as specified in the methodology section. as per the available statistics, the earliest case was reported on 1 december, 2019 in wuhan, and thereafter sporadic cases have been reported all through december, especially in the later part of the month. the first case was reported in a paper [26] on 1st of december 2019. the health commission of wuhan municipality reported the first case of coronavirus (at the time, an unusual disease). these were unusual cases, which took the local physicians by surprise, and it was dr. li wen liang who reported the unusual case as a possible epidemic in wechat social media on 30th of december 2019. to develop this narrative, as mentioned above, a large number of sources were consulted, reviewed and some milestones events are presented here. needless to say, with a vast country like china, with the level of infection of corona virus, there are many small yet important events, which may be missed out here. however, the author tried to highlight the key developments in china based on the five following phases:very early phase: until 31 december 2019; 2.investigation phase: until 20 january 2020; 3.early intensification phase: until 31 january 2020; 4.criticism, agony and depression phase: until 14 february 2020; 5.positive prevention and curative control phase: until 29 february 2020. figure 2 shows the timeline of key events in five phases. authors extracted the key events from different news and social media reports. in each phase, five top public concerns are highlighted, which is prepared through word cloud analysis in each phase using the key social media data, as specified in the methodology section. as per the available statistics, the earliest case was reported on 1 december, 2019 in wuhan, and thereafter sporadic cases have been reported all through december, especially in the later part of the month. the first case was reported in a paper [26] on 1st of december 2019. the health commission of wuhan municipality reported the first case of coronavirus (at the time, an unusual disease). these were unusual cases, which took the local physicians by surprise, and it was dr. li wen liang who reported the unusual case as a possible epidemic in wechat social media on 30th of december 2019.this phase was characterized by a crackdown by local government and detailed investigation. huanan seafood market in wuhan city was closed on 1st of january. the city government and its health commission investigated the cases in december and called dr. li and made him apologize for spreading a rumor on the 31st of december 2019. three teams of experts from beijing conducted a detailed investigation from the 31st december to 4th january, 8-16 january and 18-19 january. it was revealed that the disease was a new type of epidemic, which had not been reported earlier. this was announced on 20th of january by a major and well-known doctor, dr. zhong nan shan, in a cctv online interview.this was a critical period, when the disease spread was intensified and a relatively large number of casualties was observed. figure 1a shows the number of people affected, recovered and dead in china and hubei province, and figure 1b shows the new confirmed and recovered cases in china and hubei province. at an early part of this phase, a few critical and wise decisions were made:22nd january: hubei province announced a level ii public emergency; 23rd of january: wuhan city was closed and all the entries and exits to the city were restricted. the decision to construct huoshenshan hospital (new hospital) for corona virus cases was announced on this day (23rd january), followed the decision to construct leishenshan hospital (another new hospital) decision on 25th january. ten hospitals in wuhan city appealed for a supply of medical and other emergency goods from all over the country;24th january: hubei province followed the suit, and the whole province was closed for entrance and exit. hubei, beijing, shanghai and eight other provinces declared a public emergency;25th january: the supreme court provided instruction on "fake news" and the negative consequences of this. tencent, which is the parent company of wechat, established a website called "rumors exposed website," as a platform to reduce rumors; 26th of january: the first emergency supply arrived from sichuan to wuhan, along with medical and healthcare staff;28th january: president xi xinping met who dg dr. tedros adhanom ghebreyesus and discussed the situation. china media administration instructed all tv channels to reduce entertainment programs, and to increase broadcasting information and programs on coronavirus and related news;29th january: a countrywide emergency was declared; 30th january: the emergency committee on the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) under the international health regulations (ihr 2005) was reconvened by the world health organization director-general dr tedros adhanom ghebreyesus on 30th january (geneva time) and a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) was declared;31st january: people's daily, the major chinese newspaper' official account, published fake news on a possible medicine (named shuang huang lian, a chinese antibiotic, of which online orders and users have drastically increased) for coronavirus by mistake, which caused the panic-buying of the medicine by the public. the next phase was a phase of panic, criticism, agony and sad news. the following events took place that explain this phase:31st january: public criticism started on chinese social media regarding the outbreak of the virus; 1st february: people's daily corrected their mistake regarding the fake news. a major media site, caixin data analysis, showed that public agony had increased and people were growing worried about the future spread of the virus;2nd february: the new hospital was prepared and handed over to the army to take control; 3rd february: sanitization of public spaces started, school entrance examinations were cancelled, and another new hospital was ready; 4-6th february: this was a time of control, where a few major control measures were taken. like a lockdown of villages, towns and cities (earlier, this was restricted to urban areas only). a new policy of "no one will be spared" was started (this enabled the government to enter people's house and check for virus symptoms). dou ban, a major media group, was shut down. overseas news, especially the spread of coronavirus in a cruise ship in japan (diamond princess) was broadcast in china through different media;7th february: the first whistleblower from wuhan, dr. li, passed away, and this caused severe public criticism in social media. this was followed by a depression phase, where several suicides by the infected people were observed, to save their respective family members;9th february: the center of disease control (cdc) head gave an online interview with caixin and announced that the virus is a totally new type, of which not much is known yet.there were several incidences of sacking senior administration people; the china news head was sacked for spreading wrong information (12th february) and wuhan's mayor was replaced (13th february). holidays (school as well as offices) were extended.the following phase was a time of positive prevention and curative planning. several new initiatives were taken through media to address public criticism as well as to lessen public agony:15th february: a diary of public life in wuhan was broadcast and shared through social media; 18th february: a touching story of female nurses cutting their hair to cope with the continuous work with protective suits was broadcast in the mass media as well as on social media. dead bodies post-mortem had started to identify the key medical factors and impacts on the body. on the 18th of february, a unique approach of using a qr code was adopted in wuhan and then spread to other parts of hubei province using mobility and safety of the person (in terms of effect of corona virus). this qr code was used for public transport, entering public areas. using big data in mobile phones, three color coding were used ( figure 3 ): green (safe), yellow (need to be cautious), and red (cannot enter). printed qr codes were used for the people who did not have mobile phones (like elderly people or children). on 19 th of february, the "no one will be spared" policy was ended. 3rd february: sanitization of public spaces started, school entrance examinations were cancelled, and another new hospital was ready; 4-6th february: this was a time of control, where a few major control measures were taken. like a lockdown of villages, towns and cities (earlier, this was restricted to urban areas only). a new policy of "no one will be spared" was started (this enabled the government to enter people's house and check for virus symptoms). dou ban, a major media group, was shut down. overseas news, especially the spread of coronavirus in a cruise ship in japan (diamond princess) was broadcast in china through different media;7th february: the first whistleblower from wuhan, dr. li, passed away, and this caused severe public criticism in social media. this was followed by a depression phase, where several suicides by the infected people were observed, to save their respective family members;9th february: the center of disease control (cdc) head gave an online interview with caixin and announced that the virus is a totally new type, of which not much is known yet.there were several incidences of sacking senior administration people; the china news head was sacked for spreading wrong information (12th february) and wuhan's mayor was replaced (13th february). holidays (school as well as offices) were extended.the following phase was a time of positive prevention and curative planning. several new initiatives were taken through media to address public criticism as well as to lessen public agony:15th february: a diary of public life in wuhan was broadcast and shared through social media; 18th february: a touching story of female nurses cutting their hair to cope with the continuous work with protective suits was broadcast in the mass media as well as on social media. dead bodies post-mortem had started to identify the key medical factors and impacts on the body. on the 18th of february, a unique approach of using a qr code was adopted in wuhan and then spread to other parts of hubei province using mobility and safety of the person (in terms of effect of corona virus). this qr code was used for public transport, entering public areas. using big data in mobile phones, three color coding were used ( figure 3 ): green (safe), yellow (need to be cautious), and red (cannot enter). printed qr codes were used for the people who did not have mobile phones (like elderly people or children). on 19 th of february, the "no one will be spared" policy was ended. 20th february: a newlywed young doctor passed away, which also created negative sentiment in social media. the issues of vulnerable people like the aged population (11 of them died in an old people's home in wuhan, along with the caregiver, which came out in the news on 20th february), physically and mentally challenged people, and their caregivers, received attention in the media; figure 3 . three color codes used for monitoring people's movement (source: https://www.sina.com. cn [5] ).20th february: a newlywed young doctor passed away, which also created negative sentiment in social media. the issues of vulnerable people like the aged population (11 of them died in an old people's home in wuhan, along with the caregiver, which came out in the news on 20th february), physically and mentally challenged people, and their caregivers, received attention in the media; 21st and 22nd february: data management and its authentication was re-ensured on (jingzhou city), and goods distribution was re-investigated to ensure a balanced distribution (after a tiktok video which pointed out the imbalance in some areas). punitive measures were taken for the two leaders of hubei province for hiding information (22nd february); 23rd february: the last half of this phase was marked by mixed measures: ensuring the free flow of emergency goods and food and punishing those prohibited them (23rd february), and the death of two additional health professionals (23rd february);26th february: new infection due to the return of overseas chinese people in some selected provinces;28th february: the unfortunate incidence of drinking sanitization tablet by mistake by some rural people, caused health issues, and there was another unfortunate incidence of suicide of a junior high school kid who did not have a mobile phone to undertake online classes provided by schools.as mentioned above, an analysis was done by csm media research with 1500 residents all over china on the mobile they use to access different sites. figure 4 shows different media usage on four different aspects: increased usage after coronavirus spread, same use as before, less use than before and do not use it for 6 months. analysis shows that wechat and tv played a strong role in acquiring information after coronavirus spread. the amount of applications has also increased compared to other media usage, since it provides real-time information. 21st and 22nd february: data management and its authentication was re-ensured on (jingzhou city), and goods distribution was re-investigated to ensure a balanced distribution (after a tiktok video which pointed out the imbalance in some areas). punitive measures were taken for the two leaders of hubei province for hiding information (22nd february); 23rd february: the last half of this phase was marked by mixed measures: ensuring the free flow of emergency goods and food and punishing those prohibited them (23rd february), and the death of two additional health professionals (23rd february);26th february: new infection due to the return of overseas chinese people in some selected provinces;28th february: the unfortunate incidence of drinking sanitization tablet by mistake by some rural people, caused health issues, and there was another unfortunate incidence of suicide of a junior high school kid who did not have a mobile phone to undertake online classes provided by schools.as mentioned above, an analysis was done by csm media research with 1500 residents all over china on the mobile they use to access different sites. figure 4 shows different media usage on four different aspects: increased usage after coronavirus spread, same use as before, less use than before and do not use it for 6 months. analysis shows that wechat and tv played a strong role in acquiring information after coronavirus spread. the amount of applications has also increased compared to other media usage, since it provides real-time information. the survey also pointed out that 44% people sought to proactively secure information, followed the news and put in their favorites. a total of 33% viewed the information proactively, but did not put it into their favorite news items. a total of 19% people saw the information if it was in the news or media; 2% of people did not bother to take any additional actions for information gathering, while another 2% did not want to hear the negative news on coronavirus. figure 5 shows the types of information accessed by different users through online platforms. it shows that the maximum access was to get information on medicines, followed by a set of other information like food/drink, online education, in-house sports, business information and entertainment and leisure goods. this shows the lifestyle requirements when people were isolated in their home for a long period of time. the survey also pointed out that 44% people sought to proactively secure information, followed the news and put in their favorites. a total of 33% viewed the information proactively, but did not put it into their favorite news items. a total of 19% people saw the information if it was in the news or media; 2% of people did not bother to take any additional actions for information gathering, while another 2% did not want to hear the negative news on coronavirus. figure 5 shows the types of information accessed by different users through online platforms. it shows that the maximum access was to get information on medicines, followed by a set of other information like food/drink, online education, in-house sports, business information and entertainment and leisure goods. this shows the lifestyle requirements when people were isolated in their home for a long period of time. as seen in figure 5 , medicine, food supply and online education were the top searched items. online food supply users have drastically increased by 10 million, with an increase of 10.60 million in delivery capacity (by volume) when comparing the data of online food shopping of january 2019 with that of january 2020. a significant increase is observed in users with the age group 35 to 44 years, from 27.9% (january 2019) to 45.1% (january 2020). specific increase has been noted with households with children from 0 to 3 years old (from 7.2 % of january 2019 to 25.2 % in january 2020). the available data show that four major online food supply companies have increased their delivery capacity by a significant percentage. they are as follows: hema fresh (up by 50% compared to before the virus spread), miss fresh (up by 321% compared to january 2019), dingdong maicai (up by 300% from december 2019), and jing dong daojia (up by 470% compared to january 2019). all the companies are struggling with a lack of human resources and shared their employees to help each other, which delayed delivery in several cases.online education has also seen significant changes. on 27 january 2020, the central government education ministry has declared to postpone the start of classes until after the spring vacation. there was an instant rise in online education (xueersi online internet school) after that, which saw a drastic increase by twenty-fold from 0.52 million to 11.54 million users within a period of one week (28 january to 6 february, 2020).through the susceptible-exposed-infectious-removed (seir) model and ai, [27] found that the epidemic of china should peak by late february, showing a gradual decline by the end of april. a five-day delay in implementation would have increased the epidemic size in mainland china threefold. lifting the hubei quarantine would lead to a second epidemic peak in hubei province in mid-march and extend the epidemic to late april, a result corroborated by the machine learning prediction.who, in a recent joint study with chinese colleagues, has summarized four specific key lessons as follows [3] : as seen in figure 5 , medicine, food supply and online education were the top searched items. online food supply users have drastically increased by 10 million, with an increase of 10.60 million in delivery capacity (by volume) when comparing the data of online food shopping of january 2019 with that of january 2020. a significant increase is observed in users with the age group 35 to 44 years, from 27.9% (january 2019) to 45.1% (january 2020). specific increase has been noted with households with children from 0 to 3 years old (from 7.2 % of january 2019 to 25.2 % in january 2020). the available data show that four major online food supply companies have increased their delivery capacity by a significant percentage. they are as follows: hema fresh (up by 50% compared to before the virus spread), miss fresh (up by 321% compared to january 2019), dingdong maicai (up by 300% from december 2019), and jing dong daojia (up by 470% compared to january 2019). all the companies are struggling with a lack of human resources and shared their employees to help each other, which delayed delivery in several cases.online education has also seen significant changes. on 27 january 2020, the central government education ministry has declared to postpone the start of classes until after the spring vacation. there was an instant rise in online education (xueersi online internet school) after that, which saw a drastic increase by twenty-fold from 0.52 million to 11.54 million users within a period of one week (28 january to 6 february, 2020).through the susceptible-exposed-infectious-removed (seir) model and ai, [27] found that the epidemic of china should peak by late february, showing a gradual decline by the end of april. a five-day delay in implementation would have increased the epidemic size in mainland china three-fold. lifting the hubei quarantine would lead to a second epidemic peak in hubei province in mid-march and extend the epidemic to late april, a result corroborated by the machine learning prediction.who, in a recent joint study with chinese colleagues, has summarized four specific key lessons as follows [3] :china has rolled out perhaps the most ambitious, agile and aggressive disease containment effort in history. although initially quite aggressive, gradually, a science and risk-based approach was taken to tailor its implementation; 2.achieving china's exceptional coverage with adherence to these containment measures has only been possible due to the deep commitment of the chinese people to collective action in the face of this common threat. at a community level, this is reflected in the remarkable solidarity of provinces and cities in support of the most vulnerable populations and communities; 3.china's bold approach to contain the rapid spread of this new respiratory pathogen has changed the course of a rapidly escalating and deadly epidemic; 4.china is already, and rightfully, working to bolster its economy, reopen its schools and return to a more normal semblance of its society, even as it works to contain the remaining chains of covid-19 transmission.from our own analysis, it was observed that the success of china's efforts in controlling the disease was a combination of strong governance, strict regulation and spontaneous community/citizen participation. although it was a late response in terms of the local and provincial government at the initial stage, once the disease was confirmed as a new one, collective responses at the community, ward, city, province and national levels were significant. to keep this large a number of people confined in their homes for almost two months was not an easy decision in terms of both economic and socio-psychological aspects. china's mobile network and big data system was able to create the qr code-screening of people, which can be considered a significant achievement. as mentioned in the earlier part of this paper, who dg has termed this virus spread as infodemic; having the right information was key to the success of mitigation measures. at an early stage, the supreme court's directives on fake news were a very good step in this regard to reduce the spread of confusion and panic. the "rumors exposed website" created by tencent (the parent company of wechat) helped to share information on fake news and rumors effectively. whenever there was fake news published or some mismanagement happened with the emergency goods and food supplies, quick corrective measures were taken by the authorities. at the village level, local communities and volunteers worked hard to ensure the implementation of the mitigation measures to reduce the spread as well as to report confirmed or suspected cases. at an early stage, data management was an issue, but once the virus was confirmed and declared by the government, strict data management measures were put into place. in this case, strict corrective measures were ensured for the mismanagement of data. the current case needs a science based solutions with local action [28] .these lessons are also reflected in the who research roadmap [29] , where eight specific research issues have been identified with a balance of medical diagnosis and community use. it also emphasized social science research in the outbreak response, where the who will establish a team that will be integrated within multidisciplinary research and operational platforms and will connect with existing and expanded global networks of social sciences. as per [30] , governments will not be able to minimize deaths from coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) and the economic impact of viral spread. keeping mortality as low as possible will be the highest priority for individuals; hence governments must put measures in place to ameliorate the inevitable economic downturn. in our view, covid-19 has developed into a pandemic, with small chains of transmission in many countries and large chains resulting in extensive spread in a few countries, such as italy, iran, south korea, and japan. most countries are likely to have a spread of covid-19, at least in the early stages, before any mitigation measures have an impact [30] .as we started the paper with two key words "humanitarian challenge" and infodemic, we would like to once again highlight that basic humanitarian principles need to be followed in this type of emergency. of course, there are geo-political, economic and social consequences, which also need to be looked at. however, humanitarian issues need to prevail over other priorities. the second point is that coronavirus is a non-measurable disaster, unlike other invisible disasters like radioactive emission. therefore, having correct and timely information is crucial for stopping its spread, as well as in the curative prevention of this disease. these two factors, along with good governance and citizen participation, will hold the key to success in combatting coronavirus in future.author contributions: conceptualization and methodology was done by r.s., data collection and analysis was done by j.h., writing was jointly done by r.s. and j.h. all authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.on 31st december 2019, 27 cases of pneumonia of unknown aetiology were identified in wuhan city, hubei province in china [1] . wuhan is the most populous city in central china with a population exceeding 11 million. these patients most notably presented with clinical symptoms of dry cough, dyspnea, fever, and bilateral lung infiltrates on imaging. cases were all linked to wuhan's huanan seafood wholesale market, which trades in fish and a variety of live animal species including poultry, bats, marmots, and snakes [1] . the causative agent was identified from throat swab samples conducted by the chinese centre for disease control and prevention (ccdc) on 7th january 2020, and was subsequently named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the disease was named covid-19 by the world health organization (who) [2] .to date, most sars-cov-2 infected patients have developed mild symptoms such as dry cough, sore throat, and fever. the majority of cases have spontaneously resolved. however, some have developed various fatal complications including organ failure, septic shock, pulmonary oedema, severe pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [3] . 54 .3% of those infected with sars-cov-2 are male with a median age of 56 years. notably, patients who required intensive care support were older and had multiple comorbidities including cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, endocrine, digestive, and respiratory disease. those in intensive care were also more likely to report dyspnoea, dizziness, abdominal pain, and anorexia [4] .on 30th january 2020, the who declared the chinese outbreak of covid-19 to be a public health emergency of international concern posing a high risk to countries with vulnerable health systems. the emergency committee have stated that the spread of covid-19 may be interrupted by early detection, isolation, prompt treatment, and the implementation of a robust system to trace contacts [5] . other strategic objectives include a means of ascertaining clinical severity, the extent of transmission, and optimising treatment options. a key goal is to minimise the economic impact of the virus and to counter misinformation on a global scale [5] . in light of this, various bodies have committed to making articles pertaining to covid-19 immediately available via open access to support a unified global response [6] .https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsu.2020.02.034 received 3 february 2020; received in revised form 17 february 2020; accepted 24 february 2020efforts aimed at deciphering the pathophysiology of covid-19 have led to the eu mobilising a €10,000,000 research fund to "contribute to more efficient clinical management of patients infected with the virus, as well as public health preparedness and response" [7] . regarding diagnostic testing, us-based companies such as co-diagnostics and the novacyt's molecular diagnostics division primerdesign have launched covid-2019 testing kits for use in the research setting [8, 9] . the united kingdom (uk) government have also invested £20,000,000 to help develop a covid-19 vaccine [10] . additionally, the united states (us) have suspended all entry of immigrants and non-immigrants having travelled to high-risk zones with the intention of halting further viral spread [11] . hong kong has also suspended several public transport services across the border and many hospital workers and civil servants are currently on strike. strikers are demanding that the border to mainland china be closed completely to prevent further covid-19 transmission. however, hong kong authorities have resisted these requests, stating that "closing the border would go against advice from the who" [12] . in addition, growing fears regarding china's economy has led the chinese central bank to invest ¥150 billion to support the stability of the currency market [13] .as of 4th march 2020, a total of 16,659 tests for covid-19 have been conducted across the uk. to date, 85 individuals have tested positive resulting in the uk public health risk for viral infection being raised from low to moderate [14] . to prevent transmission, the uk government are following direct guidelines from the department of health (doh) for encountering overseas travellers with respiratory infections, particularly for those who have travelled to wuhan [15] [16] [17] . the uk national health service (nhs) have stressed the importance of using personal protective equipment (ppe), taking a thorough travel history, and escalating suspected cases immediately with a view to isolating patients. any detected cases of covid-19 should be transferred to an airborne high consequence infectious diseases (hcid) centre, including the two principal centres in england (the royal free hospital in london and the newcastle royal victoria infirmary).the doh and uk chief medical officers have also advised individuals having visited wuhan and the hubei province in the last 14 days to remain indoors and to call nhs 111. this advice also applies to individuals having visited mainland china, thailand, japan, republic of korea, hong kong, taiwan, singapore, malaysia, and macau. the british foreign and commonwealth office have advised british citizens to avoid all travels to the hubei province, and to avoid unnecessary travel to mainland china [18] . more recently, 200 british citizens were quarantined following an evacuation flight from wuhan on the 30 january 2020. all other flights arriving to the uk from hubei province have since been suspended [19] . however, in keeping with who recommendations, no travel restrictions have been placed on individuals having travelled to china within the last two weeks and are free to enter the uk.there are currently few studies that define the pathophysiological characteristics of covid-19, and there is great uncertainty regarding its mechanism of spread. current knowledge is largely derived from similar coronaviruses, which are transmitted from human-to-human through respiratory fomites [20] . typically, respiratory viruses are most contagious when a patient is symptomatic. however, there is an increasing body of evidence to suggest that human-to-human transmission may be occurring during the asymptomatic incubation period of covid-19, which has been estimated to be between 2 and 10 days [20] [21] [22] .as of 3rd march 2020, 90,870 cases of covid-19 have been confirmed, 80,304 of which are confined to china. of the chinese cases, 67,217 were confirmed in the hubei province with the remainder being reported in 34 provinces, regions and cities in china ( fig. 1) [23]. the remaining 10,566 cases were identified in 72 countries including japan, the us, and australia. 166 of these cases were fatal (the philippines, japan, korea, italy, france, iran, australia, thailand, and the us). it is important to note that these figures are likely to be an underestimate, since the data presented depicts laboratory-confirmed diagnoses only.various bodies including the who and us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) have issued advice on preventing further spread of covid-19 [20, 24] . they recommend avoiding travel to highrisk areas, contact with individuals who are symptomatic, and the consumption of meat from regions with known covid-19 outbreak. basic hand hygiene measures are also recommended, including frequent hand washing and the use of ppe such as face masks. japanesebased company bespoke inc has also launched an artificial intelligencepowered chatbot (bebot) that provides up-to-date information regarding the coronavirus outbreak, preventative measures that can be taken, as well as a symptom checker [25] .clinical features of covid-19 include dry cough, fever, diarrhoea, vomiting, and myalgia. individuals with multiple comorbidities are prone to severe infection and may also present with acute kidney injury (aki) and features of ards [3, 26] . the who and cdc have both issued guidance on key clinical and epidemiological findings suggestive of a covid-19 infection (table 1 ) [27] . extensive laboratory tests should be requested for patients with suspected infection. patients may present with an elevated c-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, lactate dehydrogenase, creatinine, and a prolonged prothrombin time [4] .full genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis on fluid from bronchoalveolar lavage can confirm covid-2019 infection [29] . investigations for other respiratory pathogens should also be performed.at present, no effective antiviral treatment or vaccine is available for covid-19. however, a randomized multicentre controlled clinical trial is currently underway to assess the efficacy and safety of abidole in patients with covid-19 (chictr2000029573). first-line treatment for fevers include antipyretic therapy such as paracetamol, whilst expectorants such as guaifenesin may be used for a non-productive cough [4] . patients with severe acute respiratory infection, respiratory distress, hypoxaemia or shock require the administration of immediate oxygen therapy. this should be at 5 l/min to reach spo 2 targets of ≥90% in non-pregnant adults and children, and ≥92-95% in pregnant women [30] [31] [32] . in the absence of shock, intravenous fluids should be carefully administered [33] . renal replacement therapy (rrt) should be initiated for patients with an aki. renal function and fluid balance should be used to identify patients that may require rrt [4] . broad spectrum antibiotic therapy should also be administered within 1 hour of initial assessment for sepsis [34] . it is important to note that patients can develop further bacterial and fungal infections during the middle and latter stages of the disease. therefore, conservative and rational antibiotic regimens must still be followed [35] .the national health commission of the people's republic of china recommends the use of ifn-α and lopinavir/ritonavir. this advice is based on prior research showing that these medications lower mortality rates in patients infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) [36] . oseltamivir, a neurominidase inhibitor, is currently being used by medical staff in china for suspected infections despite the lack of any conclusive evidence regarding its effectiveness on covid-19. glucocorticoids may also be considered for patients with severe immune reactions. in children, methylprednisolone should be limited to 1-2 mg/kg/day for a maximum of 5 days [4, 35] .as of 3rd march 2020, a total of 3,112 deaths have been reported worldwide. outside of china, 166 of these deaths have been reported in the philippines, japan, korea, italy, france, iran, australia, thailand, and the us [23] . however, the number of positive cases and deaths continues to rise. the current reported mortality for covid-19 is approximately 3.4% compared with 9.6% for sars [37] and 34.4% for middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) [38] . the clinical features of covid-19 versus its distance relative sars are summarised in table 2 . to date, covid-19 has been shown to have a mean incubation period of 5.2 days and a median duration from the onset of symptoms to death of 14 days [22, 39] , which is comparable to that of mers [40] . patients ≥70 years of age have a shorter median duration (from the onset of initial symptoms to death) of 11.5 days, highlighting the vulnerability of this particular patient cohort.the epicentre in wuhan is comprised of an urban area spanning 1,528 km 2 and exceeds 11 million residents. this area was quarantined on 23rd january 2020. subsequent viral spread led to the imposition of a cordon sanitaire, restricting movement across hubei province in 16 cities, affecting 50 million people [42] . all forms of public transportation including long-distance bus routes, metros, express railways, and aviation were uncompromisingly sealed off -a process facilitated by china's mega city-region infrastructure [43] . in addition, chinese new year celebrations were subdued amid an unprecedented national lockdown to prevent the amplification of viral spread [44] . despite the implementation of restrictions on trade and trading routes representing an effective method of curbing viral spread [45] , who recommendations continue to advise against the enforcement of restrictions to travel and trade [46] . to halt further viral spread, a ¥1 billion fund from china's finance ministry was used to facilitate the construction of two new hospitals in under two weeks in wuhan [47] . outside of china, aviation restrictions are being employed. in europe, the czech republic, greece, and italy have recently suspended visa issuance and all air traffic from mainland china [48] . us airlines have also suspended flights until early spring [49] . local exit screening conducted by healthcare professionals at airports is currently recommended by who [46] , and multiple countries (australia, thailand, south korea, japan, india, italy, and singapore) have initiated temperature and symptom screening protocols [50] . several countries (uk, us, and australia) are also quarantining citizens having recently been evacuated from wuhan [51] [52] [53] . notably, significant concerns are currently focused towards africa which may be least prepared should an outbreak ensue [46] . evidently, an exponential increase in case count may dampen concerted containment efforts.covid-19 is caused by sars-cov-2, a betacoronavirus. it is comprised of a single-stranded ribonucleic acid (rna) structure that belongs to the coronavirinae subfamily, part of the coronaviridae family. sequence analysis of sars-cov-2 has shown a structure typical to that of other coronaviruses (fig. 2) , and its genome has been likened to a previously identified coronavirus strain that caused the sars outbreak in 2003 [54] . structurally, the sars coronavirus (sars-cov) has a well-defined composition comprising 14 binding residues that directly interact with human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. of these amino acids, 8 have been conserved in sars-cov-2 [55] . in humans, coronaviruses were thought to cause mild respiratory infections until the identification of sars-cov and mers coronavirus (mers-cov). although the exact pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the emergence of sars-cov-2 are unknown (due to pending laboratory trials), genomic similarities to sars-cov could help to explain the resulting inflammatory response that may lead to the onset of severe pneumonia [55] . until these laboratory trials are initiated, the precise mechanism of sars-cov-2 remains hypothetical.china is integral to nearly every sector of the global economy. as the world's most populous nation, china has already battled with viral epidemics, including the outbreak of sars in 2003. at the time, however, china's gross domestic production was 4% of the global total -it is now 17% [57] . the recent outbreak of the covid-19 has already challenged an economy strained by trade wars with the us; national growth hit a 30year low in 2019 [58] . provinces responsible for over 90% of chinese exports have since ordered their factories to stay closed or to run at low capacity [59] . moreover, china's position as the world's largest manufacturer [60] and importer of crude oil [61] has caused economists to nudge down their forecasts for full-year global growth. the key difference between covid-19 and sars however is the complexity of supply chains that china is now enmeshed in. there exists little historical evidence to provide guidance for the disruption of such supply chains as global reliance on them is a relatively new phenomenon.the international response to covid-19 has been more transparent and efficient when compared to the sars outbreak. however, several learning points should be taken away from covid-19 in the event of future outbreaks (table 3) . of particular note, it has been suggested that the chinese central government may have issued viral response guidelines 13 days before the public were informed [62] . this may have delayed the implementation of containment strategies that could have dampened viral spread such as reporting suspected cases in public and the work place.the recent covid-19 outbreak has been deemed a global health emergency. internationally, the number of confirmed reports has continued to rise, and is currently placed at 90,870 laboratory-confirmed cases with over 3,000 deaths. it is perhaps clear that quarantine alone may not be sufficient to prevent the spread of covid-19, and the global impact of this viral infection is one of heightening concern. further research is undoubtedly required to help define the exact mechanism of human-to-human and animal-to-human transmission to facilitate the development of a virus-specific vaccine. evidently, the pandemic potential of covid-19 demands rigorous surveillance and on-going monitoring to accurately track and potentially predict its future host adaptation, evolution, transmissibility, and pathogenicity. these factors will ultimately influence mortality rates and prognosis. however, the rapidly evolving nature of the covid-2019 epidemic, ever changing statistics, and constant unravelling of new research findings represents a major limitation to the present review. nevertheless, as a surgical community, it is also our responsibility to be aware of the aforementioned signs and symptoms and to promptly escalate suspected cases. not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed.the data in this review is not sensitive in nature and is accessible in the public domain. the data is therefore available and not of a confidential nature.no ethical approval required.no funding received. not relevant.niamh o'neill -corresponding author niamh@ijspg.com. riaz agha -senior author mail@riazagha.com.no conflicts of interest to declare. globally, but generally have low fatality rates. [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] these 4 hcovs also are believed to be derived from zoonotic sources, including bats (nl63, 229e), dromedary camels (299e), or cattle (oc43), although the origins of hku1 remain uncertain. [11] [12] [13] [14] the 4 hcovs are linked to common cold symptoms, 9,10,15,16 while hcov-hku1 has less definitively been linked to gastrointestinal symptoms. 17, 18 hcov-hku1 and hcov-nl63 can cause severe diseases, including bronchitis, bronchiolitis, and/or croup among pediatric and adult hospitalized patients. 5, 7, 8, [19] [20] [21] however, due to the relatively mild course of illness in the majority of otherwise healthy individuals, these 4 hcovs are thought to be underreported. 22 our current understanding of the epidemiology of hcov-229e, hcov-hku1, hcov-nl63, and hcov-oc43 outside of clinics is extremely limited. the prevalence, severity, and co-occurrence of hcovs with other respiratory viruses are not yet established. 4 data are primarily from outbreak reports, case studies, and clinical studies focusing predominantly on children. 5, 6, 8, 15, 18 here, we begin to address this gap by estimating the prevalence, shedding duration, symptom progression, and codetection with other respiratory viruses of hcov-229e, hku1, nl63, and oc43 among a cohort of college-aged students.we collected demographic, clinical data, and throat and anterior nasal specimens from students as part of a previously described large social network study of acute respiratory infection (ari) among university students. 23 briefly, a total of 590 students living in one of 6 on-campus residence halls were recruited through a chain referral method between october 2012 and january 17, 2013. all participants were asked to identify recent social contacts through searching a list of enrolled contacts or through suggestions based on the underlying social network on a weekly online survey. for a 10-week period from january 17 until april 9, 2013, participants experiencing respiratory symptoms were asked to complete an online screening survey to self-report illness symptoms.participants reporting symptoms meeting the ari case definition (cough plus at least one of the following: body aches, chills, or fever/ feverishness) were scheduled to provide up to 3 specimens over a 6day period following ari onset. in order to reduce the likelihood that any 2-illness episodes were linked to the same etiology, symptomonset dates were required to be at least 2 weeks apart for an ari participant to provide more than one set during the study period.this allowed us to consider each illness episode as an independent event.once an ari case was identified through our online screening survey, an email was automatically sent out to the individual's network contacts, inviting presumed "healthy" social contacts to provide a specimen. the social network was identified through a list of contacts that each enrollee generated over the course of the study.social contacts were eligible if: (i) they had recent face-to-face contact within the previous calendar week with an ari participant and (ii) were not an ari participant during the previous 2 weeks. social contacts that elected to provide specimens were scheduled for up to 3 specimen collections.although healthy social contacts were not experiencing ari when they were asked to provide a specimen, some of the social contacts reported symptoms of illness, such as cough or sneezing, at the time of specimen collection. changes in symptoms among social contacts were calculated as the time from the first specimen collection to illness onset. any social contact symptomatic on any one or more of the specimen collection days was defined as a "social contact with symptoms." any social contact remaining healthy on specimen collection days 0, 3, and 6 was defined as an "asymptomatic social contact."the university of michigan's institutional review board (irb) (hum00054432) approved the study protocol, and the centers for disease control and prevention's human subjects research office reviewed and approved deferral to the university of michigan's irb.all participants providing specimens reported information on 13 acute symptoms: abdominal pain, body aches, chills, cough, diarrhea, earache, feverishness, headache, nasal congestion, runny nose, sneezing, sore throat, and vomiting. symptoms were collected using a standardized questionnaire administered by trained staff during the sample collection visit, and severity was reported as follows: not present, mild, moderate, or severe.for each ari illness participant and invited social contact, we aimed to collect up to 3 samples from each study participant as follows:day 0 specimen-within 24 hours of illness onset. day 3 specimen-between 25 and 96 hours after illness onset. day 6 specimen-between 97 and 144 hours after illness onset.day 0 specimen-time of first specimen collected, as close to illness onset of ari contact as possible.day 3 specimen-approximately 72 hours after initial specimen collection.day 6 specimen-approximately 144 hours after initial specimen collection.if a social contact reported symptoms consistent with our ari definition, either through the online screening survey or during specimen collection, they were considered an ari participant and their next scheduled specimen was considered a day 0 ari specimen. the collection of any combination of day 0, day 3, and day 6 specimens for any participant was defined as a "set" of specimens.trained staff collected specimens at each participant's residence.swabs were taken from 2 locations: the anterior nares and along the uvula. both specimens were placed in copan universal transport media (copan, murrieta, california) and then stored at −70°c prior to testing. 24 we assessed the type and number of viral pathogens in each of the day 0, 3, and 6 specimens. a participant was considered positive for a particular virus (or viruses) if at least one of the 3 specimens within an illness episode had a positive rt-pcr result.we used fisher's exact tests and t tests to compare demographic differences between study participants providing and not providing specimens, as well as the virus prevalence between 3 groups: (i) ari participants, (ii) social contacts with symptoms, and (iii) healthy social contacts. symptoms were analyzed as present or absent, except for cough, which, as a required symptom for the ari case definition, was defined as absent/mild compared to moderate/severe. to assess changes in symptoms over time, we compared the proportion of participants who reported each symptom on day 0, 3, and 6 for each illness episode, testing for trends by virus with the cochran-armitage test. we assessed the change in illness symptoms over the 6-day period separately for ari participants (with a defined symptomonset date) and social contacts with symptoms (with no defined symptom-onset date). due to sample size constraints, the 4 human coronaviruses were combined for symptom analysis. all statistical analyses were calculated using sas 10.1 (cary, nc).of the 590 enrolled participants, 176 (29.8%) provided specimens as an ari participant, a social contact, or as both an ari participant and social contact. a total of 250 sets, the collection a mean of 1.6 specimens was collected per set. compared to enrolled students who did not report ari or did not provide specimens as a social contact, those providing specimens were slightly older (19.5 years vs 19.1 years; p = .0006), had parents who were less well educated (p = .04), and were less likely to have received a 2011/12 seasonal influenza vaccine (37.7% vs 51.2%; p = .01; table 1 ).just over half (127/250; 50.8%) of the specimen sets were from ari participants, 78 (31.2%) from social contact with symptoms, and 45 (18.0%) from asymptomatic social contacts. overall, 76 (30.4%) of the 250 sets were positive for at least one of the 13 viruses included in our assay; a total of 101 viruses were identified (11 dual infections, one triple infection). the overall prevalence of virus from ari participants was 46.5%, compared to 28.3% for social contacts with symptoms (p = .01) and 13.3% for asymptomatic social contacts (p < .001). the most common virus identified was hcov-nl63 (10.0%; 25/250), followed by rhinovirus (7.6%; 19/250), influenza a (6.4%; 16/250), and rsv (3.2%; 8/250). influenza a was the only virus that appeared statistically significantly more frequent in ari cases than social contacts with symptoms or asymptomatic social contacts (ari participants 10.2% vs social contact with symptoms 2.6%, p = .05); though not between ari participants and asymptomatic social contacts 2.2%, p = .12). no specimens tested positive for parainfluenza 2 ( table 2 ).the overall prevalence of codetection (ie, detection of >1 virus per illness episode) in our population was 4.8% (12/250; table 3 ). there were 11 two-virus codetections and one triple codetection in our population (positive for hcov-hku1, influenza a, and rhinovirus).rhinovirus occurred most frequently as a codetected agent (8 of 12 specimens; 66.7%), while hcov-nl63 was present in 50% of the codetected specimens (6/12). the viral positive counts in any one group were too small to draw conclusions about the statistical associations between codetection and clinical symptoms.among ari participants, the prevalence of all viruses detected decreased from time of symptom onset to follow-up. influenza a (16.9%) was the most frequently detected virus on the day of illness onset, followed by hcov-nl63 (15.3%). human coronavirus nl63 was the most frequent virus detected 6 days following illness onset (8.9%), followed by rhinovirus (6.7%). parainfluenza viruses 1 and 2were not detected in any specimens collected from ari participants (table 4 ).of the 127 participants with ari, 56 provided a specimen on day 0, 98 provided a specimen on day 3, and 90 provided a specimen on day 6. the most frequent symptoms on day 0 were moderate/ severe cough (87.5%) and sore throat (83.9%). by day 3, the most frequent symptoms were moderate/severe cough (80.6%), nasal congestion (73.5%), and runny nose (72.4%). finally, 6 days following ta b l e 2 prevalence of rt-pcr viral detection among 176 participants with 250 specimen sets using symptom status from the ex-flu study in the university setting ta b l e 1 demographic information for the 590 participants enrolled in the ex-flu study illness onset, the most frequent symptoms were nasal congestion and runny nose (both 73.3%; figure 1a ).of the 78 social contacts with symptoms, 78 provided a specimen on day 0, 67 on day 3, and 60 on day 6. the most frequent symptoms across the 6-day specimen collection time frame were runny nose (43.4% on day 0, 43.3% on day 3, and 50.0% on day 6) and nasal congestion (39.5% on day 0, 41.8% on day 3, and 45.0% on day 6; figure 1b ).looking over all the specimens collected in a set, 67.2% (203 of 302 social contact specimens) of specimens collected from social contacts were associated with at least one symptom and 32.5% (98 of 302 social contact specimens) were associated with no symptoms. (p = .01), and headache (p = .03) decreased in prevalence from day 0 to day 6. only the reports of rhinitis (p = .02) increased over the 6-day period (figure 2a ).for ari patients with influenza a and multiple specimens (n = 12), moderate/severe cough was the most prevalent symptom during the illness episode, followed by sore throat on day 0 and nasal congestion and runny nose on days 3 and 6 of the illness. body aches (p = .02) and feverishness (p = .02) were the only symptoms with a significant difference in the prevalence of symptoms over time ( figure 2b ).among ari participants with rhinovirus and multiple specimens (n = 9), nasal congestion was present in all participants at all 3 collection times. runny nose was the second most common symptom, decreasing over the illness period from 100% on day 0 to 71.4% 6 days after symptom onset; there were no significant changes in the prevalence of symptoms over time among ari participants with rhinovirus ( figure 2c ).symptoms among social contacts were compared at day 0, 3, and 6 for hcov (n = 9 participants), as this was the most prevalent type of virus identified in this group. moderate/severe cough, nasal congestion, and sore throat were the most frequent symptoms on day 0 and day 3 of specimen collection. six days after the initial specimen collection, nasal congestion (37.5%; 3/8) was the most common f i g u r e 1 a, frequency of symptoms present among acute respiratory infection a participants (n = 127) on day 0 (n = 56 specimens), day 3 (n = 98 specimens), and day 6 (n = 90 specimens). b, frequency of symptoms present among social contacts with symptoms (n = 78) on day 0 (n = 78 specimens), day 3 (n = 67 specimens), and day 6 (n = 60 specimens) following the initial specimen collection a . a cough is defined as moderate or severe vs mild or absent; all other symptoms were either present or absent f i g u r e 2 a, frequency of symptoms present among 19 ari a participants positive for at least one of the 4 human coronaviruses on day 0 (n = 12), day 3 (n = 18), and/or day 6 (n = 16) following illness onset b,c . b, frequency of symptoms present among 12 ari a participants positive for influenza a on day 0 (n = 10), day 3 (n = 12), and/or day 6 (n = 10) following illness onset b,c . c, frequency of symptoms present among 9 ari a participants positive for rhinovirus on day 0 (n = 7), day 3 (n = 8), and/or day 6 (n = 7) following illness onset b . a ari, acute respiratory illness defined as a cough plus at least one additional symptom: body aches, chills, and fever/ feverishness; b cough is defined as moderate or severe vs mild or absent; all other symptoms were either present or absent; c p-values calculated by the cochran-armitage test for trend over the day 0, 3, and 6 specimens symptom, followed by sore throat (25%; 2/8) among hcov-positive social contacts with symptoms. there were no symptoms with significant changes in the prevalence over time among hcov-positive social contacts with symptoms ( figure 3a ).there are few prospective non-clinic-based studies describing the epidemiology of human coronaviruses 229e, hku1, nl63, and oc43 and the changes in symptoms over time. among the otherwise healthy young adults with ari symptoms and a sample of their social contacts participating in this study during a single season, winter season, the prevalence of the 4 hcovs combined was 19.7% among specimens from participants with ari, 14.1% among social contacts with symptoms, and 6.7% among asymptomatic social contacts.codetection of viruses was found in 12 specimens collected during the study period, including one triple codetection with hcov-hku1, influenza a, and rhinovirus. influenza a was the most commonly detected virus among specimens collected from ari participants, while hcov-nl63 was the most frequent virus detected 6 days following illness onset. we found that moderate/severe cough, chills, and headache decreased in frequency over the 6-day period among students with hcov infections, while runny nose increased in frequency over the 6-day period; no similar frequency trends were observed among symptomatic social contacts with hcov. while statistically significant differences were observed between patients providing specimens and participants not providing specimens in age and parental education, the significantly higher portion of patients not providing specimens with a seasonal influenza vaccination status is likely of concern for interpretation. the differences potentially suggest that receiving a vaccination decreased the likelihood of providing a specimen during our study, an area to note for future studies with a voluntary specimen collection component.our prevalence estimates are higher than estimates for a previously conducted study examining these 4 hcovs in adult and asymptomatic populations, potentially due to the close contact within the residence halls. in addition, our focus on ari participants and their social contacts did not include individuals living in residence halls that did not have contact with an ari participant. as such, our reported prevalence estimates among social contacts of ari cases only are likely higher than they would be among a similar population without known ari contact. in that retrospective study conducted over 9 years in são paulo, brazil, the prevalence of hcovs tested by rt-pcr was 8% among 50 adults living in the community with influenza-like illness. 25 an additional 50 asymptomatic adults were tested, and no positive hcov specimens were detected. by contrast, we found that 6.7% of our asymptomatic contacts were positive for hcovs. a household study that used similar rt-pcr methods conducted over the same period as our study in southeast michigan found a prevalence of 16% of hcovs among individuals with ari, but they did not examine the prevalence among non-ari contacts. 24 the high prevalence of hcov, compared to the 12 other viruses in our testing panel, could be attributed to the timing of our study.human coronaviruses are most frequently found during december through may, and long-term cohort studies suggest a cyclical pattern in the presence of the 4 hcovs over multiple years. 26 however, without multiyear data, we are unable to determine whether the high prevalence of the hcovs found was due to the cyclical nature of the virus or a result of testing ill individuals in close quarters.unpublished data from a pilot study conducted among an independent sample of 574 students followed from february to april 2011, resulted in few patients with ari providing specimens (25) 29 these studies suggest that viral codetection is frequent in children. in contrast to these studies, our study designed allowed for multiple samples taken from the same participant, f i g u r e 3 frequency of symptoms present among 9 social contact participants positive for at least one of the 4 human coronaviruses on day 0 (n = 9), day 3 (n = 9), and/or day 6 (n = 8) following initial specimen collection a . a ari, acute respiratory illness defined as a cough plus at least one additional symptom: body aches, chills, and fever/feverishness; our findings of persistently high prevalence of runny nose over the 6-day period in ari cases with hcov corresponds with common symptoms found in historical challenge studies of these viruses. 26 however, we were unable to find any other studies presenting a change in symptoms observed over time for the 4 globally circulating hcovs outside of human challenge trials. the statistically significant decrease in cough, chills, and headache and increase in runny nose over the 6-day period for the hcov observed in our study suggest that symptoms change significantly over the course of natural infection, making it difficult to delineate between viral etiologies associated with common ari. the similarity of our findings with those of another study conducted in the region during the same season 24 suggests that university students were under similar regional viral pressure. due to the low level of severe illness, screening for these viruses in a university setting does not seem necessary. however, it does seem likely that increased testing in the university setting, even among those with mild symptoms, would result in a high number of viruses detected. future studies would help to confirm the results of this study over multiple seasons to assess long-term trends that were not observed during the current study, conducted over a single season.because we used a chain referral methodology for enrollment, our study population was not randomly recruited. it is unlikely that this would bias the estimates of viral prevalence among those with ari;however, it is possible that the estimates for viral prevalence from healthy contacts may be elevated compared to the prevalence found in the general population. additionally, prevalence estimates include samples that were taken at up to 3 time points within the first 6 days of illness, providing a greater opportunity to identify virus-positive samples compared to other study designs. further, our testing for viruses was not exhaustive; the 13 viruses included were selected for their frequency of appearance as upper respiratory viruses in the population, as well as their clinical importance. however, additional respiratory viruses may have been present; as a result, the number of codetected viruses identified in this study is likely underestimated.finally, seasonality may have influenced our findings. by recruiting and testing patients, january-april of 2012, we were more likely to see respiratory viruses compared to other circulating viruses. 32 human coronaviruses are common, even among those without respiratory symptoms, and specific symptoms may change over the course of an illness that can mirror symptoms ranging from influenza to rhinovirus. larger studies in the community setting are needed to better understand the epidemiological and clinical significance of codetection. these studies may help to uncover important transmission characteristics that could inform measures for addressing more deadly coronavirus outbreaks.the findings and conclusions in this study are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the centers for disease control and prevention.none declared.brian m. davis http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0505-6180allison e. aiello http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7029-2537covid-19 is a new and highly contagious respiratory disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2).sudden and rapid progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is the severe and fatal feature of covid-19. the current outbreak of covid-19 has caused global pandemic. up to march 24, 2020 , there are 812,18 confirmed patients and 3,281 deaths in 31 provinces in china [1] . in all world, there are 1051,635 confirmed cases and 56,985 confirmed deaths [2] , covid-19 has a high case fatality rate in severe patients and a huge medical burden caused by invasive mechanical ventilation [3, 4] , national healthcommission of the people's republic of china has issued the relevant diagnosis and treatment guidelines for covid - 19 , which have been updated to the 7th edition [5] ,who also referred to the chinese covid -19 guidelines for diagnosis and treatment, and proposed internationally oriented advice on diagnosis and treatment [6] .however, with the continuous recognition of this new disease, we believe that the current diagnosis and treatment guidelines still need to be improved, such as the characteristic clinical symptoms of covid-19, meaningful laboratory examination indicators, the diagnosis basis of covid-19 pneumonia, the limitation of glucocorticoid usage and dosage in treatment, and the choice of mechanical ventilation timing. more excellent experience in clinical diagnosis and treatment is needed for reference.the fifth affiliated hospital of sun yat-sen university, as the only designated covid-19 hospital in zhuhai city, has admitted 97 cases of covid-19 patients, all of whom have been successfully cured and discharged. through the analysis and summary of the diagnosis and treatment process of these patients, we hope to provide some reference advice on the diagnosis and treatment of covid-19, especially how to accurately identify the risk of severe disease and early block disease progression, and rationally apply glucocorticoid to reduce the rate of invasive mechanical ventilation and case fatality rate of severe patients.this study was a retrospective single-center study, which included 97 confirmed covid-19 adult patients (more than 14 years old) admitted to the fifth affiliated hospital of sun yat-sen university from january 17, 2020 to march 10, 2020. this retrospective observational study was approved by the research ethics committee of the fifth affiliated hospital of sun yat-sen university and the need for informed consent was waived, considering the retrospective study design. clinical data were extracted from electronic medical records, including basic demographic data, symptoms, vital signs, clinical classification, complications and the sars-cov-2 rna of nasopharyngeal swab and blood samples clearance time which was defined as the time of after two consecutive negative real-time pcr results with 1-day interval.covid-19 was diagnosed and clinically classified according to the new coronavirus pneumonia diagnosis and treatment plan (trial version 7) [5] .categorical variables were described as frequency rates and percentages, and continuous variables were described using mean (±sd, standard deviation), median and interquartilerange (iqr) values. means for continuous variables were compared using independent group t tests and one way anvoa when the data were normally distributed and homoscedasticity; otherwise ,the mann-whitney u test and kruskal-wallis h were used when the data were nonnormal distribution. proportions for categorical variables were compared using the chi-squared test, although the fisher exact test was used when the data were limited. all statistical analysis was performed using spss software (version 26.0, ibm). for unadjusted comparisons, a two-sided p<0.05 was considered statistically significant.a total of 103 patients with positive sars-cov-2 nasopharyngeal swab test in zhuhai, 5 of whom were younger than 14 years old, belonged to pediatric diagnosis and treatment; the first case (death case) among adults was not treated by our medical team. a total of 97 patients treated by the diagnosis and treatment team included in the analysis of this report, of which 26 were severe, accounting for 26.8%. among the cases of covid-19 in zhuhai, 69 of the 97 patients were local residents of wuhan or had lived in wuhan within 14 days before the onset, 8 cases were from hubei area outside wuhan, 14 had a history of direct contact with personnel from hubei, and another 6 cases did not have a clear epidemiological history. the proportion of severe cases of patients directly from wuhan was lower than that of non-severe cases (p=0.028), but the proportion of severe cases of patients who had no clear epidemiological history was higher (p=0.023). this coincides with the possibility of multiple origins of the new coronavirus. clinical symptoms found in these covid-19 patients were: fever, shortness of breath, cough, diarrhea, loss of appetite, hemoptysis ,fatigue, nasal congestion, runny nose, chest tightness, and sputum.hemoptysis was a distinctive symptoms of severe patients (26.9% vs 0, p <0.001 table1); shortness of breath was more common in severe patients (100% vs 9.9%, p <0.001 table1), and the incidence of fever symptoms was more in severe patients than non-severe (80.8% vs 50.7%, p = 0.008 table1). there was no any clinical symptoms in 12.4% of non-severe covid-19 patients. the underlying diseases of these patients were: hypertension in 16 above indicators (except lactic acid) also showed significant differences between non-severe and severe (p<0.05, table2).in addition, the valley value of lymphocyte count and pco2 was lower, while the peak value of bnp and the d-dimer were higher in severe covid-19 patients than the non-severe ones(p<0.05, table2).in addition, we found the proportion of abnormal of lactic dehydrogenase, total protein, pondus hydrogenii, glutamic oxalacetic transaminase, creatine kinase mb, creatine kinase, urea nitrogen was low (< 30%, table2) in these patients. the abnormal of glutamic oxalacetic transaminase, lactic dehydrogenase and creatine kinase mb tend to occur in severe covid-19 patients (p<0.05, table2).for the above indicators with significant differences in covid-19, we are more concerned about their changes in the course of disease, especially for the prediction of severe disease. lymphocyte count, crp, d-dimer, bnp, albumin, and potassium were abnormal throughout most of the course of the severe covid-19 patients ( figure 1 ). it suggested that abnormalities in these indicators can early predict the progression of the severe disease. lymphocyte and crp recovery were slow in severe patients ( figure 1 ). so it must be attention to the balance between early immune response and lateral inflammatory reaction, especially during the first 2 weeks of the course of the disease. the level of d-dimer and bnp gradually increased during the first week of the course of the disease, and reached the peak at day 8-9 of the course of the disease, and then slowly decreased, which suggested that the risk of secondary thrombosis and myocardial injury should be paid attention to during the peak period.the recovery of hypoalbuminemia was still slow in the case of continuous supplementation (20g-40g albumin per day), lasting the whole course of severe patients, which also suggested that the consumption and loss of albumin may persist.hypokalemia was also more obvious in severe patients, but it can be basically maintained in the normal range after active potassium supplementation.the overall course of the disease in severe patients lasted about three weeks before most indicators return to normal levels( figure 1 ).as shown in table3,covid-19 patients were classified as mild (oi> 300mmhg), severe (150≤oi≤300mmhg), critical (oi<150mmhg) stage. among the 26 severe patients, three patients were severe on admission, the other 23 patients all progressed rapidly from non-severe to severe stage, and 10 cases developed to critical stage with oxygenation index further decreased to less than 150mmhg.we compared the characteristic symptoms and laboratory results of these groups at . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054890 doi: medrxiv preprint different stages. in addition to the oxygenation index which was an important indicator, we are more concerned about the predictive effect of changes in clinical symptoms and relevant laboratory indicators.we also selected and analyzed the most significant abnormal changes in the relevant symptoms and laboratory indicators in three stages over the course of covid-19.hemoptysis, dyspnea, hyperbilirubinemia, high α-hbdh and high ldh were more common in severe and critical stage than in mild stage (p<0.05). lymphocyte count, crp, d-dimer, bnp, and albumin were generally abnormal in the course of covid-19 patients, and the abnormal changes were more significant with the aggravation of the disease. (p<0.05).the deterioration of the above indicators indicated that the patient's condition was rapid progress, which required close monitoring and early intervention.blood sars-cov-2 rna was detected in 33 of the 97 covid-19 patients enrolled in this study. the results of viral nucleic acid were interpreted as positive results in four patients, and the oxygenation index of all the 4 patients was lower than 150mmhg.it is suggested that patients with positive blood sars-cov nucleic acid test had a high potential risk, and are likely to progress to severe or critical disease, so the changes of the condition should be closely observed.the pneumonia like change is important lung sign in covid-19. if there is no change in lung ct, it will not progress to severe disease. the common sign in lung ct is ground-glass opacity (ggo) and some high-density line-like and flake-like is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint .lesion range on lung ct scans, we saw a greater frequency of bilateral lung involvement, and a greater number of pulmonary lobes involved, higher frequency of consolidation and more mediastinal lymph node enlargement in severe covid-19 cases than in non-severe ones (5 vs 1, p <0.001, table 4 ), suggesting that both lungs involved, multiple lobes involvement and rapid lesion progression are important indicators for predicting disease progression to severe disease.on the basis of respecting the clinical characteristics and current known pathological process of covid-19, our team mainly adopts symptomatic supportive treatment measures. blind medication was avoided during the treatment. all medicines used are considered to effectively protect and support the patient's own immune function against viruses. as shown in table 5, due to the common hypoproteinemia (89.7%) and hypokalemia (70.1%), we provided corresponding supplements to maintain body fluid electrolytes and internal environment and nutrition balance. especially in all severe patients, 20-40g albumin / d was given, adjusted according to the heart function. appropriate plasma supplementation had been applied in 68.8% severe and all critical cases, which could supply immunoglobulins and lymphokines to support the body's normal antiviral effect. we think that plasma (especially fresh plasma) supplementation has better supportive treatment effects than extracted immunoglobulins. for critically ill patients, an appropriate dose of methylprednisolone had been given to exert anti-inflammatory effects, suppressing the inflammatory storm caused by the body's excessive immunity. oxygen therapy had been given in 89.7% of all patients at early stage. when oi declined below 300mmhg ， medium-high flow rate to inhale oxygen through the nasal catheter to maintain sao2 higher than 95%, but if oi declined continually ， high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy (hfnc) should be applied as early as possible. we found that . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054890 doi: medrxiv preprint hfnc could achieve good blood oxygen maintenance effect even in severe and critical patients, with better tolerance than non-invasive mechanical ventilation. with early and appreciated intervention and treatment, only one case took invasive mechanical ventilation for short time.in this study, 22 patients were treated with methylprednisolone, of which 7 cases were for dealing with high fever in small doses of 40mg. and the other 15 cases were for rescuing, when theyhad sudden respiratory distress and a sharp decrease in oi. in these patients with oi <150mmhg or close to 150mmhg, the application of methylprednisolone varied from 1 to 3 times, but single or as few times as possible application was recommended, rather than continuous and long-term applications.and the single dose of methylprednisolone was 40mg-500mg, according to severity, oxygenation index, speed of progression, production of inflammatory factors, body weight, age and underlying diseases condition. as shown in figure 4 , after treatment with methylprednisolone, the patient's oi improved significantly, and all but one avoided invasive mechanical ventilation. the most important application principles of methylprednisolone had been shown in table 6.otherwise, it is important to prevent possible side effects in advance, with proton pump inhibitor, appropriated anticoagulation, monitoring blood pressure, blood glucose, electrolyte disorder. all 22 patients treated with methylprednisolone had no gastrointestinal bleeding manifestations; no obvious change in blood glucose and blood pressure, no osteonecrosis of the femoral head (onfh) in one-month-follow up.we analyzed the effect of methylprednisolone to time for negative-conversing in 2019-ncov testing of nasopharyngeal swab. the time for negative-conversing in . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054890 doi: medrxiv preprint sars-cov-2 testing were 10.0 ± 5.3d and 10.0 ± 7.9d in patients with or without methylprednisolone respectively, and there was no statistical difference between the two groups (p> 0.05 , figure 5 ), indicating that application of methylprednisolone according to above principles does not extend sars-cov-2 clearing up time.march 24, 2020, the global case fatality rate was 4.4% [2] . in the cohort study of 41 covid-19 patients in wuhan at early stage of epidemic, 13 cases were admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) , and 6 cases died at last [3] . in another cohort study of 138 covid-19 patients, 36 cases had been transferred to icu, and of which 4 (11.1%) cases died [7] . the fatality rate was significantly higher in the severe covid-19patients. the treatment of mechanical ventilation in critical patients brings also huge medical burden [4] .so far, no specific anti-sars-cov-2 drug has been found successfully [8, 9] .therefore, it is extremely important to recognize the predictive risk factors of disease aggravation, identify severe disease early, give scientific and effective treatment programs, block the progression to severe disease, and avoid intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation in critical disease to reduce the case fatality rate. based on successfully treatment of 97 covid-19 patients (including 26 severe, 10 critical) in our hospital, we would like to share and discuss our experience in recognizing and intervention of severe early and timely.consistent with previous research [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] , persisted or worsen hypoxemia, low lymphocyte count, hypoalbuminemia, hypokalemia, high crp, high d-dimer, and high bnp were important indicators of predictive risk factors of disease aggravation in our study. hypoxemia is the most common clinical feature throughout the course of disease (93.8% of all patients ) in covid-19 cases, even if someone have no shortness of breath on admission. the declining of oi in severe patients was more . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054890 doi: medrxiv preprint significantly than that in non-severe cases. shortness of breath was shown in all severe patients, which was 92% of icu patients in the research of huang et al [3] . a large scale multicenter research [12] of 1099 covid-19 patients from 31 provinces reported 95.5%, 81.5% and 59.6% of severe cases had low lymphocyte count, high crp and high d-dimer respectively, which were significant difference from non-severe ones. in the research of huang [3] , low lymphocyte count, hypoalbuminemia and high d-dimer had been found common in severe covid-19 patients, particularly in critical cases in icu. in addition , we also found the hypokalemia and high bnp were more significant in severe cases than non-severe ones. in addition, sars-cov-2 viremia should also be paid attention to, as a predictor for progression to severe. except for the abnormal values of above indicators, we found that it was more important to observe the changing trend of these indicators during course of disease. more significant low lymphocyte count and high crp appeared in severe patients from the beginning and continued the whole course, which indicated the imbalance between early immune response and lateral inflammatory reaction. liu [11] et al reported that mean days from illness onset to icu admission were 8d in the severe or critical type. in our study, the peak of obvious abnormality of d-dimer and bnp appeared at day 8-9 of the disease course and then decreased slowly, which indicated early recognition of critical signs and the risk of secondary thrombosis and myocardial injury. the persistent hypoalbuminemia and hypokalemia suggested that the imbalance of homeostasis , at the same time instructed treatment. some characteristic imaging findings, such as ggo, nodules, stripe and patchy consolidation , bronchial abnormalities, were consistent with previous studies [3, 12, 16] . the abnormal images on lung ct were corresponding to the pathological features of covid-19 pneumonia [17] . two types of acute exudative pathological changes had been considered corresponding to imaging change in these covid-19. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. according to the clinical characteristics of covid-19, early and timely intervention is important. in this study, none of the 97 patients had basic diseases of immune dysfunction. therefore, it is considered that immune dysfunction and internal environmental disorder are transient after the virus infection. so in the treatment, we mainly focused on symptomatic and supportive treatment in the early stage, such as adequate supplementation of albumin, plasma and potassium, in order to maintain the stability of the intracellular environment and adequately reactivate body immunity to clean up sars-cov-2 by themselves, which is consistent with lei zhang's opinion [18] .at the same time, continuous application of small doses of glucocorticoid should be avoided in case of suppressing the body's immune function at this stage.hfnc should be applied as early as possible, if patients had progressive decline of oi. we found that hfnc could achieve good blood oxygen maintenance effect even in severe and critical patients, with better tolerance than non-invasive mechanical ventilation. the most common indications for invasive mechanical ventilation should be strictly control in critical covid-19 patients. based on our experience, appropriate pulse methylprednisolone application on severe/critical covid-19. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054890 doi: medrxiv preprint patients on demand, improved blood oxygen and reduced the utilization rate of invasive mechanical ventilation, case fatality rate and medical burden significantly. a meta-analysis [19] shows that glucocorticoid is a more effective drug for suppressing the occurrence of inflammatory storms, and it is safe within a certain dose range. the emergence of covid-19 inflammatory storm is often life-threatening in a short time, with a variety of inflammatory factors [3] , so the effect of single il-6 mab on covid-19 should be further evaluated [20] . if the inflammatory storms could not be suppressed timely, multiple organ failure and death might be caused. so far, glucocorticoid may be unique effective medicine suppressing the progress of the inflammatory storm with appropriated and reasonable application. the application of glucocorticoids in viral pneumonia is currently controversial. a retrospective cohort study about sars showed that glucocorticoids can reduce case fatality rate and hospital stays [21] , but there are also studies that show that glucocorticoids may increase the case fatality rate of sars patients and delay the virus clearance time [22, 23] .in patients with middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and influenza virus pneumonia, the use of glucocorticoids is also controversial [24, 25, 26, 27, 28] . application indication and dosage of corticosteroid had been strictly controlled from the beginning of epidemic of covid-19, and corticosteroid had be recommended not be used for the treatment of 2019-ncov-induced lung injury or shock outside of a clinical trial [29] . although this issue has always been controversial [30] ，clinical usage of corticosteroid was obviously restricted, and the role was underestimated greatly.the most obvious effects of methylprednisolone therapy in our study were that invasive mechanical ventilation had been avoided in 14 patients, the time to use invasive mechanical ventilation had been shortened significantly in one patient, medical expenses had been reduced greatly, and no death happened. there were no obvious adverse reactions during one-month follow up. according to some reports, we find that there are too many critical patients admitted in icu at the same time or . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054890 doi: medrxiv preprint there is no qualification or condition of invasive mechanical ventilation treatment in some hospital admitting covid-19 patients. in this case, methylprednisolone therapy might be an effective choice. based on the data and experience of our team, it is recommended to improve the status of glucocorticoids in the treatment of severe covid-19, and organize multi-center large-scale retrospective studies and possible prospective studies.after summarizing the successful treatment of 97 covid-19 patients (26 severe cases) by our team, we found accurate and timely identification of clinical features in severe risks, and early and appropriate intervention could block disease progression.appropriate dose of methylprednisolone can effectively avoid invasive mechanical ventilation and reduce case fatality rate in severe and critical covid-19 patients.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint . timely review of lung ct showed better prognosis for the progress of the disease (figure 2 , figure 3 )abbreviations:sd, standard deviation;iqr,interquartilerange; *p<0.05 was considered statistically significant.p a values indicate differences among non-severe,severe patients and critical patients;p b values indicate differences between non-severe and severe patients;p c values indicate differences between non-severe and critical patients; p d values indicate differences between severe and critical patients.table4. lung ct features in covid-19 patients 3days before and after of the lowest oxygenation index shortly after the end of the war in (or on) iraq, the british prime minister was invited to address the us congress, at which occasion he would also be given the congressional gold medal. a few seconds into his address, delivered on july 17, 2003, blair stresses how, in the past five decades or so, nations have grown ever closer because of 'technology, communication, trade and travel'. he continues with a few lines that are worth quoting here in full:we are bound together as never before. this coming together provides us with unprecedented opportunity but also makes us uniquely vulnerable. the threat comes, because, in another part of the globe, there is shadow and darkness where not all the world is free, where many millions suffer under brutal dictatorship; where a third of our planet lives in poverty beyond anything even the poorest in our societies can imagine; and where a fanatical strain of religious extremism has arisen, that is a mutation of the true and peaceful faith of islam and because in the combination of these afflictions, a new and deadly virus has emerged. the virus is terrorism, whose intent to inflict destruction is unconstrained by human feeling (. . .) 2 .in this essay we hope to be able to demonstrate how the imagery in this quotation is indicative of a newly emerging imaginary of empire. empire here appears as the body of freedom-loving nations 'bound together', whose health, always 'vulnerable', is threatened by 'afflictions' and 'strains' of 'viruses' that are 'unconstrained', and, because of their being devoid of any 'human feeling', and because of their status as 'unconstrained' 'viruses', firmly belong outside this benign empire, i.e., outside the body of real humanity that, in recent years, had been growing together. it is worthwhile to note here that this healthy body of empire is one that combines both the freedom of flows and the order of an assemblage, 'bound together'. this empire is basically one of assembled technologies -''technology, communication, trade and travel'', says blair -where freedom flows orderly. the gaps in-between these assembled technologies is where disorderly, 'viral' 'fanaticism' can and will slip within.we will get back to the prime minister's speech later. it may suffice for our purposes here to underline the importance of this newly emerging imaginary. its particular medical imagery seems to betray a new vision of empire, i.e. one that, on the one hand, is moving beyond notions of empire as productive achievement, and one that, on the other hand, is gradually abandoning both legality and diplomacy as the main tools of empire-building. although this particular medical imaginary, in our view, already began to crystallise during the early 1990s, i.e., shortly after the fall of the berlin wall, and, with it, the cold war, it could be argued that, in the aftermath of september 11, and in the months prior to the latest iraq war, events catalysed this medical imaginary and refined it. by the time of blair's congressional address, it emerged fully fledged. we will attempt to reconstruct this process of catalysis and refinement. but before we do that, we need to explore some imaginaries of empire, old and new.empire used to be considered as productive process. empire was something to be achieved, to be accomplished. it was a goal, and, as such, it was strived for. empire was not just there, it was not given. it had to be made, it had to be produced, and it had in turn to be made productive. forces had to be marshalled, populations had to be subdued and mobilised, crops had to be cultivated, peoples had to be disciplined and 'civilised', landscapes had to be changed, goods had to be transported, networks and dependencies had to be established, and ultimately, something like imperial integration or better, inclusion, had to be accomplished: 'they' had to be part of 'us'. and sometimes this accomplishment of empire seemed to have implied that 'they' must be 'like us', or 'with us', or 'under us'. referring to victorian writers such as ruskin and lord macaulay, this is how ian baucom recently read the british empire: 'a factory for the production of english identity'. 3 let us be clear and not overstate our case here, and let us at least qualify this claim. empire, it should be stressed, was simultaneously and inevitably also exclusive; it aimed, at best, at disciplinary normalization of subdued populations (that sometimes went under the heading of 'civilization'), and, at worst, at sheer repression, even genocide. if 'they' would not be 'part of us', if 'they' would refuse to 'be like us', or be disciplined to be 'with us' or 'under us', then the options of repression and destruction were opened up. but this is not the issue of this paper. the issue here is to realise how empire used to be imagined and practiced, first and foremost, as something that had to be made, that had to be produced, as something that had to be assembled. out of fragments, incoherence, and disunity, empire had to be produced. so unnatural an enterprise, this empire, in the words of rudyard kipling, the colonialist par excellence, was literally the white man's burden. 4 and all this required tremendous productive effort 5 as well as discipline. one could hope that, at the end of this productive effort, empire would emerge. if ever it did emerge. the production of empire did seem to be a never-ending process of construction, mobilisation, inclusion, discipline, and integration (however repressive it may at times have been). empire never seemed to be fully accomplished, it required constant and unrelenting productive attention. in this empire, there's no room for complacency. as a 'factory', empire seemed to be an ongoing productive process. its decline threatened every minute of the day from within as well as from without (outside was the location of other empires). this 19th century notion of empire as an unrelenting process of productive inclusion or integration of some sort coincided with the consolidation of european nation-states and the emergence of nationalism. nation-states too were not given. they too had to be built, they had to be produced, they had to be fashioned out of fragments, incoherence, and disunity. they too were the result of productive inclusion and discipline. they too were the result of tremendous effort, of particular arrangements that kept populations and landscapes together. they too were the result of factories and of labour. they too had to be made productive in turn. however, in both cases, i.e. the production of nation-states on the one hand, and the production of empire on the other, legality and diplomacy were crucial. law and diplomacy were important technologies (however repressive at times) by which nation-states as well as empires were held together, or indeed, by which they were produced or maintained, and by which they were made to be productive.this imaginary -i.e. empire is the result of a productive process of inclusion -has, since about the fall of the berlin wall, been replaced by another. this new imaginary, we hope to be able to demonstrate below, unfolded gradually throughout the 1990s. at first notions such as 'production', 'productivity', and 'inclusion' gradually disappeared from the imaginary of empire. later, after the events of september 11 and the latest iraq war, a newly emerged imaginary of empire, i.e. empire as an 'exclusive' 'given', was medicalised. let us reconstruct this first phase here. the second phase, i.e. the phase of medicalisation, will be dealt with in the next section. empire does not have to be produced or maintained anymore. it is accomplished. it's just there. today, empire is a given. nothing needs to be included anymore. empire is global, universal, complete, and is, as such, 'immutable'. 6 it may, as hardt and negri recently argued, 7 be a 'multicentric' empire, driven and fuelled by what they call the 'multitude' of desires and hopes. it may not have a clear and obvious centre anymore. but it is, hardt and negri argue, global and complete, and it seems to have reached a point of no return. indeed, prior to september 11, it looked as if the global and globalizing 'multitude' and their 'multicentric' controls, i.e. empire, in hardt's and negri's view at least, were there, or here, to stay. such an empire does not need to be produced or maintained. it produces and maintains itself. it doesn't have to be made productive. its productivity is determined by this multitude of desires and controls. there is no imperial centre that arranges for particular inclusions or that works towards integration. there is a multitude of desires and controls that interact with each other or resist each other. this empire is complete. now this is how two radicals have imagined empire in the 1990s. one does not have to agree with them of course. according to peter fitzpatrick, for example, although this 'new imperialism' assumed something like a 'complete givenness', something like the 'naturalism' or 'the implanted truth and the inevitability' of 'the neo-liberal order', while 'it assures itself that it has encompassed its own limit, achieved completeness, and marked the end of history', it also retained and continues to retain severely disciplinary features, such as 'structural adjustment plans' and other 'contractual' devices whereby states are forced to collaborate towards their own disciplined subordination to 'global capital'. fitzpatrick also amply demonstrates how the 'new imperialism' of the 1990s tended to be imagined as that particularly western but highly pretentious universalism that hides under words like 'human rights'. and this entailed massive exclusion, as, of course, 'those who do not behave in accordance with or aspire to human rights, must not be human'. 8 one might however agree with the claim that the imaginary of empire, after the fall of the berlin wall, say roughly from president bush sr.'s new world order onwards, has arguably undergone marked changes. empire seems to have lost much of its 'productive' and 'inclusive' connotations (however repressive at times such production and inclusion may have been). if anything, today's imagined empire seems to be in need of exclusions. in the imaginary of bush sr.'s new world order, for example, there was no room for 'rogue states'. those should be kept at bay, or neutralised, or embargoed, or just contained. this imaginary empire, i.e. an almost natural given of free-flowing forces and desires (freeflowing but orderly, new-world-orderly, that is), only needs to reproduce itself by excluding 'rogue states' (rogue-but-unfree, that is), or at least by keeping them in check. this is its imaginary legality, this is what its imaginary diplomacy is about: the exclusion, or at least the policing (with the us as the 'world's policeman') of 'rogue' elements from a given state -a given empire -of natural freedom and natural order. this shift in the imaginary of empire again coincided with a similar shift that could be detected in the imaginary of the nationstate. in an age when, as habermas once noted, 9 life and governance are marked by an 'exhaustion of utopian energies', the project of the nation-state, or any project for that matter (habermas himself wrote about the welfare state in particular), tends to be imagined and practiced much more as a negative complex of exclusions rather than a focused, positive, indeed utopian project of inclusion. or, in a somewhat different vein, and borrowing from deleuze, discipline gradually made way for control. 10 during the past few decades, the legality of national projects often expressed itself in images such as 'fight' and 'enemy', or 'stranger' and 'risk'. the fight against crime, for example, or the stranger at the border, or the prevention and containment of risk, all did begin to weigh heavily upon the imaginary of nation. however, in both cases, i.e. empire as well as the nation-state, legality and diplomacy remained fully part of their respective imaginary space. policing rogue states, fighting crime and criminals, and keeping strangers out did remain a matter of legality 8 see note 5, at 208-216. this emerging imaginary of empire (i.e. empire as a natural, selfsufficient, complete given of orderly freedom and exclusion of rogue elements), we will argue, got medicalised, and this medicalization also catalysed the imaginary of empire towards a higher level of coherence. now this medicalization of the imaginary of empire, one could argue, was already on its way before september 11. 11 indeed, the first gulf war (1990) (1991) , the first test of bush sr.'s new world order if you wish, already saw imagery like 'surgical strikes' surge to the surface. the then us government administration may have regarded themselves as the world's policeman, operating within the bounds of legality and diplomacy (however repressive at times), they nevertheless saw no problem in using the scalpel when cutting out 'rogue' elements with surgical precision. we shall demonstrate how this embryonic medicalization further evolved, passing an oncological stage, and ending in a final, epidemiological one. again, this trend of medicalisation could also be seen on an intra-national level, where, as nikolas rose has shown, crime control, in today's 'biological culture', seems to adopt genetically informed risk prevention strategies 'that aim to identify, treat and control individuals predisposed to impulsive or aggressive conduct', and that should be implemented against (and this is important) 'those whose conduct seems to show wanton disregard for the moral constraints on the conduct of free individuals in a liberal society'. 12 before we explore the medicalised imaginary of empire in more detail below, let us just emphasise here how, in this imaginary, particularly in the oncological and epidemiological stages (see below), empire appears as a full, self-sufficient given, as a naturally given body, as a naturally ordered body of freedom-cum-constraint, whose undoubted health should be maintained in and through the exclusion of anything -indeed: anything inhuman -that does not belong there. at this point, preoccupations with legality and diplomacy give way to a different logic of empire, to 11 one could add here that medical imagery as such, e.g. the use of words such as ''health'' to describe the state of the nation, has 19th century origins. as many criminologists know, louis pasteur's work in bacteriology made sure that late 19th century criminologies did tend to define crime in terms of bacterial ''infection''.12 rose, n., ''the biology of culpability: pathological identity and crime control in a biological culture'', theoretical criminology 1 (2000), 5-34, at 5 (italics r.l.).viral contagion and anti-terrorism a different logic of imperial intervention, if you wish. this is the point where imperial intervention comes to be imagined as an instance of medical urgency. in a medicalised imaginary of empire, it's the logic of medical urgency and medical necessity that is likely to start determining and structuring imperial interventions such as 'pharmacotic' wars on terrorism. 13 3. 15 the image of terrorism as a cancer that needs to be fought (gill himself, somewhat ironically, understands this 'fighting' to consist of 'longterm' 'understanding') would prove to be rather resilient. president bush's national security adviser, condoleeza rice, e.g. about a month after the september attacks, and 10 days into operation enduring freedom in afghanistan, admits to a cnn journalist that 'what we want to do is to work with every government in which there is a substantial al-qaeda presence to figure out a strategy for rooting it out (...) because it's like cutting out a cancer (...)'. 16 although it moves towards further medicalization -oncologization, to be precise -rice's imaginary remains a somewhat uneasy hybrid. 'cutting out cancers' does not sit nicely and squarely within an apparently tenaciously persisting legal and diplomatic framework which implies 'working together' with 'governments' to 'figure out strategies', particularly at a time when a severe military campaign is going on. the image of 'terrorism as cancer' as such was unable to capture both the conditions and the particulars of what happened on september 11. cancer tends to grow inside bodies. yes, like 'evil', it 'knows no boundaries' (president bush during his trip to china), 17 and it often grows and spreads through metastases, but it is localised, and, moreover, it appears to come from within, and as such, has something human about it -it's just human cells running wild, it's humanity running wild. but the image did persist, and surfaced on a few occasions, one as late as march 2003 (during a press conference on the eve of the invasion of iraq) when president bush, referring to 'regime change', talked about 'replacing this cancer inside of iraq'. 18 'viral' imagery, however, would prove to be more appropriate to capture the events of september 11 and the conditions that led to it. viruses -at least some viruses -tend to be both outside and within. they come form 'outside' the body, but somehow, and unpredictably so, like 'evil', manage to penetrate boundaries, slipping 'within'. viruses also need 'cultures' where they are able to grow and multiply incessantly. this notion of 'cultures' is worth dwelling on for a moment. fitzpatrick, for example, critically examines the use made by proponents of 'human rights' of phrases such as 'cultural absolutism' to denominate 'culture-bound, closed, exclusionary, traditional, authoritarian, status-ridden, static, 'pure and inviolable community'', 19 i.e. those rigid and automaton-like elements devoid of the capacity for moral, and therefore, human deliberations. in a strange and ironic twist these 'cultures' of 'absolutism' prove to be highly flexible and mobile on a global scale, and possibly more so than the allegedly culturally universal particulars that go under the name 'human rights'. indeed, and most importantly, viruses -at least some of them -tend to be airborne, just like the images of the twin towers that circulated through cnn's ether, spreading fear and terror, contagiously. as the head of a fascist terrorist conspiracy tells us (in the hollywood production the sum of all fears, which was released in 2002), whilst enjoying the apparent inability of both us and russian protagonists to move beyond cold war thinking, and whilst planning a nuclear attack on baltimore, 'our virus is airborne'. a french judge, in a televised programme, likened al-qaeda to the aids virus : 'this virus is totally mutant'. 20 viruses are not human. a virus is a 'fremdkorper', an alien, inhuman entity that does not belong within (and that has no place without either). viruses ought to be tracked down in their cultures and destroyed without further ado. 21 this is a matter of medical, or more precisely, of epidemiological necessity and urgency.the image of 'terrorism as viral contagion' surfaced fairly shortly after the september attacks, particularly in academic milieux. a few days after the attacks, arthur and marilouise kroker, the canadian editors of the pomo-zine par excellence, ctheory, published an essay under the heading 'terrorism of viral power'. the attacks on 19 see note 5, at 209. 20 ''the third world war: al-qaeda'', bbc two (television), tuesday 10th february 2004, 9 p.m. 21 the virus metaphor of course had been used before. in his 1947 statement before the house of un-american activities committee, j. edgar hoover, fbi director, spoke of the ''virus of communism''. epidemiological destruction of internal communism, however, still had a seriously legal tinge about it in hoover's statement. ''i do favor unrelenting prosecution wherever they are found to be violating our country's laws. as americans, our most effective defense is a workable democracy that guarantees and preserves our cherished freedoms'' (taken from http://edition.cnn.com/specials/cold.war/episodes/06/documents/hoover). the twin towers, the krokers tell us, have taught us that, when confronted with the 'contagious logic of viral power', particularly with a suicidal viral logic, 'dissuasion is inoperative'. diplomacy and legality, in other words, are inoperative. when dealing with sickness and contagion (and how else to define suicidal mania that spreads like wildfire in fundamentalist cultures and in rigid communities of machine-like automatons?) epidemiological 'logic' has to take over. 'viral power adopts the strategy of the attacking parasite', the krokers continue, 'invading the body of the host (the american homeland), bleeding its tactical intelligence (those flight schools in florida), circulating in its commercial bloodstream (american airlines), and imploding in a violent fatal metastasis that has as its aim the infiltration of the mediascape through its apocalyptic effects'. 22 it should come as no surprise that such imagery emerged very quickly in postmodern academia. baudrillard of course had been preparing for this for years. 'hatred, a viral passion', claimed baudrillard, in 1996, 'is also a vital passion. against the perfection of the system, hatred is a last vital reaction'. 23 against the pretended self-sufficiency of a naturally given, perfect, human and healthy empire, against this new world order, hatred is a viral reaction.'terrorism as viral contagion' gradually replaced oncological imagery in official statements and documents. the when it became already clear that a number of nato member states were likely to formally object to any invasion of iraq before the complete exhaustion of legal and diplomatic possibilities (a temporary compromise would be found in and offered by un resolution 1441 a few weeks later, in november 2002). 25 the image of terrorism as viral contagion appeared throughout 2003 in a host of publications and addresses, such as bruce hoffman's rand paper on al-qaeda, 26 or terrorism expert magnus ranstorp's statement to the us national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states, which conjures up an image of al-qaeda as an 'incontrollable virus', or a 'disease' that aims to strike 'at the heart of the west's strength -the interconnectivity of their economies'. 27 in his statement, ranstorp seems to combine both the krokers' and blair's imaginaries when he argues for 'making suicide-bombings a crime against humanity', i.e. a crime committed by elements with a 'suicidal mindset becoming airborne missiles' (or machine-like fanaticism) against this healthy body of global interconnectivity (or orderly freedom). here is a passage taken from the president's state of the union, delivered in january 2003, at a time when preparations for the large scale epidemiological expedition into iraq's viral culture were in full swing: ôbefore september the 11th, many in the world believed that saddam hussein could be contained. but chemical agents, lethal viruses and shadowy terrorist networks are not easily contained'. 28 it could be noted here how, in this quotation, terrorists are placed on the same line as their weapons. indeed, terrorists, in particular the alien, inhuman, suicidal, machine-like types that have placed themselves beyond legality and diplomacy -'dissuasion', however repressive, 'is inoperative'are (like) their weapons; they are (like) noxious chemicals or contagious viruses. as viruses, they don't need moral reform or social rehabilitation. they don't need punishment.they don't need mere containment. they need to be destroyed. that is ultimately a matter of medical necessity that needs to be dealt with urgently and swiftly by medical experts, and it's the latter, i.e. the experts, that will decide on this urgency and necessity. in a curious way, bush's state of the union is replete with medical images and imagery, virological and epidemiological ones in particular. the president for example announces a massive budget increase aimed at 'strengthening medicare' (the nation's healthy body), asks for a strategic budget 'to quickly make available effective vaccines and treatments against agents like anthrax, botulinum toxin, ebola, and plague', and promises developing countries substantial help in their struggle against the hiv/aids virus.as suggested above, one could argue that this epidemiological imaginary helped refine a space where medical necessity and medical urgency provided the natural 'logic' for imperial intervention, thereby gradually replacing the unnatural 'logic' of legality and diplomacy. the 'authoritarianism' that is crystallizing in today's healthy body of empire (global 'post-fordism', claims steinmetz) seems to be of a medical nature. empire's permanent 'state of emergency' feels like an epidemiological one. 29 one could wonder why this imaginary has formed as and when it did, and whether there was a clear and conscious strategy behind it, but that is an issue we cannot hope to resolve here. what we can say here is that 'terrorism as viral contagion' seems to have facilitated a number of imperial interventions. or, to weaken down this claim a little, it seems to have coincided with a number of issues and subsequent interventions which it may have provided a facilitating imaginary space for. one of these issues and interventions came with the capture of al-qaeda and taliban fighters, the first of whom were imprisoned in guantanamo bay, in january 2002, on a site that was aptly named 'camp x-ray'. naming those fighters 'criminals' would have triggered a whole body of international human rights charters and domestic due process provisions. naming those fighters and alleged terrorists 'soldiers' or 'warriors' would have turned them into prisoners of war, and that would at least have made the geneva convention applicable. a medical or viral problem, a clear and present problem of inhumanity, on the other hand, can and should be dealt with 'outside', i.e. 'outside'america's healthy body (or the world's, for that matter), and 'outside' the bounds of humane -or simply: human -legality and diplomacy. the natural body of empire is in no need for unnatural legality or diplomacy; precisely because it is a given, natural body, it needs medical attention and intervention instead. there is no need to build or rebuild the body of empire: once freed from the virus, it will emerge healthy, naturally. there is no need for the productive negotiations of a 'cosmopolitan globalism' either (to use mikkel rasmussen's words 30 ), nor for reconciliatory efforts (one does not reconcile with viruses): the sanitary exclusion of viral contagion will suffice to keep the body of today's imperial new world order healthy. another issue (and subsequent intervention) that, at least to some extent, however minor, seems to have been facilitated by this epidemiological imaginary, was the invasion of iraq. invading an alleged or potential culture of viral, and therefore contagious terrorism is first and foremost a matter of medical necessity and urgency. the legal and diplomatic 'logic' of un resolutions (resolution 1441 in particular), in this imaginary, can only be of secondary importance. furthermore, epidemiological interventions allow empire to deal with contagious terrorists and their cultures (the 'rogue states' of yore) simultaneously, in one cleansing, sterilising sweep. it allows for a move beyond both the unnatural legal strictures of criminal procedure and the unnatural diplomatic constraints of international law.empire, after the end of the cold war, is imagined ever more as the medical practice of exclusion rather than a legal and diplomatic (however repressive at times) project of inclusion. against the given, naturally ordered, healthy body of empire the image of the inhuman, machinic, disorderly, virally chaotic ''fremdkorper'' looms darkly. in 'shadow and darkness', said blair in his july 2003 congressional address, somewhere 'outside' the healthy body of humanity. the events of september 11 and their aftermath, in our view, have catalysed this shift in the imaginary of empire. however, it remains to be seen whether empire is now on a course that will take it beyond any regard for legality and diplomacy. in his address, tony blair is unclear about it. 'freedom', he says in his address, 'democracy', and 'the rule of law' are 'not western values', but 'the universal values of the human spirit and anywhere, and anytime, ordinary people are given the chance to choose'. if left on its own, the healthy body of empire (of freedom-cum-rule of law) will emerge naturally and orderly, indeed, like a body. what therefore needs to be done is to make sure it is left on its own. what is needed, in michael ignatieff's words, is an 'empire lite'. 31 and once the virus removed, there will be no real need to start reconstructing the rule of law, or indeed, there will be no need to start reconstructing anything at all: the healthy body of empire (i.e. freedom-cum-order) will emerge or re-emerge naturally and organically. blair continues, 'our new world rests on order', the 'danger is disorder and in today's world it now spreads like contagion' through fundamentalist terrorism, whose 'weapon is chaos'. this contagion needs to be dealt with. the natural rule of law must be protected swiftly. if necessary -and it is necessary, says george w. bush, as 'there are no rules' 32 -this must be done beyond an unnatural logic of legality and diplomacy:let us say one thing. if we are wrong, we will have destroyed a threat that, at its least is responsible for inhuman carnage and suffering. that is something i am confident history will forgive. but if our critics are wrong, if we are right as i believe with every fibre of instinct and conviction i have that we are, and we do not act, then we will have hesitated in face of this menace, when we should have given leadership. that is something history will not forgive. 33 this is the new logic of empire. the unprecedented coronavirus disease of 2019 (covid-19) global pandemic 1 has changed the way our society operates. the total confirmed cases and deaths globally increased at an alarming rate 2 . the availability of an effective vaccine may still be many months away 3 4 and there is also no consensus on the use of antiviral drugs and other therapeutic agents 5 6 .meanwhile, among the best hope for reducing mortality is societal preventative measures and providing timely and optimal critical care. as the list of countries in the grip of rapid spread of the covid-19 is growing, many countries are or will be at the brink of further overwhelmed health care systems. many countries have strengthened their non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) in order to flatten the curve and reduce casualties 7 .for the npis to be effective, one of the critical conditions is the public's active participation and compliance. since the lockdown of wuhan city on 23 rd jan 2019, china is the first country to have introduced npis with strict measures such as lockdown of cities and counties; compulsory mask wearing; isolation of suspicious cases; screening and contact tracing; quarantining people from high risk area for 14 days; as well as promoting hand washing, proper coughing habits, social distancing and self-isolation. however, there was no published evidence on relationships between covid-19 infection, the chinese public's risk perception, information source, knowledge, attitude and personal npis during the middle towards the end of the epidemic.between 22 feb 2020 to 5 march 2020 (the late period of covid-19 epidemic in china) 2 , we conducted an online cross-sectional survey of chinese residents to: 1) understand the risk 4) the repeated questionnaire from the same ip address. during the study period, the survey web page was browsed 21673 times with a total of 8431 questionnaires returned. after excluding those illegible questionnaires and those who were younger than 18 years old, the final study sample for the current study were 8158.the ethics committee of chongqing medical university approved our study protocol.there was an introduction document before the study questionnaire that provided the respondents with the background, aims and estimated time (10 minutes) for completing the survey. respondents were asked for their agreement to participate the study and to answer the questions faithfully and assured confidentiality and anonymity, and no individual data will be disclosed. after the confirmation of their willingness to participate the study voluntarily, the participants were directed to complete the online questionnaire. we plan to disseminate the results to study participants whenever appropriate.the roles of funding body: the funding bodies played no roles in the study design, conduct, analysis, interpretation and the decision of the publication of the results.the study team developed the survey questionnaire through literature review, group discussion involving public who were not part of the research team and piloting. the final questions included in the survey were: 1) personal and family demographics: age, gender, location of residence, education, occupation, family monthly income, ever smoked during the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint last month (with over 100 cigarettes smoked over the lifetime), drinking alcohol during the last month, height and weight, if had been infected with covid-19, marital status, if one of the family members is health professionals, the severity of the community infection where the respondent was living, if one of family members being part of local community efforts against covid-19; 2) perceived risk, attitude, information source, knowledge and four npis and if the respondent had repeatedly used a mask; 3)self-isolation: if the respondents had a chinese new year party (2 days: 24 jan -25th jan 2020) with invited guests, the main reason for the longest home stay family member; the main reason for the most often went out family member; the approach taken by the respondent when went out (i.e., shorten the time to avoid infection/as usual/ stay longer given the restrictions/uncertain).frequencies of demographic, perceived risk, knowledge, attitude and four npis as well as self-isolation behaviours were described. the risks between covid-19 infection and four binary npis were tested using fisher exact tests. the absolute risk difference(rd), risk ratio (rr) and their 95% confidence intervals(ci) were also presented. we modelled the four npis using logistic regression based on theoretical framework of the theory of reasoned action (tra) and theory of planned behaviour (tpb) as developed by ajzen and fishbein 8 which take into account the individual's attitude and social norms as well as the individual's perceived control as accurate predictors of behavioural intentions. the predictors included the demographic characteristics, social economics status, family and social environment, perceived risk of situation, attitude (belief) and respective knowledge on the four npis. we . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint explored the risk between covid-19 infection and four npis using similar approach but excluded distal determinates (i.e., knowledge, attitude and risk perception) of four npis based on a penalised maximum likelihood function logistic regression 9 10 which provides consistent estimates in situations of sparse event and total separation. the modelling results for four npis separately and combined (model 1-model 5) were compared to the results of the baseline model with only social demographic variables (model 6). risk ratio, odds ratio (or) and their 95% ci were presented whereas appropriate. we explored the potential risk compensating effects among four npis through a pairwise npis comparison of infection rates and through the comparison of infection rates of wearing mask across a combination of other three npis. a flowchart of different sample sizes for the modelling of four npis and covid-19 infections was presented ( figure 1 ). the data management and statistical analysis were done through spss v25 and stata tm v16. p value of 0.05 was considered as indicative of significance.in total, 8158 adults were included in the study and 57(0.7%) infected with covid-19. the respondents were predominantly female (63%), younger age groups (18-39 years old: 62%), living in city (71.5%). close to 45% of respondents had undergraduate and above education and close to one-quarter were students ( table 1 ). the last month family income had a large range (0-4,000,000 rmb) with close to 20% of them less than 2000rmb (approximately . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint us$286 using exchange rate of $1=7rmb). around 13% of respondents smoked and drank alcohol during the last month. over half of them had normal body mass index(bmi) 11 . close to 72% of respondents had a partner and 54% were living with one. close to 37% had a family member who were health professionals and 35% had a family member who was part of the local community efforts against covid-19. over 54% were from the area outside hubei province with fewer than 100 cases, 42% from the areas outside hubei province with more than 100 infected cases, 4% form hubei province, the epicentre of chinese covid-19 epidemic ( table 1) .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . 2. risk perception, information source, knowledge, attitude, four npis and self-isolation close to 7% of respondents were aware of the seriousness of the situation on 11 jan 2020 when the first covid-19 related patient death was announced by the wuhan health commission; 39% on 20 jan 2020 with the announcement of covid-19 transmission among humans; 29% on 23 rd jan 2020 with the lockdown of wuhan city; 24% after 24 th jan 2020 due to the activation of level 1 pubic emergency responding scheme by local governments and strict measures and lockdown of neighbourhood or villages. 12 nine respondents (0.1%) did not think it was serious at the time ( figure 2 ). overwhelmingly, the majority (99.2%) strongly agreed with the position that the fight against covid-19 is everyone's responsibility (table 2 ). close to 97% perceived governmental websites, app and public media as the most authoritative source of information; 90% felt that governmental websites, app and public media were also the most involved source of information; 99.6% of respondents knew why and how to wash hands properly during the covid-19 outbreak period; 97.2% were aware of the proper procedures when coughing (turning away from people and covering mouth and nose when coughing and washing hands afterwards); 97.8% knew the right way of practicing social distancing (i.e., keeping social distance more than 1 meter and avoiding close contact with those who had fever or cough); and 99.9% knew why and how to wear a mask. the overwhelming majority also reported that they translated this knowledge into practice: 96.8% when washing hands; 93.1% when coughing; 87.1% when social distancing; and 97.9% when wearing a mask (table 2) .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint approximately 23% of respondents reported had a chinese near year party with invited guests (appendix; etable 2). the major reasons for the family member who stayed longest at home included: 1) comply with the call from government (65.6%); 2) self/compulsory isolation (13.6%); 3) fear of the virus (5.7%); 4) the focus of family protection (3.8%); and 5) no mask (3.0%). the main reason for going out were: 1) shopping(40.5%); 2) partaking in work related to controlling covid-19(32.1%); 3) doing usual job (21.4%); 4)having a walk (2.6%); 5) getting delivery(0.7%); and 6) socializing/dinner party (0.3%). over 74%shortened the time to avoid infection when they went out; close to 20% acted in the usual way; and 1% (50) stayed longer than usual, given the restrictions and difficulties to be able to get out home (appendix 1; etable 2).our multivariate models found that the knowledge of the relevant npis was one of the strongest predictors of that behaviour (or=22.6 for hand washing, or=4.26 for social distancing, all ps < 0.001, and positive knowledge level associated with proper coughing habit and mask wearing were 100% and excluded from the models, appendix: etable 1).the belief that task of fighting against covid-19 is everyone's responsibility was positively associated with the hand washing (or=5.59;p<0.001) , social distancing (or=3.76; p<0.001) and mask wearing(or=26.89; p<0.001). those who perceived the seriousness of the situation before the lockdown of wuhan city were more likely to practice hand washing (or=1.43; p<0.05), proper coughing habit (or=1.54; p<0.05). those who had a family member being . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint of the local community efforts against covid-19 and people from outside hubei province were more likely associated with positive npis. in comparison to those who currently living with a partner, those who did not have partner were less likely to practice hand washing (or=0.57; p<0.05), proper coughing habits (or=0.59; p<0.05), but were more likely to practice social distancing (or=1.64; p<0.001). the respondents who have a normal body weight were more likely to practicing social distancing (or=1.21; p<0.05) than those who were underweight. those non-smokers were more likely to practice social distancing (or=1.38; p<0.01) than smokers. family income, education, occupation, living area, sex and age groups demonstrated differential impacts on different npis (appendix 1; etable 1).the bivariate analyses between individual npi and covid-19 infection showed that there was a significantly increased risk of covid-19 infection ( for not practicing proper coughing; 2.14(95%ci: 1.17-3.94) for not practicing social . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint distancing and 12.76 (95%ci:5.00-32.57) for not wearing a mask. the model which adjusted all four npis plus social demographic variables (model 5; appendix 1; etable3:m5) showed that not wearing a mask was the only significant predictor of infection (or=7.20; 95%ci:2.24-23.11;). in comparison to those who had only primary school education, those with high school qualification were less likely to be infected(or=0.12; p<0.001). this was similar to those who had professional college qualifications (or=0.10; p<0.001) or with university degrees (or=0.15; p<0.001; appendix 1: etable 3: model 6). non-smokers were less likely to be infected than smokers (or=0.40; p<0.01) and those who with a monthly family income of 8001-10000rmb were less likely to be infected than those who having a monthly family income less than 1000rmb (or=0.20 ;p<0/05) (appendix 1:etable 3:m6).the pairwise distributions of covid-19 infection rate among four npis are presented (table   4 ). wearing mask (versus not) was associated with significantly reduced risk of covid-19 infection among those who practiced hand washing (0.6% vs 5.3%; rr=0.11; p<0.001),proper coughing (0.7% vs 3.9%; rr=0.18; p=0.019) and social distancing (0.5% vs 16.7%; rr=0.03; p=0.002). hand washing showed a trend towards further reduced risk of infection for those who did not practice social distancing (rr=0.25; p=0.053). among those who did not practice social distancing, persons who had proper coughing habits were associated with a reduced risk of infection compared to those who did not have proper coughing habits (1.3% vs 4.4%; rr=0.29; p=0.048). the potential added protecting effects . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint of mask wearing on different combinations of the other three npis are presented in figure 3 .for those who did practice all three npis (i.e, hand washing(h), proper coughing(c), social distancing (s): hcs), wearing a mask were associated with significantly reduced risk of infection compared to those who did not (0.6% vs 16.7%; p=0.035). similarly, for those who did not practice all other three npis, wearing a mask was also associated with significantly reduced risk of infection compared to not wearing a mask (figure 3 ).to our best knowledge, our study is the first comprehensive report of the covid-19 infection rate, perceived risk, knowledge, attitude, four npis and self-isolation of a national-wide adult sample amidst the late period of the covid-19 epidemic in china. we found that most respondents were aware of the seriousness of the outbreak at different time periods and believed that it is everyone's responsibility to fight against the spread of covid-19. the positive attitude, earlier risk perception and relevant knowledge were among the strongest predictors of hand washing, proper coughing habits, social distancing and mask wearing. different social demographic factors also contributed to different npis. those having only primary school education, with little family income, and being a smoker were associated with increased risk of covid-19 infection. mask wearing, among the four practices, was the most important protecting factor against covid-19 infection with added preventive effect among those who practised all or part of the other three npis.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint our findings of high levels of knowledge among the chinese public are consistent with the results of a previous study 13 . however, the previous online survey study was conducted at a much earlier stage (i.e., 27 jan to 1 feb, 2020) with a smaller sample and over half of respondents from hubei province which did not include the knowledge and behaviours of hand washing, proper coughing habit, social distancing and self-isolation (but with mask wearing included). the widespread use of mobile phone, internet, the social media app such as wechat (with estimated 1.1 billion registered accounts in china in 2019) 14 our study's finding that the early perceived seriousness of the situation is a strong predicting factor for the use of npis reinforces the importance of transparency and timely dissemination of the critical information of covid-19 pandemic. our study showed that around 22% of respondents had a party during chinese new year (24 jan -25 jan) which is the most important festive in the chinese tradition. this was the period immediate after the lockdown of wuhan city (on 23 rd jan) with much confusion for those who lived outside hubei province . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. our study found almost universal acceptance of the importance of mask wearing and very high proportion (97.9%) wore a mask in public after the outbreak. our study found that mask wearing, among four personal npis, was the most important protective measure against covid-19 infection. this may have policy implications. the chinese public were accepting towards the concept of mask wearing possibly due to factors such as the previous sars epidemic experience 16 , coordinated national wide education campaign, the earlier recognition of existence of asymptomatic virus carriers, the strict measures in reinforcing such a role (e.g., .cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. or shopping centre). during the study period, there were still 3% of respondents who reported that 'no mask' was the main reason for stopping them from going out and most respondents had repeatedly used the same mask. given the likelihood of surged demand for masks during an outbreak, public health agencies and related authorities may also need to provide practical and evidence-based guidance on when and how to appropriately reuse a mask. china contributed over half of the global mask manufacturing output before the outbreak but still faced the shortage of mask over the epidemic period 24 . it is important for governments and international agencies to rethink the adequacy of and better approaches towards their strategic stockpiles of masks and other personal protection equipment (ppe) for . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint the current and future pandemics.our study has several strengths. first, it was the largest study of its kind to cover the most critical period of the covid-19 outbreak in china. second, our study design and analysis were driven by theory and policy needs and included many factors such as demographics, social economic status, family contextual factors, risk perception, knowledge, attitude and personal practices. third, the adoption of the internet survey methodology enabled us to complete our study in a critical period and cost-effective manner. our study also has several limitations. first, our study sample have disproportionately more female, well-educated and less smokers, reflecting a typically young and healthy cohort in similar surveys. thus, the frequencies of desirable knowledge levels and health behaviours may be over-estimated while less desirable outcomes (such as lower family monthly income) may be under-estimated.however, the modelling results may be less susceptible to these potential biases. second, our study results were from a particular period of the outbreak and most of the respondents were from outside hubei province. the generalization of the results to other settings and countries may be limited. third, our study was a cross-sectional population survey and the association found between the predictors and outcomes should be interpreted with caution and further intervention studies are needed in confirming our findings. fourth, despite the relatively large sample size, the total cases of covid-19 infection were still small so that the relationship between npis and the covid-19 infection should be confirmed by other larger epidemiological studies. fifth, the potential risk compensating effects of mask wearing against other npis should be considered as being of a hypothesis-generating in nature given . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint the potential limitations outlined above. common to any observational studies with multiple outcomes and modelled with different effective sample sizes, the interpretations and generalisation of the results should be strictly limited to the same setting and be cautious with multiple tests risks.our study found high level of risk perception, positive attitude, desirable knowledge and practices in hand washing, proper coughing habit, social distancing and mask wearing among a large cohort of chinese adults. our study also found that the relevant knowledge, risk . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. the ethics committee of chongqing medical university approved our study protocol.there was an introduction document before the study questionnaire that provided the respondents with the background, aims and estimated time (10 minutes) for completing the survey. respondents were asked for their agreement to participate the study and to answer the questions faithfully and assured confidentiality and anonymity, and no individual data will be disclosed.not applicable.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprintthe datasets generated and/or analysed during the current study are not publicly available due ongoing research effort and data analysis by the team but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.all authors declaimed no conflict of interests. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public/when-and-how -to-use-masks.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint *: only 6444 included as 1714 person reported that they did not cough during the last month. §: only 5120 respondents of who went out during the period after outbreak included . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.02.20120808 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . *only including 5120 respondents who went out after the outbreak of covid-19.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 4, 2020. . pandemic. the covid-19 pandemic may represent the most significant public health emergency that the world has faced in a century.understanding the modes of transmission of emerging infectious disease is a key factor in protecting healthcare workers and implementing effective public health measures. the lack of evidence on sars-cov-2 transmission dynamics has led to shifting isolation guidelines 5 between airborne and droplet isolation precautions by the who, u.s. cdc and other public health authorities. other emerging coronaviruses (e.g. sars and mers) have been suggested to have airborne transmission potential (5, 6) in addition to more direct contact and droplet transmission. at least one study suggests that mers-cov has the possibility of transmission from mildly ill or asymptomatic individuals (7) . surface samples taken in patient care areas for 10 mers and sars have shown positive pcr results (6) ; however, experts question the possibility of transmission through contact with surfaces that have been contaminated by an infected person, either by the direct contact of the infected person or the settling of virus-laden particles onto the surface (8) . nonetheless, coronaviruses have been implicated in nosocomial outbreaks with reports of transmission related to environmental contamination (9, 10) . nosocomial transmission 15 of sars-cov-2 has been reported, but the role of aerosol transmission and environmental contamination remains unclear (11) .the university of nebraska medical center (unmc), with its clinical partner nebraska medicine, monitored and cared for thirteen individuals with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection as of march 20 6 th , 2020. the thirteen confirmed sars-cov-2 cases were managed in the nebraska biocontainment unit (nbu) for individuals requiring hospital care and the national quarantine unit (nqu) for isolation of asymptomatic or mildly ill individuals not requiring hospital care. key features of the nbu and nqu included: 1) individuals isolated in their rooms with private bathrooms; 2) infection prevention and control (ipc) protocols for each unit including wear of 25 personal protective equipment by staff with hand hygiene and changing of gloves between rooms; and were not doffing until exiting the unit 3) entry and exit into rooms by staff was limited; 4) all nbu and nqu rooms were negative pressure equipped (12).to improve the understanding of potential environmental transmission risk of sars-cov-2, 30 refine ipc practices and protocols within the nbu and nqu specifically, and inform outbreak control strategies more broadly, we initiated an ongoing study to obtain surface and air samples in 2 nbu hospital and 9 nqu residential isolation rooms where individuals who tested positive for sars-cov-2 were being monitored. samples were obtained in the nqu on days 5-9 of activation, i.e. when mildly ill or asymptomatic individuals infected with sars-cov-2 were housed in their 35 rooms for five to nine days. samples were obtained in the nbu on day 10, when patients 1 and 2 had been admitted for ten days. additional samples were obtained in the nbu on day 18, after patient 3 had been admitted to the unit for four days. three types of samples were taken during this survey: surface samples, high volume air samples, and low volume personal air samples. the surface samples fell into three general categories of location: common room surfaces, personal 40 items, and toilets. personal items were those items considered to be handled routinely by individuals in isolation and included: cellular phones, exercise equipment, television remotes, and medical equipment. room surfaces were areas such as ventilation grates, tabletops, and window ledges. toilet samples were taken to evaluate the potential for viral shedding during toileting. air samples were collected both in isolation rooms and in the hallways of the nbu and nqu during 45 sampling activities. air samples were collected in the room while patients were present. air samples were taken in the hallways during sampling activities and samplers were placed on the floor adjacent to rooms where sampling activities were taking place. personal air samplers were worn by sampling personnel on two occasions during sampling activities: once during sampling at the nqu when 6 individual rooms were sampled, and once in the hospital nbu when one room was sampled. it is important to note that all individuals in nqu isolation had mild illness such as 5 low fever, cough, or body aches, had been advised to maintain a 6-foot distance from staff members who entered their room as well as wear a procedure mask when interacting with these personnel. individuals in isolation were instructed that they could remove the mask during air sampling activities; however, many individuals were uncomfortable removing their mask and therefore the impact of infected individuals wearing masks can neither be assessed in this study 10 nor can its impacts be removed.surface and aerosol samples were analyzed by rt-pcr targeting the e gene of sars-cov-2 (13). of the 163 samples collected in this study, 126 (77.3%) had a positive pcr result for sars-cov-2. due to the need to cause minimal disruption to individuals in isolation and undergoing hospital 15 care, the precise surface area sampled in this study was not uniform, so results are presented as concentration of gene copies present in the recovered liquid sample (copies/µl). viral gene copy concentrations recovered from each sample type were generally low and highly variable from sample to sample ranging from 0 to 1.75 copies/µl ( figure 1a and 2), with the highest concentration recovered from an air handling grate in the nbu. since both the sampling time and 20 flow rate were known for all aerosol samples collected in this study, the airborne concentration was calculated for all air samples (copies/l of air; figure 2 ).overall, 76.5% of all personal items sampled were determined to be positive for sars-cov-2 by pcr ( figure 1b air samples, both in the rooms and in the hallway spaces ( figure 1b and 2), provide information about airborne viral shedding in these facilities. in room air samples were 63.2% positive by rt-40 pcr (mean concentration 2.86 copies/l of air). in the nqu, samplers were placed either on the bedside table or a desk, wherever there was space. no attempt was made to ensure the sampler was placed a specific distance from the individual in the room, so, while distance between sampler and individual was neither defined nor consistent, individuals in the room did not directly interact with the sampler. in the nbu, for the first two sampling events performed on day 10, the sampler was 45 placed on the window ledge away from the patient (nbu room a occupied by patient 1) was positive for viral rna (table 1; 3.76 copies/l of air). during the sampling event on day 16 in nbu room b occupied by patient 3, one sampler was placed near the patient and one was placed near the door greater than 6ft from the patient's bed while the patient was receiving oxygen (1l) via nasal cannula. both samples were positive by pcr, with the one closest to the patient indicating a higher airborne concentration of rna (4.07 as compared to 2.48 copies/l of air). samples taken 5 outside the rooms in the hallways were 66.7% positive ( figure 1b and 2b), with a mean concentration of 2.59 copies/l of air. both personal air samplers from sampling personnel in the nqu showed positive pcr results after 122 minutes of sampling activity ( figure 2b ), and both air samplers from nbu sampling indicated the presence of viral rna after only 20 minutes of sampling activity ( figure 2b ). the highest airborne concentrations were recorded by personal 10 samplers in nbu while a patient was receiving oxygen through a nasal cannula (19.17 and 48.21 copies/l). neither individuals in the nqu or patients in the nbu were observed to cough while sampling personnel were in the room wearing samplers during these events.air samples that were positive for viral rna by rt-pcr were examined for viral propagation in vero e6 cells. cytopathic effect was not observed in any sample, to date, and immunofluorescence 15 and western blot analysis have not, so far, indicated the presence of viral antigens suggesting viral replication. however, the low concentrations of virus recovered from these samples makes finding infectious virus in these samples difficult. further experiments are ongoing to determine viral activity in these samples.during the sampling, individuals in isolation were recording symptoms and oral temperatures 20 twice a day. reports of symptoms for the 3 days preceding each sample collection were provided. the maximum temperature, during that period, was recorded, as was the presence of any symptoms. for the 3 days preceding each sampling event, 57.9% of patients recorded a temperature greater than 99.0 f, and 15.8% had a temperature greater than 100f. independent of temperature, 57.9% of patients reported other symptoms, primarily cough. because sampling 25 personnel were allowed to use judgement and feedback from patients when collecting samples, between 5 and 16 samples were collected from each room, with a mean of 7.35 samples per room and a mode of 6 samples per room. percentage of positive samples from each room ranged between 50% and 100% ( figure 1b and 2a) . a pearson product moment correlation of percent positive samples and total number of samples for each room had an r 2 value of 0.01, indicating that there 30 was no relationship between the number of samples taken and the percent of positive samples observed. when the percent of positive samples taken was compared to the maximum reported oral temperature of the patient for the previous three days, a pearson's r 2 of 0.01 indicated no relationship between elevated body temperature and shedding of virus in the environment. further, recorded oral temperature was compared with the gene copy concentration for each in-room 35 sample type (figure 2a ). these r 2 values ranged from 0.00 (cell phones and remotes) to 0.22 (bedside tables), indicating small to no significant relationship between body temperature and environmental contamination, with bedside tables having the strongest correlation followed by toilets (r 2 = 0.20) and windowsills (r 2 = 0.19).taken together, these data indicate significant environmental contamination in rooms where 40 patients infected with sars-cov-2 are housed and cared for, regardless of the degree of symptoms or acuity of illness. in addition, the recovery of culturable virus from air samples taken outside of the doorway of a patient room strongly suggests aerosol dissemination of virus. contamination exists in all types of samples: high and low-volume air samples, as well as surface samples including personal items, room surfaces, and toilets. samples of patient toilets that tested positive for viral rna are consistent with other reports of viral shedding in stool (14) . the presence of contamination on personal items is also reasonably expected, particularly those items that are routinely handled by individuals in isolation, such as cell phones and remote controls, as well as medical equipment that is in near constant contact with the patient. 5 the variability in the degree of environmental contamination (as measured by the percentage of positive samples) room to room is of interest. on average, a higher percentage of positive samples were detected in the nbu where patients were hospitalized for inpatient care with both hospital nbu rooms sampled on day 10 and 18 having the highest percentage of positive samples (85.6% over 3 rooms). however, samples of the residential nqu rooms from the first pass of sampling 10 (days 5 to 7) had a similar average (84.6% over 8 rooms). it is interesting to note that the average percentage of positive samples per room dropped to 64.9% (over the same 8 rooms and individuals and one additional room) during the second sampling period (days 8 to 9 ). this may indicate a reduction in viral shedding by these individuals. the lack of any statistically defensible relationship between the evidence of environmental contamination and body temperature indicates 15 that infected individuals may shed viral rna to their environment without clearly identifiable symptoms, such as fever, at least in convalescence.it is interesting to note the presence of viral rna on the floor under the bed of the patients and on the window ledges (which were not obviously used by the patient) in the hospital nbu. airflow in nbu suites enters from the top center of the room and exits at grates near the head of the 20 patient's bed on either side of the room. airflow modelling (15) has suggested that turbulent eddies may form under the patient's bed, which may cause the observed contamination under the bed, while the dominant airflow likely carries particles away from the patient's bed towards the edges of the room, likely passing by the windows resulting in some deposition there.although this study did not employ any size-fractionation techniques in order to determine the size 25 range of sars-cov-2 droplets and particles, the data is suggestive that viral aerosol particles are produced by individuals that have the covid-19 disease, even in the absence of cough. first, in the few instances where the distance between individuals in isolation and air sampling could be confidently maintained at greater than 6 ft, 2 of the 3 air samples were positive for viral rna. second, 66.7% of hallway air samples indicate that virus-containing particles were being 30 transported from the rooms to the hallway during sampling activities. it is likely that the positive air samples in the hallway were cause by viral aerosol particles transported by personnel exiting the room (16,17) . finally, personal air samplers worn by sampling personnel were all positive for sars-cov-2, despite the absence of cough by most patients while sampling personnel were present. 35 recent literature investigating human expired aerosol indicates that a significant fraction of human expired aerosol is less than 10 µm in diameter across all types of activity (e.g. breathing, talking, and coughing; 18) and that upper respiratory illness increases production of aerosol particles (less than 10 µm; 19). taken together these results suggest that virus expelled from infected individuals, including from those who are only mildly ill, may be transported by aerosol processes in their local 40 environment, potentially even in the absence of cough or aerosol generating procedures. further, a recent study of sars-cov-2 in aerosol and deposited on surfaces, indicates infectious aerosol may persist for several hours and on surfaces for as long as 2 days (20). despite wide-spread environmental and limited sars-cov-2 aerosol contamination associated with hospitalized and mildly ill individuals, effective implementation of airborne isolation precautions including n95 45 filtering facepiece respirators and powered air purifying respirator use adequately protected health care workers, in the nqu and nbu facilities, preventing health care worker infections. health care workers were closely monitored and screened for covid-19 suggesting the value in implementing ipc protocols that maintain airborne isolation standards including respiratory protection and include routine systematic environmental cleaning and disinfection of patient care surface and personal items were collected using 3x3 sterile gauze pads prewetted with 3 ml of phosphate buffered saline (pbs). large area surface samples were collected by wiping in an "s" pattern in 2 directions to cover as much of the available surface as possible. smaller items (e.g. cellular phones, remote controls) were wiped in one direction on every available surface. 40 following collection, samples were packed in 50 ml conical tubes. hand hygiene and glove changes were performed between the collection of every sample.several categories of personal items were sampled consistently between all quarantine rooms and assayed for evidence of viral contamination: cellular phones and television remote controls. in addition, individuals were asked about what items they used or handled frequently and several additional samples were collected based on those responses: exercise equipment, pots used to heat water, a nasal cannula and a spirometer. in addition, both the rim and seat of the toilet were 5 sampled together.several surfaces were sampled in each room. for rooms in the national quarantine unit, both the windowsill and the bedside table were sampled. for rooms in the nebraska biocontainment unit, samples were taken on the windowsill, the bed rail or bedside table, under the patient's bed 10 and on the air conditioning return grate nearest the door.several types of air samples were collected both in patient rooms, on personnel performing sampling and, in the hallways, outside of patient rooms. stationary air samples, both inside and outside of patient rooms, were collected using a sartorius airport md8 air sampler operating at in order to quantify the number of viral gene copies present in each sample from the measured ct values, a standard curve was developed using synthetic dna. a 6-log standard curve was run in duplicate beginning at a concentration of 1x10 3 copies/µl. the data was fit with the exponential function:where ct is the cycle time where amplification is definitive. the equation was then used to convert all measured ct values from all samples into gene copy concentrations. the average and standard deviation concentrations were calculated from the triplicate values for each sample. the primers and probe used in this study (below) are based on a previously published assay (13) 5 targeting the e gene of sars-cov-2, which produces the envelope small membrane protein.the gene was used as a target based on its similarity to previously identified coronavirus, including sars-cov strain frankfurt and two bat sars-related cov (genbank acc. no. mg772933.1 and nc_014470) . the positive control consisted of ssdna, targeting the e and n gene (below), in a 1:1 mixture at 10 3 copies/µl. ssdna was based on the 2019-ncov genome 10 sequence published in genbank (21). the minimum concentration detected by this assay was between 1e-1 and 1e-2 copies/µl. in the case where no data was obtained, the patient had been transferred from another facility less than 24 hours prior to sampling. m a n u s c r i p t 4 in december 2019, a cluster of pneumonia cases caused by novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) was identified in wuhan of hubei province, china's central transportation hub [1] . the viral data were rapidly determined through highthroughput sequencing on january 7 and identified as having homology with human severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), the zoonosis originating from wild animals [2, 3] . the most reported initial pneumonia cases were geographically linked with the huanan seafood market, which also sells wild animals in wuhan [4] .to prevent widespread epidemic outbreaks, the government implemented isolation in wuhan with traffic-blocking measures on january 23, 2020, and hubei province finished blocking trafficon january 26 [2, 5] . however, millions of people had left wuhan before isolation due to the high mobility of the population during the spring festival (a traditional festival in china when families are reunited), which contributed to the spread of sars-cov-2. on january 30, 2020, the epidemic was listed as a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) by the world health organization (who) and was later officially named coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) [6, 7] . as of february 8, 2020, a total of 27,100 cases were confirmed in hubei province and a total of 10,098 cases were confirmed in other parts of china [8, 9] .a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 5 human-to-human transmission has been confirmed in early epidemiological analyses of covid-19 [5] . since sars-cov-2 could be transmitted via respiratory droplets and close contact [10], more evidence emerged to show positive pcr detection of the virus in various clinical specimens, such as blood, sputum, feces, urine, and nasal samples [11, 12] . the live virus has even been detected in feces [12] , implying the possibility of fecal-oral spread. in recent studies the basic reproduction number (r0) was calculated as 2.20~3.77, higher than those of sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) [3, 5] . due to the large number of cases of infection in hubei province, the details of the cases were not released, so we collected information on cases confirmed to be from outside of hubei province. in this study, our objectives were to analyze the epidemiological characteristics of confirmed cases and the length of the interval between contact with infected patients to the onset of symptoms and the diagnosis.study population and source of data. this retrospective study was conducted with 7,015 covid-19 cases from january 19 to february 8, 2020 in all provinces of china outside hubei province. the information of all participants was collected from the website of the national health commission of the people's republic of china (nhcprc) and health commission website of each province or city. detailed data included age, gender, residence, history of contact confirmed cases or persons from a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 6 hubei province, travel history, initial symptoms, information on family clusters, and several crucial dates (such as onset date, first visit date, diagnosis date, hospitalization date and isolation date). we indicated the amount or number of cases using in the analysis when part of the information unable to be collected. a total of 3,294 cases with detailed clinical performance information were included in the analyses of clinical symptoms and 2,907 cases with contact history and date of onset or diagnosis were analyzed for incubation period in this study. to compare the characteristics of confirmed cases with that of the domestic population, latest demographic data (sex- the prognosis of disease (cure or death) was also collected. a cured case was defined as a case with body temperature that had returned to normal, markedly improved respiratory symptoms, significant inflammatory absorption shown in lung ct, and two consecutive nucleic acid detections that were negative, according to the we extracted the last contact date to estimate the incubation period. collected contact history information through individual epidemiological questionnaire surveys by public health physician. the questionnaire information includes four types of contact: (1) contact with confirmed cases, (2) contact with suspicious cases or fever,(3) contact with people come from hubei, (4) the travel or residence history of hubei province. by comparing the date of each type of contact, the last date of contact was extracted. if there was only one, the time was the last contact date. incubation period was defined as the duration between the last contact date and the onset date. the onset date was defined as the first day when symptoms developed, such as fever and cough.in addition, to evaluate the relationship among exposure, onset and diagnosis, we to study the distribution of covid-19 cases, we presented the case number by gender, age and province. considering the variable distribution, age was presented as the mean and standard deviation, and the incubation period and time intervals mentioned above were presented as the median (25%q, 75%q). the difference between imported cases and nonimported cases was tested using the t-test or wilcoxon rank-sum test. the chi-square test was used to compare the numerical difference between imported cases and nonimported cases. all analyses were performed using r software (version 3.6.2) or excel (microsoft). a two-sided p<0.05 was statistically significant.the distribution of 7,015 confirmed covid-19 cases (3,695 males, 54.12%) is shown in table 1 . henan province (1,017) and guangdong province (852) reported more cases than other provinces did (table s1 ). the average age for all cases was 44.24 years, with a range from two months to 97 years old. over 60% of confirmed cases were between 30 and 59 years old (21.81% for 30-39 years old, 21.07% for 40-49 years old, 19.24% for 50-59 years old). by comparing with the age-specific proportion of the national population, we found the proportion of cases under 20 years old (20,826 per 10 6 ) is much lower than that of other age groups (56,189 per 10 6 ). up to 61.50% (3,802) of all cases were imported cases and 37.56% (1,428) of them came directly from wuhan ( table 2 ). the proportion of imported cases in adjacent a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 9 provinces of hubei was 55.77% (1,411 cases) and in non-adjacent provinces was 65.47% (2,391 cases). table 3 , among 3,294 confirmed cases (53.94% male) with an average age of 44.71 years old, the most common symptoms were fever (83.00%) and cough (33.61%). fatigue (9.96%) and pharyngalgia (6.68%) were common as well. a few cases also reported digestive tract symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea or vomiting. compared with 533 cured cases, 21 deaths occurred among patients who were much older (71.9 vs 39.9 years old), and a much higher proportion of these deaths occurred among patients with other diseases (71.4% vs 0.9%).we analyzed the variation in the age, gender and proportion of imported cases by diagnosis date (figure 1 ). the average age of the cases was 66 years old on january 19 and 56.21 years old on january 20, and the average age gradually decreased to 43.73 years old on january 23. after january 23, the average age for confirmed cases remained near 44.18 ± 16.28 years old. the proportion of imported cases gradually decreased with later dates of diagnosis, especially after january 23. before january 23, the proportion of imported cases was approximately 85.71% to 100%, and the proportion decreased to 33.19% on february 8. we did not observe any difference in the age or gender distribution between cases from provinces adjacent to hubei province and those from other provinces with the time of diagnosis.the median incubation period for 2,907 covid-19 cases was 5 days (2 days, 8 days), and the longest incubation period was 24 days for 1 case. the incubation period m a n u s c r i p t 10 for more than 95% of the covid-19 cases was less than 13 days. we did not observe a significant difference in incubation period among males [5 days (2, 8) ] and females [4 days (2, 8) , p=0.22]. the incubation period in imported cases was 5 days, while it was 4 days in nonimported cases, with no significant difference (p=0.23).interestingly, we observed that the median incubation period gradually extended over time (figure 2 and figure 3 ). we further analyzed the change in the incubation period between imported and nonimported cases (figure 4 ). the extension of the incubation period was observed in imported cases, but no significant change was observed among nonimported cases.the median time from disease onset to diagnosis, disease onset to first visit, first visit to diagnosis and disease onset to censoring was 4, 0, 2 and 12 days, respectively.we collect data in the early stages of the epidemic, so the outcome of many cases has not yet occurred. we used february 8 as censored time for confirmed cases, the cured time for cured cases and the death time for death cases.the time between disease onset and diagnosis for imported cases (4 days, 2-7days) was significantly shorter (p<0.01) than for nonimported cases (5 days, 2-8days) ( table 2 ). the median time from disease onset to diagnosis was decreased to zero over the onset time (figure 3 decreased rapidly before january 23 and then stabilized to 0 days and 2 days, respectively, after january 23. we did not observe a significant difference in the length of time from disease onset to the first visit or the length of time from the first visit to diagnosis between imported cases and nonimported cases.in this study, we collected information on 7,015 confirmed covid-19 cases (over 50% male; average age of 44.24 years old). the most common symptoms were fever and cough. we observed a decreasing trend in the proportion of imported cases in provinces outside hubei province and decreasing trends in the time intervals between onset and diagnosis, onset and first visit, and first visit and diagnosis from january 19 to february 8. based on 2,907 confirmed cases, the median incubation period of covid-19 was 5 days, and more than 95% of cases had an incubation period of less than 13 days. an increasing trend in the incubation period with the time of diagnosis or onset was observed in this study, especially among imported cases.we found that the median incubation period was slightly longer than that found in the 1,099-case report by wei-jie guan [5] and was supported by a reported family clustering case in which five family members experienced the onset of symptoms 3-6 days after exposure [16] . moreover, the longest incubation period a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 12 was 24 days in this study, which is consistent with the longest incubation period reported by wei-jie guan et al. [11] . it should be noted that we extracted the date of last contact with infected persons as the date of contact to calculate the incubation period. when actual contact was earlier than this date, it may lead to an underestimation of the incubation period. in addition, it would appear equally likely that infection might have occurred through contact with some other infected but unidentified person at some time after contact with the known infected person, resulting in an overestimate of the incubation period.since the outbreak of the covid-19, mandatory traffic restrictions have been adopted across china to prevent further spread of the epidemic. for example, wuhan stopped all traffic inside and outside the city on january 23, and no residents could leave wuhan unless they had very special circumstances. in the following days (january 24 to january 26), transportation in other cities and surrounding counties in hubei province also stopped. our study showed that from january 23, the incubation period among imported confirmed cases outside hubei province showed a gradual upward trend, but this trend was not obvious in nonimported cases. we also observed that the proportion of imported cases decreased from 100% on january 19 to 33.19% on february 8. this situation suggested that imported cases started to decrease after traffic restrictions were imposed. after the closure of hubei province, new imported cases would no longer increase, and cases that had been imported into other provinces outside hubei province gradually developed, thus prolonging the incubation period.on the other hand, the main transmission routes of covid-19 that have been a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 13 confirmed thus far are respiratory droplets and contact transmission [5, 11, 16, 17] , while other possible transmission routes (such as aerosol and digestive tract transmission) have not been confirmed [10, 15] . therefore, the opportunities for infection with 2019-ncov did not change, which might partly explain the relatively stable incubation period among nonimported cases.in the present study, we observed that the median time from disease onset to diagnosis decreased very rapidly, from 16 days on january 19 to 4 days on and afterjanuary 23. this phenomenon should be attributed to the gradual recognition of covid-19 and the rapid application of nucleic acid antibody detection. our results also found that the time between disease onset and diagnosis for imported cases was significantly shorter than that for nonimported cases. this indicated that physicians were more likely to consider the possibility of covid-19 among pneumonia cases from wuhan or hubei province. in addition, the rapidly decreasing time interval from onset to the first visit and from the first visit to diagnosis, especially after january 23, also illustrated the effectiveness of the traffic restriction measures in hubei province and the improvement in diagnostic capacities.in summary, our analysis provided evidence that the various policies and isolation measures taken by hubei province have been effective since the outbreak of covid-19. imported cases started to decrease after traffic restrictions were imposed, and the incubation period gradually increased. all authors declare no competing interests. to the editor:since the coronavirus disease (covid-19) outbreak was declared a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) on 30 january 2020 and yet the pandemic disease, its epidemiology has been reported to change rapidly as pointing to over 118,000 cases in over 110 countries [1] [2] [3] . for the first time, since the onset of symptoms of the first identified case of covid-19 on 8 december 2019, there has been a 13-fold increase in cases reported from countries outside china [4, 5] . as of 16 march 2020, 10:00 am cet, there were 81,077 confirmed cases and 3218 deaths in china while the authorities outside china's borders had reported 86,434 confirmed cases, 3388 deaths in 151 countries and thousands more fighting for their lives in hospitals [5] . the statistics tells us that even countries with advanced health systems are still struggling to cope with this epidemic. as the number of cases continues to rise outside china, moving to low-income countries, we should be deeply concerned about the impact it can pose to such population which for decades is characterized by high hiv prevalence [6] , chronic non-communicable diseases [7] , and malnourished individuals [8] . i think it is high time to report newly recorded incidences and provide clear recommendations while reflecting on china's experience. on 16 march 2020, the ministry of health of tanzania announced the first case of covid-19. the victim happened to be a female traveler aged 46 years who departed the country on 3 march 2020 to belgium and had visited denmark and sweden between the dates 5 and 13 march 2020. on the 15 march 2020, the lady flew back to tanzania from belgium and arrived at the kilimanjaro international airport (kia) at 1600 hours using the rwandan airplane. as of other countries, tanzania had also prepared for the reception of travelers from abroad in terms of diagnostics and trained health care providers and much more. a victim was effectively screened for the symptoms of covid-19 at the airport and showed none. she took a cab all the way to the hotel located about 28 miles away from the airport. on the 16 march 2020, she felt unwell and decided to surrender herself to medical tests on the same day just to find out that she was infected with the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2). she came to put it clear to the authorities that the reason behind staying at the hotel overnight instead of going home directly was a need for self-quarantine. she further uncovered that, back in belgium, she was accommodated by her female friend whose husband had acquired the infection. an important thing to learn from this brief story is there is a questionable strategy for screening for this disease as it can obviously miss the truly affected individuals. in addition, body temperature assessment might not be an adequate or sufficient attribute for the screening of covid-19 [9] . the situation might also mean tanzania may have a number of imported cases currently large, posing a huge threat to public health. in this regard, i thought it is imperative to bring forth some few recommendations:(i) as the ministry of health of tanzania suggests, there is no need to panic. in this period when most countries worldwide are taking measures to prevent the importation of the virus, the government of tanzania should improve in monitoring the disease epidemiology by improving strategies for identification, diagnosis, management of cases, contact tracing, and implementation of strict measures for returning travelers. (ii) as travelers coming from risky countries are quarantined for the recommended time (not less than 14 days) while undergoing symptoms based as well as laboratory tests, the government should make a significant improvement in establishing more resources and equipment for quarantine and isolation. if this approach is effectively applied, it can dramatically slow down the spread as it was appreciated in china where strict restrictions were put in place to quarantine nearly 60 million people in hubei province that led to a tremendous decline of new cases from nearly 1600 cases each day to less than 40 cases [10] . (iii)the government should build capacity to the existing healthcare centers to diagnose the infection instead of depending on the national laboratory located in dar es salaam. in addition, as the cases are still accumulating, one of the cost-effective approaches may be to transform some of the existing structures such as malls or exhibition centers and prepare them to receive covid-19 patients. establishment of safe rooms for negative-pressure rooms (contagious respiratory disease isolation) to accommodate patients who might require more sophisticated medical attention should also be considered. (iv) in case of symptoms suggestive of acute respiratory illness before, during, or after travel, the travelers are encouraged to seek medical attention and share travel history with their health care providers. in addition, public health authorities of tanzania should provide to travelers information to reduce the general risk of acute respiratory infections, via health practitioners, travel health clinics, travel agencies, conveyance operators, and at points of entry. immediately suspend not only schools and colleges as it has been successfully done but also all religious and any other social gatherings. in china, all unnecessary or non-essential large-scale public gatherings were stopped as early as 25 january 2020 [11] . the application of this approach can provide significant contribution towards flattening the epidemic curve. (vii) as it has been shown by who and well-practiced in china during the epidemic, the use of banknotes should be banned [12] . i advise the ministry of finance of tanzania to encourage citizens to use contactless payment such as mobile applications and electronic bank transactions by ensuring ease of its use, security, and privacy. despite the announcement from the bank of tanzania that the banknotes cannot harbor the virus [13] , cdc has acknowledged that banknotes in circulation can hold virus and bacteria and hence recommends rigorously that people wash their hands after handling money [12] . in addition, a study conducted in 2017 revealed a list of things including dna from pets, traces of drugs, bacteria, and viruses found on banknotes [14] (viii)in response to covid-19 epidemic, the central government of china imposed a lockdown in the epicenter, wuhan city of hubei province. however, this lockdown model might not work in low-and middle-income settings like tanzania. this has been proven in other east african countries like kenya where there have been episodes of civil unrest as citizens are enforced to stay home. in this regard, the government of tanzania is called to come up with the african-based lockdown and social distancing model that will specifically suit the citizen. this is mainly because a significant proportion of tanzanians have to work daily in the streets to earn a living. (ix) since this crisis is proving to be more difficult and longer-lasting than any of us had expected, there is a need for tanzania to formulate a rapid network with chinese doctors and health care providers that will ensure a rapid sharing of information and how to effectively and timely diagnose the viral infection and track cases. by joint cooperation, we are more than capable of containing the virus. the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), defined as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a global pandemic. the clinical features of covid-19 include fever, cough, fatigue, muscle pain, diarrhoea, and pneumonia. dyspnoea is seen in approximately one-fifth of patients 18.7%. [1] however, in a series from china, covid-19 produced no radiographic or ct abnormality in 157 of 877 patients (17.9%) with non-severe disease [1] . severe cases are characterised by acute respiratory distress syndrome, metabolic acidosis, septic shock, coagulation dysfunction, and organ failure. [2] [3] [4] in addition to immobility induced by malaise and dyspnoea, covid-19 predisposes to systemic inflammation which has been reported to increase the risk for deep vein thrombosis (dvt) [5] , with pe seen in 16.7-47% of patients admitted to intensive care unit (icu) [6] [7] [8] [9] despite the use of thromboprophylaxis .elevated d-dimer values were reported in up to 43% of patients with covid-19 [10] , with higher values seen in patients with more severe disease [11, 12] . therefore, in the context of covid-19 infection, identifying who to investigate for co-morbid pulmonary embolism (pe) is highly challenging.d-dimer is a continuous variable, reflecting increasing risk for pe [13] , and is used to further risk stratify patients with low pre-test probability -with imaging not required in those with negative ddimer [14, 15] . patients with pe and significantly raised d-dimers have been shown to be more often hypotensive, tachycardic, and/or hypoxemic [16] . the radiographic burden of pulmonary thrombotic disease may also be greater with high d-dimer values [17, 18] .we therefore examined the clinical and radiographic characteristics of patients with covid-19, who underwent pulmonary imaging for possible thrombotic disease. we report the incidence of pe and looked at the utility of d-dimer and wells score in this patient cohort.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fthis was a retrospective analysis of adult inpatients with suspected covid-19, having imaging to codiagnose pe, at king's college hospital, london, uk, with a high regional numbers of covid-19 cases [19] . data collection was from 3 rd march 2020 and concluded on 7 th may 2020. at our institution, patients with suspected pe undergo a two-level pe wells score, with mandatory recording of allcomponents of the wells score in the electronic request for pe imaging. imaging is not undertaken for those considered 'pe unlikely' by the wells rule (score <4) in conjunction with a d-dimer result below 500 ng/ml. hospitalised patients were categorised as icu patients or ward patients (if they were not transferred to icu during hospitalisation). weight based thromboprophylaxis was standard of care for all patients admitted with covid-19 (in the absence of contraindication). patients with weight <50kg receive enoxaparin 20mg once daily; weight 50-100kg, enoxaparin 40mg od; 100-150kg, enoxaparin 80mg once daily and >150kg, enoxaparin 120mg once daily. this was also the case in patients admitted to icu with egfr>30ml/min, with unfractionated heparin 5000 units twice daily given to those <100kg, increasing to three times daily in higher body weight. from 24 th april, intermediate dosing was utilised in icu only (see supplementary table 1 ).d-dimer was measured by a latex photometric immunoassay, with sta-liatest. values over 500ng/ml are considered positive; the intraassay cv at this value is 10%. the upper limit of reporting of d-dimer assay is 8000ng/ml, we obtained raw values for this study, where available. fibrinogen was measured by the clauss method, with sta-fibrinogen. prothrombin time (pt was measured by coagulation-based assay with sta neoptimal. all reagents were obtained from diagnostica stago (asnières, france), with assays performed on the automated analyzer sta-r evolution as per manufacturer's instruction (diagnostica stago). detection of covid-19 was from viral rna isolated from nasopharyngeal swabs using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rtpcr). computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (ctpa) was performed using a ge discovery ct750hd (chicago, il, usa). the interval between d-dimer and ctpa was less than 48 hr.using the electronic patient records (epr; allscripts sunrise™, chicago, il), we collected data for vital signs (including the national early warning score 2; news2 [20] ), components of wells score from the clinical notes (not the completed imaging request form), basic demographic data, laboratory values and imaging results (ctpa and venous ultrasonography, if performed). pe is most or equally likely was considered present in patients with a sudden unexplained clinical deterioration, eg without new changes on chest x-ray. if there was no documentation for a component of the wells score, it was considered absent. in cases with no documentation in the epr, a wells score was not calculated. ct scans were requested by the treating clinician for suspected pe. the free text of epr was reviewed for clinician entry stating whether covid-19 was suspected. covid-19 swab results were obtained from epr. the date and time of ctpa request was extracted from the epr. all laboratory and clinical variables were taken as the last values recorded before ctpa request.the wells score was calculated post hoc by the authors [21, 22] , using only data available in the clinical record at the time of ctpa request. pe was considered most, or equally likely where there was an unexplained deterioration in clinical status. normality was determined by kolmogorov-smirnov test. parametric and non-parametric distributed quantitative variables were compared using the student's t-test and the mann-whitney u test, respectively. categorical variables including gender, or presence of a venous thromboembolism (vte) risk factor were compared using the chisquared test (two-tailed). contingency tables were constructed to evaluate the accuracy of using the d-dimer level to diagnose pe, with ctpa as the gold standard. receiver operating characteristics (roc) curve analysis was performed and area under the curve (auc) calculated.the results are given as the mean ± standard error of mean (sem), median (interquartile range), or number (percentage), wherever appropriate. a p value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. data analysis was made using spss statistics for windows, version 26 (ibm corp, armonk, new york, usa).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f continued therapeutic anticoagulation for pre-existing comorbidities (eg atrial fibrillation). four patients did not receive any anticoagulant prophylaxis due to a contraindication (active bleeding or severe thrombocytopenia). data were unavailable for four patients for whom a paper prescription record was in use.wells score: the wells score was no different between those with and without pe ( table 1) table 1 . (table 1) , with higher values seen in those with pe in both the low and high pre-test probability groups (fig 2) . the performance of the d-dimer assay to determine pe is shown as a receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve (fig 3) . this study of hospitalised patients showed that in patients with suspected or confirmed covid-19, and clinical suspicion for pe, more than one-third of ctpa studies were positive for pe. this compares to the yield of ctpa of inpatients, prior to the covid-19 epidemic, of 12 to 17 % [24] [25] [26] , and 18% in an icu environment [25] . most literature on the use of ctpa centres on over-utilisation, particularly if yields fall below 10% [24] [25] [26] . the high-yield from ctpa in our series raises the possibility of relative under-diagnosis of pe in patients with covid-19. neither the wells score, nor news2 (a marker of general illness severity), differentiated between positive and negative studies.of wells score components, only the presence of symptoms or signs of dvt were significantly greater in pe, although only evident in just over a tenth of cases. our data suggest that the d-dimer has a positive predictive value for thrombotic events of approximately 70% when values approach 5000 ng/ml. no d-dimer threshold had an adequate npv to eliminate the need for diagnostic imaging. we found the overall proportion of patients with pe to be 5.4%, increasing to 16.2% in icu patients. pe was diagnosed in 3.5% patients receiving ward-based care, similar to that reported in italy and the netherlands (6.6% and 3.3% respectively). [8, 9] the higher rate of pe in icu patients is consistent with previous reports (16.7 -47%), albeit at the lower end. this may partly be explained by imaging requested on clinical suspicion, compared to some centres incorporating screening imaging. [6] [7] [8] [9] the use of epr means that data capture of requests and results was very high. however, as with any retrospective dataset evaluation, selection bias is likely. ctpa request would more likely be made after high d-dimer results, making assessment of the performance of d-dimer challenging. we used the d-dimer value closest to the request for ctpa. evolution of d-dimer values may occur during illness, and evaluation of serial measurement would be of interest in covid-19 patients.retrospective calculation of the wells score based on author evaluation of the notes up to the time of imaging request relies on accurate recording of comorbidities and clinical features within the notes. we adopted this approach as previous audit has demonstrated the wells recorded is not consistently recorded with accuracy in the imaging request. [21] in our series, very few individuals had fibrinogen measured (outside of icu) and we are therefore unable to determine the presence of dic for most of the cohort. tang et al, (2020) [12] highlighted that the majority of covid-19 patients who died during hospital stay, fulfilled the criteria for disseminated intravascular coagulation (71.6 vs. 0.6% in survivors) although overall numbers were low (15 of 21 non-survivors, total cohort n= 182). of note, other markers of dic were not prevalent j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f in our cohort (seven patients with platelets < 100x10 9 /l and 11 with pt prolonged >3 seconds). apart from d-dimer, coagulation markers were not significantly associated with pe.there is debate as to whether the pe seen in covid-19 represents true 'thrombus embolisation' or whether this may be localised 'immunothrombosis'. [27, 28] 51% of cases in our cohort were limited to unilateral segmental/subsegmental vasculature. a minority of patients (9%) had dvt imaging performed, with dvt confirmed in 11/19 scans including seven patients with confirmed pe. of note, the majority of events were proximal dvt (n=8). of patients with both dvt and pe, only 1 had pe limited to the segmental vasculature with all others demonstrating more proximal thrombosis. we did not collect data on whether segmental/subsegmental pe were co-localised to areas with lung parenchymal disease.all patients diagnosed with pe during hospitalisation had received at least weight-based thromboprophylaxis beforehand. whilst this may raise concern regarding the efficacy of thromboprophylaxis, it should be noted that the overall only 5.4% of patients hospitalised with covid-19 were diagnosed with pe. furthermore, in our series, over half of all imaging occurred within the first 72 hours of admission (43% of positives) suggesting pe may develop earlier in the disease, prior to hospitalisation. we therefore caution against intensified thromboprophylaxis strategies outside icu without further evaluation in randomised controlled trials.in summary, we have found that the diagnostic yield of ctpa for pe in patients with confirmed or suspected covid-19 is high. a high index of clinical suspicion for pe in patients with covid-19 iswarranted. an optimal d-dimer threshold to exclude pe without imaging was not identified; further studies to optimise risk stratification of patients for pe imaging are welcomed. randomised controlled trials to evaluate intensified thromboprophylaxis strategies are urgently needed. addendum m.b.whyte data acquisition, data analysis, manuscript writing; e.gonzalez data acquisition, p.kelly and r.arya study conception and data analysis. l.n.roberts data acquisition and analysis, study conception. all authors were involved in manuscript revision and approved the final version.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 