since december 2019, wuhan city, hubei province has successively discovered multiple cases of patients with pneumonia infected by a novel type of coronavirus. with the spread of the epidemic, other cases in china and abroad have also been found. as of march 21, 2020, a total of 81,054 covid-19 cases in china have been confirmed.the new coronavirus belongs to the beta-type coronavirus, which has an envelope and is round or oval, usually polymorphic, and 60-140 nm in diameter. its genetic characteristics are significantly different from sarsr-cov and mersr-cov. current research shows that it has more than 85% homology with bat sars-like coronavirus (bat-sl-covzc45). recently, the international virus classification commission had proposal named the novel coronavirus as "sars-cov-2"(1), and the world health organization has officially named the novel coronavirus pneumonia as "covid-19."at present, it has been confirmed that receptor-binding mechanism in infection of host cells by novel coronavirus is the binding of the coronavirus s protein to the human angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) protein, which involves in the regulation of blood pressure in the human body (2) . it is widely present in the lungs, heart, kidneys, and intestines. additionally, studies had reported that a considerable number of patients with covid-19 were complicated by underlying diseases such as hypertension and the proportion of patients with hypertension was high. peng et al. showed that among 138 covid-19 patients, the proportion of patients with hypertension was the highest (43/ 138, 31.2%) (3). huang et al. also found that 15% of patients with covid-19 had hypertension, ranking second among all comorbidities (4). in addition, there were reports that most of the deaths disclosed during the early stage of the covid-19 epidemic were complicated by hypertension. however, at present, there were no researches about the clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients with hypertension and the effects of taking acei or arb drugs on patients' prognosis. therefore, we selected hypertension as a casecontrol retrospective study to investigate the clinical characteristics of hypertensive patients exposed to the covid-19.this case series was approved by the institutional ethics board of wuhan fourth hospital (ky2020-027-01). all study cases were from confirmed patients with covid-19 at wuhan fourth hospital discharged from january 25 to february 20, 2020. wuhan fourth hospital is located in wuhan, hubei province, which is one of the first batch of covid-19 diagnosis and treatment hospitals requisitioned by the wuhan municipal government. all patients included in the study were diagnosed and treated in accordance with the covid-19 diagnosis and treatment program issued by the chinese national health committee.the medical records of patients were collected and analyzed by the research team of the department of critical care medicine, wuhan fourth hospital. the clinical data included demographic data, medical history, underlying comorbidities, symptoms, signs, laboratory findings, treatment measures, and clinical outcomes. all study cases were grouped according to whether they had a history of hypertension. then, hypertensive patients were further divided into two groups based on whether to take acei or arb.prism 5 (graphpad software, la jolla, ca, usa) and spss 23.0 (spss, inc., chicago, il, usa) were used to perform statistical analysis. means of two groups were tested for the statistical difference using unpaired student's t-test. the distribution of categorical variables was evaluated using chisquare test. p < .05 was considered statistically significant. the association between whether to take acei or arb and prognosis in covid-19 patients with hypertension was examined by logistic regression analysis performed by spss.the study included 110 patients with covid-19 who had been discharged. the mean age of all patients was 57.7 years (range, 25-86 years), of which 60 (54.5%) male patients. as shown in table 2 , compared to the non-hypertensive group, patients in the hypertensive group were significantly older (average age, 64.8 vs 54.3) and showed a significantly higher occurrence of dyspnea [15 (41.7%) vs 10 (13.5%)], diabetes [9 (25.0%) vs 2(2.7%)], and cardiovascular disease [7(19.4%) vs 3(4.1%)]. remarkably, the lymphocyte count on admission was significantly lower in the hypertensive group (average value, 0.96 × 10 9 /l vs 1.26 × 10 9 /l). there was no statistical difference in the time from onset to hospitalization between the two groups. clinical outcomes showed the two groups had no significant differences for crude cure rate, the rate of referral to high-level hospitals, and length of stay, but the crude mortality rate was higher in the hypertensive group than that in the control group [7(19.4%) vs 2(2.7%)]. taking acei or arb drugs may not change the prognosis of covid-19 patients with hypertension. clinical features of covid-19 patients taking acei or arbthe covid-19 patients with a history of hypertension were divided into two groups according to whether to take acei or arb drugs, of which 15 patients had previously taken acei or arb were divided into acei or arb group, and other patients were divided as control group. the patients in acei or arb group were younger than that in the control group and the difference was statistically significant (average age, 58.5 vs 69.2). while there were no significant differences in lymphocyte counts, crude cure rate, crude mortality rate, onset time, and length of hospital stay between the two groups ( table 3) . we classify patients transfer to high-level hospital and clinical death as a poor prognosis, and the prognosis between the two groups was examined by logistic regression analysis with adjustment for age, sex, hospitalization time, time from onset to hospital admission, and whether to take acei or arb. as shown from table 4 , whether to take acei or arb was not significantly associated with prognosis.in this report, we recruited 110 patients with covid-19.from the results, we found that fever was the commonest symptom during the early stage, besides, the patient also showed other symptoms such as dry cough, fatigue, and dyspnea, and so on. in terms of underlying diseases, hypertension was the commonest comorbidity (32.7%). for the first time, this report showed that compared to the nonhypertension group, the hypertension group had significantly lower lymphocyte count. in addition, we grouped the covid-19 patients with a history of hypertension based on whether to take acei or arb for antihypertensive treatment, and found that there was no difference in clinical outcomes between the two groups. as reported by other researchers (4-6), for most patients with covid-19, the common symptoms were fever, dry cough, and fatigue, but we should be alert to the clinical manifestations of a few patients without fever at the time of consultation. besides, we also should be wary of a few patients without clinical manifestations of the respiratory tract, such as anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and other clinical manifestations of the digestive system, as well as clinical manifestations of the nervous system such as dizziness and headache.we observed about one-third of patients with covid-19 were complicated by hypertension. this result was consistent with peng et al. results which showed that 31% of 138 covid-19 cases had hypertension (3) . until now, there were no effective drugs for the treatment of covid-19. we observed that most patients used antiviral drugs (arbidol tablets or lopinavir and ritonavir tablets) and antibiotics, and some patients used low-dose hormones (methylprednisolone) and immune globulin, and some critically ill patients had used oxygen therapy. in studies with limited conditions and data, it can be seen that there was no difference in cure rate between the hypertension group and the nonhypertension group, while the mortality rate in the hypertension group was higher, and the prognosis seems to be worse. however, it should be noted that the patients in the hypertension group were older and had a higher proportion of major comorbidities, which indicates that the elderly and comorbidities together constitute risk factors for poor prognosis to a certain extent.blood pressure is affected by many molecules, such as endothelin-1 (7), angii, etc. (8, 9) . like angii, ace2 belongs to the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and kallikreinbradykinin system family and is also a blood pressure regulating protein (10,11), which can degrade angii to form ang1-7 and degrade des-arg (9) bradykinin (dabk) to an active peptide (12) . as we all know, angii and dabk can bind to corresponding receptors and play physiological roles such as constricting blood vessels, promoting value-added, inflammation, neutrophil infiltration, and pulmonary fibrosis (12, 13) . while ang1-7 can bind to specific mas receptors and exert diastolic blood vessels, anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative, anti-fibrotic, and anti-alveolar epithelial cell apoptosis. therefore, ace2 indirectly exerts anti-inflammatory and antilung injury effects. animal experiments show that ace2 expression in hypertensive rats is decreased (14, 15) . ace2 is also the binding protein of novel coronaviruses (16) like severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) (17) . in studies on sars, researchers found that coronavirus can cause ace 2 levels to decline or even be absent (18, 19) , but the expression of ace remains unchanged, and the balance of ace2 and ace in lung is broken (20) , leading to angⅱ elevation and activation of the dabk-bk1 receptor pathway work the association between whether to take acei or arb and prognosis in covid-19 patients with hypertension was examined by logistic regression analysis performed by spss with adjustment for age, sex, hospitalization time, time from onset to hospital admission, and whether to take acei or arb.together to cause lung inflammation, apoptosis, and accelerated lung injury. because novel coronavirus and sars both use ace2 as a receptor, we speculate that novel coronavirus and sars have similar mechanisms of action ( figure 1 ). reduced lymphocyte count is one of the diagnostic criteria in the national health commission's diagnosis and treatment program. the results of this study show that covid-19 patients with a history of hypertension had lower lymphocyte count. in reports by peng et al., a persistent decline in lymphocyte counts was observed in death cases (3). chen et al. also reported that patients with covid-19 who were over 50 years of age, and low lymphocyte counts can easily turn into severe cases (21) . maybe the lymphocyte count could reflect the severity of the condition in patients with covid-19 to some extent, and this may explain the increased mortality in patients with a history of hypertension. whether lymphopenia is due to the reduction of ace2 caused by novel coronavirus invasion in covid-19 patients with hypertension, the increase of angii and des-arg bradykinin caused lung injury and inflammatory response, needs further basic experimental research.after scientists announced that novel coronavirus enters target cells through the receptor ace2, many experts in the cardiovascular field began to discuss whether covid-19 patients with a history of hypertension should continue to use acei or arb as antihypertensive drugs. some scholars believe that aceis should be discontinued, while other scholars believe that the recommendations to discontinue aceis have no scientific basis.in our data analysis, we saw that a considerable number of cases were complicated by hypertension, so we further collected the patient's previous medication situation, and grouped them according to whether they were taking acei or arb drugs. statistical analysis under limited data showed that the prognosis of the two groups was not statistically different, but we need to note that there was a statistical difference in the age of the two groups. further logistic regression analysis showed that patients whether had a history of taking acei or arb were not correlated with prognosis. studies show that both acei and arb can cause increased expression of ace2 (22, 23) . as the angiotensin type i receptor, arb can increase ang2, and then compensatingly increasing ace2 expression. acei prevents ang1 from forming ang2, which in turn promotes ace2 expression. but whether both types of drugs will affect covid-19 patients with hypertension require further research.this study has several limitations. first, some patients had been referred to other hospitals, so we can only calculate a crude cure rate and a crude mortality rate. second, this is only a singlecenter study, and the sample size was also limited, especially for patients with hypertension. therefore, it is difficult to accurately assess the risk factors for poor outcomes.in general, our current work demonstrated that in 110 discharged patients with confirmed covid-19 in wuhan, china, hypertensive patients had a significantly lower lymphocyte count on admission, the elderly and comorbidities such as hypertension may together constitute risk factors for poor prognosis. taking acei or arb drugs may not change the prognosis of covid-19 patients with hypertension. however, as mentioned above, the sample size of the hypertensive patients we collected is small, and more researches are needed to confirm it.the first case of pneumonia caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars‐cov‐2) was reported in wuhan, hubei province, china, on december 31, 2019. until march, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid‐19), caused by this virus, has spread around the world. sars‐cov‐2 is human coronavirus, which does not belong to the group of benign coronaviruses that cause common cold, but to the smaller group of coronaviruses that cause acute respiratory distress syndrome (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus—sars and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus—mers). 1 ,  2  recently published studies showed that arterial hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease were prevalent among the patients with covid‐19. 3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6 ,  7 ,  8 ,  9 ,  10 ,  11 ,  12 ,  13 ,  14 ,  15 ,  16 ,  17 ,  18 ,  19  investigations on the outcome of these patients are scarce, and data are very limited. nevertheless, hypertension is considered as one of the most important risk factors for covid‐19. the relationship between hypertension and adverse outcome is still questionable.the aim of this review paper was to summarize current knowledge about the relationship between hypertension and covid‐19 and the role of hypertension in outcome of these patients. a comprehensive search was performed on pubmed, scopus, web of science, and google scholar, to find review papers on this topic published until may 1, 2020.sars‐cov‐2 infection is triggered when the s‐protein of the virus binds to angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which is highly expressed in the heart, lungs, kidney, and gastrointestinal tract, and plays an important role in several cardiovascular and immune pathways. 20  sars‐cov‐2 binds to ace2 with much higher affinity compared to sars‐cov. 21  additionally, sars‐cov‐2 shows its pathogenic activity by attacking type ii alveolar epithelial cells that are expressing ace2. previous studies of coronavirus that causes sars demonstrated that this virus binds to ace2 in pulmonary alveoli through their superficial spike proteins, which causes lung damage and even lung function failure. 21  the loss of ace2, caused by binding sars‐cov‐2, may shift the system to an overall higher angiotensin ii and lower angiotensin‐(1‐7) tone. the role of angiotensin ii in covid‐19 hypertensive patients seems to be crucial due to its role in functioning of the renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system (raas) that promotes vasoconstriction, sodium retention, oxidative stress, inflammation, and fibrosis and increases the bioactive peptide angiotensin‐(1‐7). 22  epidemiological data coming from china indicate that arterial hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are the most prevalent concomitant diseases in patients with covid‐19  3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6 ,  7 ,  8 ,  9 ,  10 ,  11 ,  12 ,  13 ,  14 ,  15 ,  16 ,  17 ,  18 ,  19 ,  23  (table 1). the number of investigations that provided at least short follow‐up with intrahospital outcome is limited. even though these data demonstrated that the prevalence of hypertension in covid‐19 patients with lethal outcome was high, 7 ,  8 ,  9 ,  10 ,  14 ,  17  it has still been debated whether hypertension was a predictor of mortality independently of other cardiovascular risk factors (age, obesity, diabetes) and comorbidities (coronary artery disease, heart failure, atrial fibrillation, cerebrovascular disease, renal impairment).the prevalence of hypertension among patients with covid‐19, between different studies, ranged from 15%‐20%  3 ,  4 ,  11 ,  12 ,  16 ,  17  to 30%‐35%. 5 ,  6 ,  7 ,  9 ,  13  there are several reasons for these variations. average age was significantly higher in patients with elevated prevalence of hypertension, 3 ,  4 ,  5 ,  6 ,  7 ,  13 ,  14 ,  15 ,  16  which might be the most important reason for different prevalence of hypertensive patients among studies. advanced age was associated with higher prevalence of other comorbidities such as diabetes, renal impairment, arterial hypertension, and obesity, which altogether increased proportion of hypertensive patients. 5 ,  6 ,  9 ,  13 ,  15  the prevalence of overweight and obesity was not reported in available studies about covid‐19. this “circulus vitiosus” between hypertension, obesity, and diabetes is difficult to break, and therefore, conclusion cannot be made without detailed data of all links of chain. the impact of smoking should not be forgotten in the relation between copd, hypertension, and higher propensity to covid‐19. 3 ,  6 ,  7 ,  8 ,  9 ,  11 ,  12  however, results are conflicting, but majority of authors did not find higher prevalence of smoking in patients with adverse outcome. 7 ,  8 ,  9  the level of renal damage cannot be excluded as one of contribute factor for higher percentage of hypertension and advance stage of covid‐19 in hypertensive patients. most of studies reported the large prevalence of cardiovascular diseases in covid‐19 patients, but they also did not classified them and therefore it is difficult to estimate the individual effect of coronary artery disease, heart failure, and atrial fibrillation on occurrence and severity of covid‐19.li et al summarized the findings from 6 studies and showed that the prevalence of hypertension, cardio‐, and cerebrovascular disease and diabetes in patients with covid‐19 was 17.1%, 16.4%, and 9.7%, respectively. 17  the incidences of hypertension, cardio‐cerebrovascular diseases, and diabetes were two‐ to threefolds higher in patients with severe type of covid‐19 than in their non‐severe counterparts. yang et al included 46,248 covid‐19 patients from 8 studies and reported that the most prevalent comorbidities were hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and respiratory system disease. 18  the most frequent comorbidities in severe patients were hypertension, respiratory system disease, and cardiovascular disease. the large meta‐analysis that included 76,993 patients with covid‐19 found that the pooled prevalence of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, smoking history, and diabetes was 16.37%, 12.11%, 7.63%, and 7.87%, respectively  19  (table 1). the authors of meta‐analyses agreed about the large heterogeneity between studies, which obviously limited the quality of their study. this can be partly explained by different designs and large variation in sample size among studies. 18 ,  19  some essential data are still missing, and it would be dangerous to ascribe the large portion of risk for sars‐cov‐2 infection or severity of covid‐19 to any risk factor, including hypertension. it would be reasonable to hypothesize that uncontrolled comorbidities, as well as combination of concomitant diseases, may increase the risk of infection and severity of covid‐19, but this has to be examined.there are many controversies about the effect of angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitors (acei) and angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arb) in covid‐19 patients. 24  some authors expressed their concern that the use of renin‐angiotensin‐aldosterone system (raas) inhibitors and variation in ace2 expression may be partly responsible for sars‐cov‐2 virulence. 25 ,  26  population‐based studies estimated that only small proportion of hypertensive patients in china (30 to 40%) is treated with antihypertensive therapy, and raas inhibitors are used in only 25 to 30% of treated patients. 27 ,  28  therefore, it can be anticipated that only small percentage of covid‐19 patients in china were actually treated with acei or arb.on the other hand, the prevalence of cardiac damage in covid‐19 patients is not negligible, and it is associated with adverse outcome in these subjects. 5 ,  6  data regarding the frequency of heart failure in covid‐19 patients are scarce, and the same is valid for chronic kidney disease. from therapeutic point of view, acei and arb have important roles in treatment of these conditions—cardiac injury, heart failure, and renal impairment (particularly with albuminuria). therefore, withdrawing raas inhibitors or switching medications would have uncertain benefits, but very certain disadvantages.it would be expected that problem with raas inhibitors would escalate in western countries (europe and usa), where patients are taking antihypertensive medications, and particularly raas inhibitors, in significantly higher percentage than in china. however, studies from italy and usa did not show any association between raas inhibitors and susceptibility to coronavirus, complications or mortality from covid‐19. 29 ,  30 ,  31  even new investigation from china confirmed these findings. 32  the switching from the raas inhibitors to another antihypertensive therapy would lead to insufficient blood pressure control, which could induce more complications in covid‐19 patients than infection of sars‐cov‐2 itself. novel data showed that raas inhibitors could even improve the outcome of hypertensive patients with covid‐19. 33  the authors hypothesized that raas inhibitors have an indirect antiviral role by regulating immune function and inhibiting inflammatory responses. 31  based on the available data, despite some theoretical possibilities, multiple specialty societies recommended that covid‐19 patients should continue therapy with raas inhibitors. 34 ,  35 ,  36  limited number of studies provided outcome data after a short follow‐up. therefore, one should be careful in interpretation of these findings. guan et al demonstrated that patients with severe covid‐19 and those with primary end point (admission in intensive care unit, the use of mechanical ventilation, or death) had significantly higher percentage of hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, copd, chronic renal disease, and cancer. 3  the authors did not investigate the relationship between different demographic and clinical parameters with severity of disease or the outcome.shi et al reported that hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, copd, and cancer were more prevalent in the patients with myocardial injury diagnosed by elevation of high‐sensitivity troponin i and creatinine kinase‐myocardial band (ck‐mb). 5  cardiac injury was associated with significantly higher mortality (52.1% vs. 4.5%). the authors did not investigate which comorbidities were associated with cardiac injury and mortality. it must be noted that patients with cardiac injury were significantly older. guo et al demonstrated similar results when compared covid‐19 patients with and without elevation of troponin and found that 27.8% of patients with covid‐19 had cardiac injury. 6  in this study, chronic renal dysfunction and usage of raas were also more prevalent in patients with cardiac injury. however, patients with cardiac injury were almost 20 years older and more frequently men than those without injury, which also have to be taken into account. it was also reported that underlying cardiovascular disease was worsening outcome only in patients with myocardial injury. 6  defining myocardial injury only by elevation of troponin i in these circumstances could be questionable because this biomarker may be increased in many conditions such as inflammation and/or sepsis/systemic inflammatory response syndrome and kidney injury. the authors did not clearly stated which disorders were included under the term “cardiovascular disease” and it is not clear whether hypertension was included in this term. furthermore, it is difficult to understand which cardiomyopathies were included and whether patients with heart failure were included.chen et al reported that hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes were more prevalent among covid‐19 patients who died in comparison with survivors. 7  however, there was a large difference in age and sex distribution between groups and authors did not investigate the effect of comorbidities on outcome in this population 7  (table 2). zhou et al reported that hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic renal disease, and copd were more frequent among non‐survivors than in survivors. 9  the authors found that hypertension, diabetes, and coronary heart disease were predictors of mortality in covid‐19 patients. nevertheless, none of these comorbidities remained significant predictor of mortality after adjustment for age, sex, and smoking status. these findings confirmed the importance of comprehensive risk assessment by including all relevant risk factors and comorbidities.in the large original study that included 1590 patients, guan et al showed that after adjusting for age and smoking status, patients with copd, diabetes, hypertension, and malignancy were more likely to reach the composite end points (admission to intensive care unit, or invasive ventilation, or death) than those without. 12  malignancy, copd, hypertension, and diabetes increased the risk of adverse outcome for 3.5‐, 2.7‐, 1.57‐, and 1.58‐fold, respectively. 12  patients with two or more comorbidities had significantly higher risk of the composite end point than patients with a single comorbidity. stratification of patients according to their age (<65 years vs ≥65 years) did not show significant difference in the strength of associations between the number of comorbidities and mortality of covid‐19. 12  however, it cannot be excluded that other confounding factors, besides aging and smoking, might also be responsible for the association between comorbidities and outcome. it would be also helpful to divide primary outcome into two separate outcomes: (a) admission to intensive care unit and/or invasive ventilation and (b) death. this would provide separated information about independent predictors of severity and mortality of covid‐19. this was performed in the small study, and authors found that hypertension and diabetes were predictors of acute respiratory distress syndrome, but not mortality in covid‐19 patients. 16  unfortunately, multivariable analysis with adjustment for relevant confounding factors was not performed in this investigation.there are a number of limitations in the mentioned investigations. the self‐reporting of comorbidities on hospital admission represents one of them. under‐reporting of comorbidities, due to the lack of awareness and/or the lack of diagnostic testing, could interfere the associations between comorbidities and clinical outcome. more importantly, the duration of follow‐up was short and some patients remained in the hospital at the time of publishing these studies, which means that real outcome was unknown. obesity was not reported in available studies, and its influence could not be investigated. furthermore, only one study reported basal values of systolic and diastolic blood pressure, which would help to estimate the percentage of uncontrolled hypertension. the same refers to prevalence of patients with uncontrolled diabetes. the most of studies included small number of patients, which is additional obstacle. one should not forget the fact that majority of studies come from china, and we should be cautious when extrapolating these findings to other countries with outbreak of covid‐19. studies should consider all potential sources of bias and confounding, which is why additional investigations with improved design are warranted.recent findings reported that arterial hypertension represented one of the most common comorbidities in patients with covid‐19. this prevalence ranged between 10% and 34%. the impact of hypertension on outcome and particularly on mortality in covid‐19 patients is not clear due to lack of data. studies did not provide evidence that raas inhibitors should be avoided or switched in these patients. large studies that will consider all potential sources of bias and confounding factors, as well as longer follow‐up, are necessary. the public pressure to find all answers is very high, but physicians' duty is to stay rational and has scientific approach to available and upcoming data.1031 covid-19 inpatients were included in this study, of whom 866 were discharged and 165 were dead in hospital. 73% of 165 dead patients had complicated chronic comorbidities. of the 1031 patients, 514 (50%) were combined with chronic comorbidities, and showed cfr 2.8 times as that of patients without any underlying disease.the number of patients with hypertension accounted for three fourths of those with concomitant underlying diseases. the univariable regression revealed that patients in the simple hypertension group showed overall risk higher than those in the simple diabetes mellitus group. in the age-grouped research, patients in the hypertension senile group were proved to be at the highest risk, which might be associated with the level of ldh and egfr. in this retrospective cohort study, 166 (43%) patients with hypertension took ccb during the hospitalization, the odds ratio of cfr in patients with hypertension taking ccb group was 0.68 (p = 0.155), compared to those not.our data shows that the clinical manifestations of most hospitalized patients with covid-19 are actually systemic syndromes, although covid-19 is defined as novel coronavirus pneumonia in china. hypertension is not just a chronic underlying comorbidity, but also a risk factor affecting the severity of covid-19 and does play a critical role in worsening patients' clinical outcomes. therefore, hypertension management in patients with covid-19 should be regarded as a major challenge in the diagnostic and therapeutic strategies, including optimal management of blood pressure and pathophysiological status.the recent outbreak of covid-19 has rapidly spread worldwide. a large proportion of covid-19 patients with chronic underlying complications have been reported to be in severe condition and show unpromising clinical outcomes. but whether chronic comorbidities are risk factors affecting the severity of covid-19 has not been well described.we included covid-19 patients who had been admitted to tongji hospital, tongji medical college of hust (wuhan, china) from january, 27, 2020 to march, 8, 2020 in this retrospective cohort study. the final date of follow-up was march, 30, 2020. all patients were diagnosed with covid-19 according to prevention and control schemefor novel coronavirus pneumonia published by national health commission of the people's republic of china and who interim. demographic data, medical history, clinical symptoms and signs, laboratory findings, chest computed tomography (ct), treatment and clinical outcomes were extracted from electronic medical records with standardized data collection forms and compared among different groups.1031 covid-19 inpatients were included in this study, of whom 866 were discharged and 165 were dead in hospital. 73% of 165 dead patients had complicated chronic comorbidities. of the 1031 patients, 514 (50%) were combined with chronic comorbidities, and showed cfr 2.8 times as that of patients without any underlying disease.the number of patients with hypertension accounted for three fourths of those with concomitant underlying diseases. the univariable regression revealed that patients in the simple hypertension group showed overall risk higher than those in the simple diabetes mellitus group. in the age-grouped research, patients in the hypertension senile group were proved to be at the highest risk, which might be associated with the level of ldh and egfr. in this retrospective cohort study, 166 (43%) patients with hypertension took ccb during the hospitalization, the odds ratio of cfr in patients with hypertension taking ccb group was 0.68 (p = 0.155), compared to those not.our data shows that the clinical manifestations of most hospitalized patients with covid-19 are actually systemic syndromes, although covid-19 is defined as novel coronavirus pneumonia in china. hypertension is not just a chronic underlying comorbidity, but also a risk factor affecting the severity of covid-19 and does play a critical role in improving patients' clinical outcomes. therefore, hypertension management in patients with covid-19 should be a major challenge in the diagnostic and therapeutic strategies, including optimal management of blood pressure and pathophysiological status.the infection of covid-19 has swiftly spread worldwide. the clinical spectrum of covid-19 patients appears to be wide, ranging from asymptomatic infection to mild, and to critical illness [1, 2] . a significant portion of covid-19 patients were reported to have at least one underlying complication when admitted to hospital, with hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and other cardiovascular diseases being the most common [3] .there were about 20% of covid-19 patients abruptly progressing from mild or normal condition to severe or critical illness, while the critical determinants remain to be identified. for early detection, early prediction, and early treatment, identifying the factors and biological indicators, in particular, those of early warning value for the development of disease progression and prognosis, are critical for clinical decision making and medical resource allocation.in this article, we conducted an in-depth retrospective analysis of covid-19 inpatients who were received and treated intensively in the early stage of the pandemic. our aim was to reveal the factors of great influence on and predictive value of covid-19 progression through the medical history, laboratory indicators and prognosis outcomes.this retrospective cohort study included 1031 covid-19 inpatients from tongji hospital, tongji medical college of hust (wuhan, china). all patients were diagnosed with covid-19 according to prevention and control scheme for novel coronavirus pneumonia (5 th edition) published by national health commission of the people's republic of china [4] and who interim guidance. a confirmed case of covid-19 was defined as a positive result of serum antibody or real-time reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chainreaction (rt-pcr) assay of nasal or pharyngeal swab specimens.the admission date of these hospitalized patients was from january 27, 2020, to march 8, 2020. the date cutoff for the study was march 30, 2020. the study was designed by the investigators and conducted in accordance with the principles of the declaration of helsinki. the institutional review board of tongji hospital, wuhan, china, approved this retrospective study and written informed consent was waived (no. tj-c20200140). data was analyzed and interpreted by the authors.we obtained raw data regarding 1031 hospitalized covid-19 patients in tongji hospital. demographic data, medical history, clinical symptoms and signs, laboratory . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.14.20125997 doi: medrxiv preprint findings, chest computed tomography (ct), treatment and clinical outcomes were extracted from electronic medical records with standardized data collection forms for hospitalized covid-19 patients. all data were doubled checked by two experienced physicians to ensure the accuracy of data collection. disagreement between these two major reviewers was adjudicated by a third reviewer.demographic data included age and sex; clinical symptoms and signs included fever, cough, dyspnea, myalgia, diarrhea, chest congestion, heart rate, blood pressure and oos; laboratory findings from laboratory information system consist of a complete blood count, ldh, pt, aptt, scr, egfr, alt, ast, serum albumin, d-dimer, nt-probnp, tni, crp, esr, il-6, sars-cov-2 igg, sars-cov-2 igm and sars-cov-2 nucleic acid detection. chest ct report data was obtained from image acquisition and communication systems.smoking history and baseline comorbidities (hypertension, dm, chd, copd, aki, stroke and cancer) were extracted from medical history. drug use condition (anti-hypertension, anti-coronary drugs, antiviral drugs, antibiotics, corticosteroids, gamma globulin, traditional chinese medicine) and mechanical interventions (non-invasive ventilator, tracheal intubation, ecmo, crrt) of covid-19 patients during hospitalization were collected from medical advice. information about the time from symptom onset to admission to hospital, severity of illness (normal/severe), and clinical outcome (discharge or death) were obtained from the electronic medical system.according to diagnosis & treatment scheme for novel coronavirus pneumonia (trial 7 th edition) published by national health commission of the people's republic of china [5] , the severity of covid-19 inpatients was classified into mild, common, severe and critically ill. acute cardiac injury (aci) was diagnosed if serum levels of tni were more than 0.342 μg/l for males and more than 0.156 μg/l for females. acute kidney injury (aki) was diagnosed if egfr was less than 60 ml/min. the composite endpoint was the occurrence of aci, aki, or use of tracheal intubation. different groups were divided on the basis of collected medical history. patients with hypertension were included in the hypertension group, and patients without hypertension were included in the non-hypertension group. the simple hypertension group referred to patients with hypertension while without diabetes mellitus. the simple diabetes mellitus group referred to patients with diabetes mellitus while without hypertension. the hypertension and diabetes mellitus group referred to patients with both hypertension and diabetes mellitus. the others group referred to patients without hypertension and diabetes mellitus. patients without hypertension, dm, chd, copd and cancer were included in the non-underlying disease group [6] .continuous variables were presented as medians with standard deviation (sd) and compared with independent sample t test. categorical variables were summarized as counts and percentages n (%) and compared with pearson χ² test. the missing data was . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . removed. we used univariable and multivariable logistic regression models to look for insights into risk factors associated with incidence of critically ill cases, fatality cases and composite endpoint. a two-sided α of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. all the analyses were performed using spss software (version 21.0).there were 514 patients with chronic comorbidities in the total 1031 covid-19 inpatients, accounting for 50%, two thirds of whom had one chronic comorbidities. the cfr (23.5%) of patients with chronic comorbidities was 2.8 times as that of patients with no underlying disease (8.5%). there was no difference in cfr among patients with different number of chronic comorbidities.there were 866 discharged patients and 165 dead patients in the total 1031 covid-19 inpatients. the clinical characteristics and prognosis conditions, including demographic data, clinical symptoms and signs, chronic comorbidities, and drug therapy, of these two groups are listed in table 1 . among dead patients, 73% had chronic comorbidities (table  1) , 56% (92/165) had hypertension or diabetes mellitus (appendix table 4 ), 47% had hypertension (table 1) .there were 573 patients included in the others group (others), 269 in the simple hypertension group (htn), 74 in the simple diabetes mellitusgroup (dm) and 115 in the hypertension and diabetes mellitus group (htn+dm). multiple indicators including ccir, cfr, the incidence of aci, aki and tracheal intubation, the use of non-invasive ventilator, ecmo and crrt, were compared among these four groups (figure 1 ). the ccir and cfr were relatively higher in groups with chronic comorbidities. compared to others group, various prognostic indicators were significantly higher in htn group and dm group. patients in htn+dm group showed higher incidence of aci, aki and tracheal intubation and the use of non-invasive ventilator.odds ratio of three major prognostic indicators (incidence of severe cases, fatality cases and cases with composite endpoint) were adjusted by age (figure 2 ) in covid-19 inpatients with htn , dm and htn+dm group, and showed that simple hypertension to be at higher risk than those with simple diabetes mellitus. odds ratio of occurrence of composite endpoint was 1.53 in the htn group (p=0.019) and 1.55 (p<0.001) in the htn+dm group (figure 2 , appendix table 4 ).the total of 1031 covid-19 inpatients were divided into four groups, ie the hypertension discharged group (307 patients), hypertension dead group (77 patients), nonhypertension discharged group (559 patients) and non-hypertension dead group (88 patients). demographic data, clinical signs (oos, hr, sbp, map) and laboratory indicators (crp、d-dimer、ldh、scr、egfr) were compared among these four groups, as shown in table 2 . there was no significant difference between discharged and dead . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.14.20125997 doi: medrxiv preprint patients in the hypertension and non-hypertension group for age, sex, oos, and many other laboratory indicators. however, the indicator of egfr was significantly lower in the hypertension dead group than the non-hypertension dead group (66.9±25.7 vs. 78.3±25.9, p=0.005).there were 419 patients in the non-hypertension non-senile group, 150 patients in the hypertension non-senile patients, 228 patients in the non-hypertension senile group, and 234 patients in the hypertension senile group, when all patients with hypertension were divided according to age (the age of 65). demographic data, clinical signs (sbp, dbp, map, oos), laboratory indicators (ldh, egfr), and ccir, cfr1, cfr2) were compared among the above four groups (appendix table 1 ). the results showed that the ccir in the hypertension senile group was significantly higher than the non-hypertension senile group (71% vs. 51%, p＜0.001). different from non-senile patients, senile patients showed significantly difference in the indicator of crp and ldh between the hypertension group and non-hypertension group. further comparing the probability of survival among the four groups above (figure 3 ), the probability of survival in the hypertension senile group continuously declined from the start of hospitalization, lowest among the four groups.due to various reasons, most of chinese hypertensive patients insisting on antihypertensive therapy were taking long acting calcium channel blockers (ccb), accounting for nearly half (43%) of the total number of patients with hypertension. hypertensive patients using renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors (rasi) were in less severe disease condition, accounting for nearly one eighth (12.7%). the comparison of demographic data, clinical signs (oos, hr, sbp, dbp, map), laboratory indicators (crp, ldh, egfr) and cfr between hypertensive patients taking ccb and not were listed in appendix table 2 . only age was proved to show significant difference between these two groups. univariable and multivariable logistic regression analyses revealed that the odds ratio of death for hypertensive patients taking ccb compared to those not was 0.68 (p = 0.155) (appendix table 3 ).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . the clinical manifestations of covid-19 patients can range from asymptomatic infection to mild, and to critical illness requiring ventilators and even ecmo to sustain lives [1, 2] . wuhan scholars in china first reported that about half of the patients with severe infection were complicated with chronic comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus or coronary heart disease [7] . among those infected with underlying diseases, about 38% progressed to severe cases [7] . about 60% of severe cases with chronic comorbidities died in hospital [7] . however, whether chronic comorbidities can be regarded as a risk factor affecting the severity of covid-19 remains controversial at that time.recently, there were many reports that age and concomitant diseases might aggravate the disease progression and affect clinical outcomes among covid-19 patients. covid-19 patients with pre-existing complications were observed to show higher cfr-10.5%, 7.3%, 6.3%, 6.0%, 5.6% for patients with cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, chronic respiratory disease, hypertension, and cancer respectively [6] . it has been reported that the greater the number of underlying diseases is combined, the greater the severity of covid-19 [3] . the retrospective analyses of covid-19 patients in zhejiang province and in 31 province across mainland china revealed that underlying hypertension was an independent risk factor for severe cases, even after adjustment for age [3, 8] . among 1043 covid-19 patients admitted to icu with available data in italy, 49% had underlying hypertension. after excluding patients still in icu as of the deadline of the study, the cfr . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . for patients with and without hypertension was 70% and 47% [9] . the result of the population-based cohort study in england supported that patients with hypertension should be included in the high-risk group [10] .in our retrospective study, it was found that the determinants of the severity of covid-19 were closely related to the age and chronic comorbidities. chronic comorbidities, such as hypertension and diabetes mellitus, are major risk factors affecting disease progression and prognosis. patients with simple hypertension may be at higher risk than those with simple diabetes mellitus, and senile hypertensive patients are at highest risk for progression and its prognosis of covid-19.why do chronic comorbidities, such as hypertension, increase the risk of the disease progression and its prognosis? it was very important and should be investigated. now, an article named "viral and host factors related to the clinical outcome of covid-19 was published online [11] , to analyze viral genome variation from sample collection of 326 patients in shanghai public health center. no significant variation of viral sequences was observed in severe cases of covid-19, therefore ruling out the possibility of mutation of sars-cov2 itself. multiple major laboratory indicators were compared among discharged and dead patients with and without hypertension, there was no significant difference observed in general. there was also no significant difference found in sbp and map among these four groups. the results suggest that it is likely due to the pathophysiological status and target organ damage in patients with hypertension, such as ras system and the laboratory indicator of egfr, rather than the blood pressure itself that makes hypertension as a risk factor of illness development and prognosis.it is now known that the infection of sars-cov2 needs its combination with ace2 and tmprss2 of human alveolar epithelial cells type 2 or other tissues and subsequent replication and multiplication. the amount of virus leads to increased expression of ace2 in neighboring cells, and then affects macrophages with inflammatory cytokines released [12] . consequently, the increased expression and activity of ace2 in tissue could be identified as the critical factor of patients susceptibility and disease progression. the huanggang study, published online, conducted serological tests of ace2 in 20 covid-19 patients and 20 non-covid-19 patients, revealing that the serum level of ace2 increased 12 hours after infection and remained high 48 hours after infection [13] . the expression of ace2 is only mildly expressed in lung tissue of healthy human, however, brazilian researchers recently found that the expression of ace2 in lung tissue was up-regulated in covid-19 patients with underlying diseases [14] , including hypertension, which might provide a reasonable explanation for the increased severity in some covid-19 patients with underlying complications.to our knowledge, this study is a retrospective report mainly focusing on patients with hypertension, which accounts for the highest proportion of covid-19 patients at risk. because early targeted interventions will prevent the disease from further progressing, so that reasonable management strategy of hypertension should be necessary, and might help to improve clinical outcomes in hospitalized covid-19 patients at high risk.our retrospective cohort study has some limitations. firstly, only admission examination for the indicator of egfr was captured in the collected data, and the overall level of aki might therefore be underestimated. secondly, the information of patients prior to admission was not put into the medical history, so it could not be determined whether the patients continued to take or changed the medication during hospitalization. thirdly, there was no national unified standard for the normal reference values of some laboratory indicators, thus we followed the standards set by the hospital. finally, the data entry of underlying diseases was based on the inquiries of patients enrolled in the hospital and might be underestimated due to the influence of awareness rate.the retrospective cohort study revealed that of the 1031 covid-19 inpatients, 50% were combined with chronic comorbidities, and showed cfr 2.8 times as that of patients without any underlying disease. 73% of 165 dead patients were complicated with chronic comorbidities, and the number of patients with hypertension accounted for three fourths of those with concomitant underlying diseases. the odds ratio of occurrence of composite endpoint for covid-19 inpatients with simple hypertension was 1.53 (p=0.019), indicating that the overall risk was higher in the simple hypertension group than the simple diabetes mellitus group. according to the age-grouped research, we found that the hypertension senile group was at the highest risk. it suggests that hypertension management in patients with covid-19 would be a major challenge in the therapeutic strategies, including optimal management of blood pressure and pathophysiological status, so that it might help to improve clinical outcomes in hospitalized covid-19 patients at high risk.hesong zeng, weizhong zhang, and yin shen conceived the study and its design, had full access to the data, and take responsibility for the integrity of the data and accuracy of the analysis. xingwei he, yuxin du, and yan tong organised and entered data. tianlu zhang, yuxin du, and xueli wang contributed to data analyses. hesong zeng, weizhong zhang, yin shen, xingwei he, and tianlu zhang participated in discussion and made crucial suggestions for interpreting the findings. weizhong zhang and tianlu zhang drafted the manuscript. all authors approved the final version of the article.we decalre no competing interests.the study was supported by covid-19 emergency response project of wuhan science and technology department (2020020201010018).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 16, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.14.20125997 doi: medrxiv preprintin december 2019, a cluster of severe cases of pneumonia of an unknown cause emerged in wuhan, china, with clinical presentations greatly resembling viral pneumonia 1 deep sequencing analysis from lower respiratory tract samples indicated a novel coronavirus, which was named coronavirus disease . by mar 16, 2020 hypertension rates range from 13.4% in non-severe patients to 23.4% in severe patients, and the total incidence is as high as 15% 2 . interestingly, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2)is involved in the pathogenesis of both hypertension and covid-19 pneumonia. the above reasons prompted us to speculate that the organs attacked by sars-cov-2 might not only be the lungs, but may also include other ace2 expression organs, especially the cardiovascular system. in addition, patients with comorbid hypertension, especially those with long-term oral acei/arb medication for hypertension, might have different susceptibility and severity levels of pneumonia upon infection with sars-cov-2. therefore, we investigated and compared the demographic characteristics, coexisting diseases, severity of pneumonia, and the effect of antihypertensive drugs (acei/arb versus non-acei/arb) in covid-19 patients with coexisting hypertension. our findings may hopefully reduce the mortality and morbidity associated with hypertension in patients with covid-19.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054825 doi: medrxiv preprintthis single-center, retrospective, observational study was conducted at hankou hospital, which is one of the hospitals designated to treat covid-19 pneumonia patients in wuhan, china. the criteria for suspected and confirmed cases of covid-19 were based on the criteria previously established by the who 3, 4 and patients who met the who criteria were included in our study. patients who were < 18 years, whose entire stay in hospital lasted for < 48 hours were excluded from the analysis. this study was approved by the national health commission of china and the ethics commission of hankou hospital (hkyy2020-005). the ethics commission of hankou hospital waived the requirement for obtaining informed consent.we obtained epidemiological, demographic, clinical, laboratory, management, and outcome data from patients' medical records using standardized data collection forms.clinical outcomes were followed up to march 8, 2020. to analyze the relationship between stage of hypertension and clinical outcome, a minimum follow-up time of 14 days was required, including follow-up of patients who were discharged before march 8, 2020. if data were missing from the records or clarification was needed, the researchers also directly communicated with patients or their families to ascertain epidemiological and symptom data. all data were checked by two physicians (ts and hh). initial investigations included a complete blood count, coagulation profile, and serum biochemical test (including renal and liver function, creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), electrolytes, and 10 common respiratory pathogens). a description of the treatment procedures and measurements has been . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054825 doi: medrxiv preprint 8 published previously 4 .the definition and classification of hypertension were obtained from previously published literature 5 . the definitions of severe and non-severe pneumonia were obtained from published literature 6 .all patients received a chest computed tomography (ct) scan on admission. all ct images were reviewed by two fellowship-trained cardiothoracic radiologists (gx and fw), with approximately 5 years of experience each, using the electronic medical record system of hankou hospital. images were reviewed independently, and final decisions were reached by consensus. in cases of disagreement between the two primary radiologist interpretations, a third fellowship-trained cardiothoracic radiologist with 10 years of experience (hl) adjudicated the final decision. no negative control cases were examined, and no blinding occurred. the radiologists evaluated the initial ct scans and assigned quantitative scores for the characteristics using a recently published scoring system 7 . the total ct score was the sum of lung involvement (5 lobes, score 1-5 for each lobe, range from 0 none to 25 maximum) 8 .the primary variable of interest was 28-day mortality (calculated from the day of admission). secondary outcome variables included the severity of pneumonia, length of hospital stay, discharge rate from hospital, and hospitalization rate.this study was approved by the national health commission of china and the ethics . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054825 doi: medrxiv preprint commission of hankou hospital (hkyy2020-005).the ethics commission of hankou hospital waived the requirement for obtaining informed consent.statistical analysis was performed using spss software for windows, version 20.0 ibm corp., armonk, ny, usa). descriptive analyses were performed for demographic, clinical, and laboratory data. bivariate analyses were used to assess the association of hypertension status and different parameters of interest. continuous data, such as white blood cell count, were converted into categorical variables (normal, low, or high levels). multivariate analysis was not performed due to the small sample size. the odds ratio (or), obtained by logistic regression, was used to measure the strength of the association of each factor with hypertension. a p value <0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. the date symptom onset was used as the starting date. we conducted a death certificate search of medical records to determine whether any patients who were alive on discharge died subsequently and included these data in the analysis when applicable.during the study period, a total of 274 patients were admitted and met the case definition of clinically confirmed covid-19 and the other inclusion criteria. the characteristics of the patients on admission, both overall and according to hypertension status are shown in table 1 . there were 75 patients with hypertension and 199 patients without . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054825 doi: medrxiv preprint hypertension. compared to patients without hypertension, patients with hypertension were significantly older and more likely to have underlying comorbidities, including chronic renal insufficiency, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and cerebrovascular disease. patients with hypertension tended to have a longer time from onset to admission and have higher positive covid-19 pcr detection rates. table 2 shows the results of the laboratory tests performed on admission according to hypertension status. patients with hypertension had higher levels of serum creatinine (scr) and lower levels of hemoglobin and d-dimer in whole blood than patients without hypertension. no differences in clinical outcomes were found between patients with hypertension and without hypertension ( table 3) .we then compared the characteristics and clinical outcomes of patients with covid-19 who had a history of hypertension and those who had previously taken acei/arb drugs and those who had not. more cases of severe pneumonia were seen among patients who had taken acei/arb drugs than the patients who had not, even though those who had taken acei/arb drugs were younger than those who had not (age, p = 0.055; pneumonia severity status on admission, p = 0.064). no significant differences in other indexes were found between the two groups ( table 4 ).our observation shows that patients with hypertension who had previously taken acei/arb drugs for antihypertensive treatment have an increased tendency to develop severe pneumonia after infection with sars-cov-2. hypertensive patients may need to . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054825 doi: medrxiv preprint adjust medications to be eliminate acei/arb drugs to reduce the risk of severe pneumonia.mechanistically, the increase in the zinc metallopeptidase ace2 might help sars-cov-2 enter the cells and accelerate its replication. ace2 is the only known human homologue of the key regulator of blood pressure, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace).since its discovery in 2000, ace2 has been implicated to play an important role in the preservation of heart function, and the balance of blood pressure, with its effects being mediated, in part, through its ability to convert angiotensin ii (ang ii) to angiotensin-(1-7).unexpectedly, ace2 also serves as the cellular entry point for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) virus and the enzyme is therefore a prime target for pharmacological intervention on coronavirus-related diseases 9 . in 2003, ace2 was identified as the receptor for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), which mediates the infection and transmission of sars-cov. this effect does not rely on the protease activity on ace 10 . structural analysis showed that the spinous protein of sars-cov was in contact with the head-end of the ace2 catalytic domain subunit i, did not involve subunit ii, and did not block the active region. once sars-cov is connected to ace2, the extracellular part of ace2 will be lysed, and the transmembrane part will be transferred into the cell, which mediates further fusion of the virus particles and host cells 11 . through next-generation sequencing technology, the entire genome sequence of covid-19 has been successfully determined 12 . compared with the genomic sequences of previous coronaviruses, it is found that sars-cov-2 has 79% similarity with sars-cov 13 .it is worth noting that acei/arb drugs that are administered to hypertensive patients have resulted in an increased expression of ace2 in the lungs. the role of ace2 is opposite . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054825 doi: medrxiv preprint to that of ace. ace2 can hydrolyze angiotensin i (ang i) to produce angiotensin (1-7) peptides, thereby generating vasodilation and lowering blood pressure. acei/arb drugs may increase the protein concentration of ace2 in rat plasma, mrna level of ace2, and even the activity of ace2 in cardiac tissue 14 . thus, it is possible that those hypertensive patients who had been taking acei/arb might have an increased level of mrna and protein expression of ace2 in the lungs, making them more vulnerable for sars-cov-2 entry, as well as for development of severe covid-19 pneumonia. these findings are worth investigating further.however, some scholars believe that the down-regulation of ace2 expression after a neo coronavirus challenge aggravates lung injuries. this opinion mainly comes from animal model studies in multiple laboratories and a small sample clinical study. studies have shown that ace2 expression decreases after viral infection, causing acute lung injury; exogenous supplementation with ace2 could alleviate acute lung injury 15 . human recombinant ace 2 (rhuace2) and angiotensin ii type 2 receptors protect mice from severe acute lung injuries induced by acid aspiration or sepsis 16 . it was found that patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) who were treated with rhuace2 injections had rapidly decreasing levels of ang ii and increasing levels of ang1-7 17 . the down-regulation of ace2 caused the imbalance of ace/ang ii and ace2 and the activity of ang ii in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) was enhanced because of the lack of antagonism 17 . ang ii mediates increased pulmonary vascular permeability by binding to receptor at1, and might also cause pulmonary vascular contraction, resulting in hydrostatic pressure elevation and pulmonary edema 10, 17 . more clinical evidence is required to determine whether the expression of ace2 is down-regulated in humans after a coronavirus (including . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. nevertheless, the results of our study suggest that in the widespread covid-19 pandemic, the hypertensive population may need to quickly consider their choice of antihypertensive medications to reduce the possibility of developing severe pneumonia. our investigation found that covid-19 patients taking acei/arb agents are younger than patients taking non-acei/arb agents; this may be related to their doctor's prescribing habits.however, we cannot directly conclude that covid-19 patients taking acei/arb antihypertensive drugs will have more severe pneumonia than those not taking acei/arb drugs because many confounding factors such as coexisting diseases have not yet been excluded.our survey shows that the population with hypertension does not seem to be more susceptible to covid-19 comparing with the non-hypertension population. previously, a large sample study of 1099 patients showed that hypertension is a coexisting disease in only . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint our research has the following limitations: first, our survey only focused on hankou hospital in wuhan, and the number of patients included was small; larger sample size and multi-center clinical data will be needed to support our conclusions in a future study. second, our investigation included all clinically confirmed cases. many patients were not tested because of the lack of nucleic acid test kits at the beginning of the outbreak. further, there were some patients were suspected to have covid-19 but were excluded from our study because they tested negative in the hospital; however, based on the exact epidemiological history, the patient's signs and symptoms, and chest ct examination results, we trust the reliability of the covid-19 diagnosis in these patients. third, due to the urgent data collection, we had a shorter follow-up time for some patients. the shortest hospital stay for patients is only > 14 days. this may interfere with the final prognosis and lead to the failure to analyze survival times. fourth, we did not analyze the comorbidities such as shock and ards, because our focus is to analyze the risk associated with hypertension to provide evidence for the issue of covid-19 prevention and treatment guidelines.covid-19 patients with coexisting hypertension were significantly older and were more . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054825 doi: medrxiv preprint 15 likely to have underlying comorbidities, including chronic renal insufficiency, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and cerebrovascular disease. patients with hypertension tended to have a longer time from onset to admission and have higher positive covid-19 pcr detection rates. patients with hypertension who had taken acei/arb drugs for antihypertensive treatment have an increased tendency to develop severe pneumonia after infection with sars-cov-2. in future studies, a larger sample size and multi-center clinical data will be needed to support our conclusions.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054825 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.06.20054825 doi: medrxiv preprint 20 bai c, gao t, song j, xia p, dong j, zhao j, wang fs. pathological findings of covid-19 associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome. lancet respir med. 2020.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint onset to admission, days 10 (6-14) 10 (7-15) 9 (5-12) 0.033 it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is thethe copyright holder for this preprint data are presented as n (%), mean (sd), and median (iqr). p values compare hypertension and non-hypertension patients. na = not applicable.covid-19 = 2019 novel coronavirus..it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is thethe copyright holder for this preprint the novel coronavirus pandemic is now a worldwide public health concern [1] and is a progressive public health emergency of global significance [2] . the first case was reported to in wuhan province of china on 31 december, 2019 with unexplained lower respiratory infections [3] . the disease has rapid human to human transmission capacity and varied fatality, due to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), multi-organ failure and other serious complications [4] . these viruses are termed as the severe acute respiratory syndromecoronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) as it is very similar to the one that caused the sars outbreak [3] .they are a large family of single-stranded rna viruses (+ssrna) that can be isolated in different animal species [5] . according to recent estimates, 2% of the population is suggested to be healthy carriers of coronavirus and these viruses are responsible for 5% to 10% of acute respiratory infections [6] . who primarily, the covid-19 patients have fever, myalgia or fatigue, and dry cough at the time of admission [7] . although most patients are thought to have a favorable prognosis, older patients and those with chronic underlying conditions like diabetes, hypertension, coronary heart diseases etc. show worse outcomes [8, 9] . patients with severe illness develop dyspnea and hypoxemia within 1week after onset of the disease, which might quickly progress to ards or end-organ failure [8] . various studies have reported the clinical characteristics of patients with covid-19 who need management in intensive care units. old age and comorbidities, particularly hypertension and diabetes, are believed to be risk factors for disease severity and death in sars-cov-2 infected patients [1, 7, 10] . another study also reported comorbid hypertension being the most common, followed by diabetes and coronary heart disease [11] . several studies have demonstrated higher prevalence of diabetes in covid-19 patients, however, the effect of the prevalence of diabetes on severity of the disease needs further exploration. the understanding of the association might be helpful in early vigilant monitoring and better management of covid-19 patients at high risk leading to ards, organ failure and death. thus, in this meta-analysis we aim to assess the association of diabetes and hypertension with severity of disease.this systematic literature review followed the preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis (prisma) guidelines extension for scoping reviews [12] .we searched pubmed, medline and cochrane until march 31, 2020 using the keywords "covid-19 and diabetes", "2019 novel coronavirus and diabetes", "2019 novel coronavirus and hypertension" and "covid-19 and hypertension". we also searched grey literature using google scholar and reference list of eligible articles.the studies describing the prevalence of diabetes and hypertension according to disease severity were included. we excluded duplicate publications, reviews, editorials, case reports, letters, meta-analysis, protocols, studies in language other than english and studies not reporting the required data. first author (rp) searched data and screened article for eligibility. senior author (na) double checked all the included articles and any dispute was resolved by consensus.two reviewers (rp and ns) assessed the quality of data in the included studies using the national institute of health (nih) quality assessment tools [13] . we preferred the nih tool because it is comprehensive and widely accepted for an exhaustive assessment of data quality.we rated the overall quality of included studies as good, fair and poor, and incorporated them in the meta-analysis results.data were inputted into a standardized data extraction table (excel) and independently checked by a second reviewer (ns) for accuracy. the following variables were extracted: name of the first author, year of publication, study design, age, gender, current smoking, number of patients in severe and non-severe condition with comorbidities hypertension and diabetes. the included studies designated severe group as having respiratory distress, rr ≥ 30 beats/minute in a resting state, a mean oxygen saturation of ≤ 93%, and an arterial blood oxygen partial pressure (pao2)/oxygen concentration (fio2) ≤ 300 mmhg [14] .we performed an exploratory meta-analysis to understand the magnitude and direction of effect estimate. odds ratios (ors) were calculated and presented with respective 95% confidence intervals (cis). mantel-haenszel random-effects meta-analysis using dersimonian and laird method was used to pool ors [15] . heterogeneity between studies was assessed using the χ 2based cochran's q statistic (p<0.1 considered as the presence of heterogeneity) and i-squared (i 2 ) statistics (>50% representing moderate heterogeneity) [15] . forest plot was produced and studies were grouped according to their design. publication bias was not assessed as a total number of studies were less than ten [15] .the systematic search yielded a total of 105 publications. out of 105 studies 40 studies were found using the keyword" covid-19 and diabetes", 16 studies with keyword "2019 novel coronavirus and diabetes", 33 studies with the term "covid-19 and hypertension", and 14 studies with keyword "2019 novel coronavirus and hypertension". two studies were found from other sources. after removing duplicates, 53 articles were found to be potential publications for screening. after the application of predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria, a total of seven studies were included for the meta-analysis.all the included studies were conducted in china. the prevalence of diabetes and hypertension were reported in survivors and non-survivors in two studies, icu care and non-icu care patients in two studies, while the prevalence of diabetes and hypertension in severe and non-severe patients was reported in three studies. among the seven included studies, three were cohort studies [11, 14, 16] , while four were case-series [1, 7, 10, 17] . the studies enrolled a total of 2018 patients, including 1175 males and 840 females. the demographic characteristics of the subjects included in these studies are provided in table 1 . we assessed the quality of data in the included studies using the nih quality assessment tools.the quality assessment indicated that most included studies were of acceptable quality. all the papers clearly stated the research question or objective, the study population was clearly specified and defined and all the subjects were selected from the same or similar populations.the detailed result of the quality assessment is provided in supplementary file. 0.0%) (figure 2c ). recent evidence on sars-cov-2 suggest that the presence of comorbidities increase mortality risk in covid-19 patients. diabetes is one the most important components to predict adverse outcomes [18] . thus, the present meta-analysis was conducted to assess the association of diabetes with disease severity in covid-19 patients. the present meta-analysis was based on data from 7 studies on covid-19 patients. the present meta-analysis demonstrated that the prevalence of diabetes is lower in survivors than in non-survivors of covid-19 patients.however, there was no difference in diabetes prevalence in patients requiring or not requiring icu care. additionally, a positive association between diabetes and disease severity was found.several studies have demonstrated higher prevalence of diabetes in covid-19 patients, however, the effect of the prevalence of diabetes on severity of the disease needs further exploration. a recent meta-analysis on the comorbidities suggested diabetes as one of the most prevalent comorbidities (8±6, 95% ci 6-11%), in covid-19 patients. however, no significant difference was found in diabetes between severe and non-severe group [19] . another similar meta-analysis demonstrated the pooled prevalence of diabetes to be 7.87% (95%ci 6.57%-9.28%) [20] . a meta-analysis reported the proportions of diabetes in patients with covid-19 to be 9.7%. the incidences of diabetes were about two folds higher in icu/severe cases than in their non-icu/severe counterparts [18] . a retrospective study showed that 85.54% of severe patients had diabetes or cardiovascular diseases, which was significantly higher than that of the mild group [21] . a case-series reported 58% covid-19 patients to have comorbid diabetes mellitus [22] .although the pathophysiology involved in this comorbidity remains unexplained, several hypotheses have been suggested. blood glucose level is suggested to play an essential role in the pathogenesis of infectious diseases. the immune system of diabetes patients might be altered by the abnormal blood glucose level, resulting in dysregulation and reduced responses of immune components. consequently, these patients are susceptible to sars-cov-2 and various other types of bacteria [21] . another hypothesis states that, human pathogenic coronaviruses, sars-cov and sarscov-2 bind to their target cells through angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which is expressed by epithelial cells of the lung, intestine, kidney, and blood vessels.the expression of ace2 is significantly increased in diabetes patients, being treated with ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii type-i receptor blockers. use of thiazolidinediones and ibuprofen can also be increased ace2. consequently, the increased expression of ace2 would facilitate infection with covid-19 [23] .the present meta-analysis showed that hypertension is lower in survivors than in non-survivors of covid-19 patients. additionally, a positive association of hypertension with disease severity and icu care was found. a recent meta-analysis demonstrated hypertension to be the most prevalent comorbidity (17±7, 95% ci 14-22%) in covid-19 patients. additionally, higher risk with hypertension was found in the severe group compared to those in non-severe group, (or 2.36, 95% ci: 1.46-3.83) [19] . according to another meta-analysis, the pooled prevalence of hypertension in people infected with sars-cov-2 were estimated as 16.37% (95%ci: 10.15%-23.65%) [20] . a meta-analysis reported the proportions of hypertension in patients with covid-19 to be 17.1%. the incidence of hypertension were about two folds higher in icu/severe cases than in their non-icu/severe counterparts [18] . in understanding of the disease to establish risk stratification of the patients.all authors contributed significantly to this manuscript.funding: this research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.n, number at the end of 2019, a series of unexplained pneumonia cases appeared and showed a tendency for transmission from person to person. soon, scientists isolated the causative pathogen, a new type of β coronavirus [1] , which was subsequently named by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [2] . the disease was named coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) by the world health organization [3] . as of april 19, 2020 , the cumulative number of confirmed cases worldwide was 2,242,395, and the cumulative death toll was 152,551 [4] .angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is considered to be the receptor for sars-cov-2 to enter human cells [5] . ace2 is widely expressed in various organ systems of the human body, including the respiratory system and the cardiovascular system [6] . the enzyme can catalyze the conversion of angiotensin ii (ang ii) to angiotensin 1-7, which is a peptide that counteracts the proinflammatory, prooxidation, and vasoconstrictive effects of ang ii. studies have shown that hypertension may be one of the most common comorbid diseases in patients with covid-19 [7] . a study involving 1099 covid-19 patients had a prevalence of hypertension of 23.4% in severe patients [8] . because of the interaction between sars-cov-2 and ace2 and the role of ace2 in the pathogenesis of hypertension, there are many speculations that hypertension may be involved in the pathogenesis of covid-19. however, some early reports have not revealed whether there is a relationship between hypertension and disease severity. therefore, it remains unclear whether high blood pressure is a risk factor for covid-19 or whether blood pressure control in hypertensive patients with covid-19 is a lowrisk factor.to understand whether hypertension is a risk factor affecting the progress and prognosis of covid-19, this study included 310 cases of covid-19 patients admitted to wuhan jinyintan hospital and the central hospital of wuhan after the outbreak in 2020. their demographic data, clinical manifestations, laboratory indicators, and treatment methods were collected and analyzed.in this study, we collected the clinical data of 310 patients diagnosed with covid-19 at wuhan jinyintan hospital and the central hospital of wuhan after the outbreak in 2020. according to the world health organization's temporary guidelines, all the patients enrolled in this study were diagnosed with covid-19. in the first part of the study, all patients were divided into two groups according to whether they had high blood pressure. to avoid the effects of other complications, the second part of the study excluded patients with complications other than hypertension and then divided the remaining patients into a hypertension group and a nonhypertension group. we monitored all patients in our study and recorded the entire course of the disease and the final clinical outcome of each person.the demographic data, epidemiological characteristics, clinical features, severity of the disease, laboratory tests and treatment results of the patients were obtained from the medical record system and recorded. the date of onset was defined as the date of the first onset of symptoms.all patients with covid-19 met the following criteria: (1) epidemic history, (2) fever or other respiratory symptoms, (3) abnormal ct imaging of typical viral pneumonia, and (4) positive sars-cov-2 rna by rt-pcr. according to their medical history, the patients were divided into a hypertension group and a nonhypertension group.the clinical classification of patients was based mainly on the novel coronavirus pneumonia diagnosis and treatment plan (trial version 7) developed by the national health committee of the people's republic of china [9] . classifications could be summarized as follows: (1) mild type: only mild clinical symptoms with no sign of pneumonia in imaging features; (2) common type: complicated with fever, respiratory symptoms and imaging features of pneumonia;(3) severe type: complicated with any of the following: (a) respiratory distress, respiratory rate ≥ 30 beats/min; (b) mean oxygen saturation ≤ 93% at rest; or (c) ratio of the partial pressure of arterial oxygen to the fraction of inspired oxygen (pao 2 :fio 2 ) ≤ 300 mmhg (1 mmhg = 0.133 kpa); and (4) critical type: complicated with any of the following: (a) respiratory failure and mechanical ventilation required; (b) shock; or (c) organ dysfunction and intensive care unit admission required. in our research, we combined both the severe type and critical type patients into the severe group.using spss25.0 software (ibm, inc., chicago, il, usa), the categorical variables are expressed as frequencies (percentages), and the continuous variables are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation or the median of the quartile interval whenever appropriate. student's t test or mann-whitney u test was used for continuous variables, and chi-square test or fisher exact test was used for categorical variables. a multivariable logistic regression model (adjusted for age and sex) was used in a multivariate analysis. a p value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.of the 310 patients with covid-19, the median age was 62 years (interquartile range, 49-70). the number of women was 136 (43.9%), and the number of men was 174 (56.1%). the most common symptom of all patients was fever, which was observed in 81.9% of the patients. the frequencies of other symptoms were cough (63.2%), dyspnea (52.3%), expectoration (19.4%), muscle ache (7.7%), and diarrhea (12.9%), whereas headache occurred in 3 cases (1.0%). the most common complications were hypertension (36.5%) and diabetes (15.5%), followed by cerebrovascular diseases (6.8%) and cardiovascular diseases (6.1%). the number of deaths in the hospital was 58 (18.7%). a total of 155 patients (50%) were in the severe group (including severe type and critically ill type, according to our definition to better explore the impact of hypertension on the progression and prognosis of covid-19 and avoid the confounding effects of other complications, in the following analysis, we excluded patients with complications other than hypertension, and the results are shown in tables 3 and  4 . compared with nonhypertensive patients, hypertensive patients were older (66 iqr, [56-71] vs 54 iqr, [38-67]), had a higher proportion of severe cases (64.6% vs 38.1%), and had a higher proportion of icu admission (21.5% vs 11.3%). however, in terms of mortality and the length of hospital stay, there were no significant differences between the two groups of patients.in addition, with regard to laboratory indexes, the white blood cell count (7. in a multivariate analysis (table 5) , we separately used the severity or mortality of covid-19 as dependent variables and age, sex, and hypertension as candidate independent variables to establish a multivariable logistic in our study, the median age of covid-19 patients was 62 years, and the prevalence rate of hypertension was 36.5%. a national survey conducted in china from october 2012 to december 2015 showed that the total prevalence of hypertension in china's adult population (≥18 years old) is 23.2% [10] . in addition, a previous multicenter study showed that 30% of covid-19 patients with a median age of 56 had previously coexisting hypertension; [2] another large sample of 1099 covid-19 cases (with a median age of 47) had a prevalence of hypertension of 15% [8] . the higher prevalence of hypertension in our study may be explained by a higher median age. in general, there is not sufficient evidence to show that people with high blood pressure are more likely to be infected with covid-19 than those without hypertension.our study revealed that hypertensive covid-19 patients tend to show higher mortality. previous clinical studies on sars and middle east respiratory syndrome showed that hypertension is a risk factor for increased mortality in infected patients [11, 12] . the specific pathogenesis of hypertension that may lead to more severe covid-19 remains to be studied. the imbalance of cytokines may be considered an explanation for the correlation between hypertension and severe covid-19. increasing clinical data have shown a relationship between the deterioration of covid-19 and cytokine storms [7] , such as elevated levels of il-6, interleukin-7, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and tumor necrosis factor α. it is worth noting that previous clinical studies have found that the increase in these cytokines is also associated with the development of hypertension [13] . a notable example is that il-6 has been observed to be closely related to the poor prognosis of patients with covid-19 [14] , which is also one of the important cytokines regulating immune-inflammatory responses in hypertension. in addition, in hypertensive patients with covid-19, due to the imbalance in the renin-angiotensin system (ras), the nadh/nadph oxidase system may be activated by excessive inflammatory reactions or a large number of cytokines [15] , resulting in cell damage and vasoconstriction [16] , aggravating lung damage in covid-19 and leading to a poor prognosis. the pathophysiology and inflammatory disorders of hypertension may partly explain poor prognoses for covid-19. in addition, the effect of antihypertensive drugs on covid-19 in patients with hypertension is controversial. on the one hand, the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) can result in a decrease in angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) and an increase in the expression of ace2 in the lungs [17] . more ace2 may mediate the invasion and infection of sars-cov-2 into lung cells, resulting in viral spread and aggravation of symptoms; on the other hand, as a negative regulator of the ras system, ace2 can catalyze the hydrolysis of ang ii to ang1-7, and ang1-7 binds to the mas receptor and plays an important role in antialveolar epithelial apoptosis, lowering blood pressure and protecting wbc white blood cell count, nc neutrophil count, lc lymphocyte count, nlr neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, sao2 oxyhemoglobin saturation, tb total bilirubin, alt alanine aminotransferase, ast aspartate aminotransferase, ldh lactate dehydrogenase, esr erythrocyte sedimentation rate, crp c-reactive protein, il-6 interleukin-6, bnp b-type natriuretic peptide, fib fibrinogen, pt prothrombin time, aptt activated partial thromboplastin time the endothelium [18] . by reducing the effect of ang ii and increasing the production of ang1-7, ace2 can induce vasodilation and an antiinflammatory response [19] , which helps to reduce the degree of lung injury and prevent the emergence of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and acute lung injury. a study from china involving 1128 hypertensive covid-19 patients showed that hypertensive patients who used aceis or angiotension receptor blocker (arbs) in hospitals had a lower risk of all-cause death than those who did not use aceis/arbs [20] . in addition, an article from the covid-19 working group of the european society of hypertension pointed out that there is no evidence to support that ras inhibitors are harmful to covid-19 patients, so there is no reason for hypertensive patients with stable conditions to stop using ras inhibitors [21] .our multivariate analysis showed that after adjusting for age and sex, hypertension did not show a significant correlation with increased covid-19 disease severity or mortality, which was contrary to the results of a previous large-sample study [20] . we speculate that the possible reasons are that the sample size of our data is small, the number of end events is small, and the test efficiency is insufficient; at the same time, the regression models used by both studies are different, and the adjusted variables are also different. at present, there is a lack of research on hypertensive covid-19 patients, especially those adjusted for age and sex, and our study can be regarded as a reference.overall, our comparative analysis of covid-19 patients with and without hypertension showed that hypertensive patients had greater disease severity and adverse progression than nonhypertensive patients. however, this result may be related to the higher age in this group than in nonhypertension group. in addition, there were more severe symptoms; greater likelihood of other complications, such as diabetes; more likelihood of transfer to the icu; and worse laboratory indicators. covid-19 patients with hypertension need additional attention to prevent adverse outcomes.our study has the following limitations. first, the number of patients included in our survey is not enough, and the effectiveness of the testing may not be sufficient; in future studies, we need a larger sample size of clinical data to support our conclusions. second, we did not analyze complications such as acute renal injury and ards because we focused on analyzing the risks associated with hypertension; in addition, due to the retrospective nature of this wbc white blood cell count, nc neutrophil count, lc lymphocyte count, nlr neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, sao2 oxyhemoglobin saturation, tb total bilirubin, alt alanine aminotransferase, ast aspartate aminotransferase, ldh lactate dehydrogenase, esr erythrocyte sedimentation rate, crp c-reactive protein, il-6 interleukin-6, bnp b-type natriuretic peptide, fib fibrinogen, pt prothrombin time, aptt activated partial thromboplastin time study, as well as the urgency of time and difficulties in collection, there was a lack of the use of antihypertensive drugs in patients. third, because the diagnosis of hypertension was extracted from medical history data, there may be a very small number of patients with hypertension, which may not have been accurately recorded. however, these limitations will not affect the reliability of our overall results.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), a newly emerging acute respiratory disease, is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and mainly transmitted via respiratory droplets [1] . compared with sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 is well capable of sustained community transmission, with each case estimated to infect another 2−3 uninfected persons on average [2] . as of 3 april 2020, approximate one million covid-19 cases and 40 000 deaths have been reported in more than 200 countries/regions around the world [3] . therefore, it is urgently needed to identify the risk factors associated with the severity and fatality of sars-cov-2 infection.recently, several clinical studies have noticed that hypertension was one of the most common comorbidities in patients with sars-cov-2 infection [4] [5] [6] . for example, in one cohort of 191 patients from wuhan, china, zhou et al. reported that about half of the patients had different comorbidities, with hypertension being the most common (30%) [7] . in a cohort of 138 hospitalised patients with covid-19, wang et al. observed that hypertension (31.2%), diabetes (10.1%), cardiovascular disease (14.5%) and malignancy (17.2%) were the most common coexisting medical conditions [8] . in addition, an analysis of an outpatient and inpatient cohort of 1099 patients with covid-19 showed that 15% of the patients had a history of hypertension [9] . however, published articles with different study designs and populations usually yield different estimates and effect sizes. therefore, a comprehensive and systematic analysis is necessary because of this variability.as one of the most important public health problems in the 21st century, hypertension affects more than one billion individuals worldwide [10] . however, the influence of hypertension on sars-cov-2 infection remains unclear. therefore, we conducted the present meta-analysis to evaluate the associations of hypertension with the severity and fatality of sars-cov-2 infection. this assessment might be helpful to further understand the characteristics of sars-cov-2 infection in hypertensive patients.this meta-analysis was conducted in accordance with the 'preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma)' statement [11] . articles published up to 20 march 2020 in pubmed, elsevier science direct, web of science, wiley online library and cnki were considered for this review. we searched the medical subject heading (mesh) terms of '2019-ncov', 'ncip', 'covid-19' or 'sars-cov-2' and 'hypertension'. additionally, we performed manual searches on the references of selected articles to avoid omission.to be included in this meta-analysis, the study had to: (1) covid-19 cases: diagnosed according to the 'new coronavirus infected pneumonia diagnosis and treatment program (5th version)' [12] . all of the included covid-19 cases should be laboratory confirmed hospitalised patients on the basis of positive qrt-pcr results for sars-cov-2 in swab samples; (2) (4) study population: at least included 10 cases. case reports, reviews, meta-analysis articles, letters, comments, editorials, expert opinions, studies without adequate information, and the articles published in languages other than english and chinese were excluded. the detail retrieval process was shown in figure 1 .the types of covid-19 severity was determined according to the 'new coronavirus infected pneumonia diagnosis and treatment program (5th version)' [12] . briefly, the criteria for disease severity determination were as follows: (1) mild cases: the clinical symptoms were mild, and there was no sign of pneumonia on imaging; (2) moderate cases: only showing fever and respiratory symptoms with radiological findings of pneumonia; (3) severe cases (for adults): ①respiratory distress ⩾30 breaths/min; ② oxygen saturation ⩽93% at rest; ③ arterial partial pressure of oxygen (pao 2 )/fraction of inspired oxygen in this study, hypertension was defined as systolic blood pressure greater than 140 mmhg or diastolic blood pressure greater than 90 mmhg, or use of antihypertensive medications, or a selfreported history of hypertension [13] .titles, abstracts and full texts were screened independently by two reviewers in the first step (jingqi zhang and jing wu). discrepancies in data interpretation were resolved by discussion with a third author (chen dong) when necessary. data extracted from the selected studies included the first author's name, publication date, average age, type of study design and severity of covid-19 in hypertensive and non-hypertensive patients. all reviewers performed a quality control check between the final data used in the meta-analysis and the original publications to prevent extraction errors.the quality of each included article was assessed using the newcastle-ottawa scale (nos) based on the following dimensions [14] : covid-19 cases selection, comparability and outcomes of disease severity or fatality. the cases selection contained four items: (1) the representativeness of the cases; (2) the appropriate determination of severe cases; (3) the appropriate determination of non-severe cases; (4) the appropriate determination of hypertension. comparability contained one item: which was to consider the comparability between patients with and without hypertension when designing and statistical analysis. the lowest quality of the literature was 0 and the highest quality was 9 stars. assessment scores of 0-3 points, 4-6 points and 7-9 points were considered as poor, fair and good studies, respectively. simultaneously, the quality of each included study was further evaluated using strengthening the reporting of observational studies in epidemiology (strobe) (2007 version) checklist in this study.in this study, the mild/moderate and severe/critical covid-19 cases were classified into non-severe and severe groups, respectively. forest plots were used to illustrate the severity and fatality of sars-cov-2 infection in hypertensive and non-hypertensive patients, which were described by pooled odds ratio (pooled or, 95% confidence intervals (ci)). the magnitude of heterogeneity between-study was tested using i 2 statistics. i 2 values of 25%, 50% and 75% represented low, moderate and high degrees of heterogeneity, respectively. if there was no evidence of between-studies heterogeneity (i 2 ⩽ 50%), a fixed-effects model was used to calculate the combined or. otherwise, a random-effects model was selected [15] . sensitivity analysis was performed by excluding studies successively. furthermore, subgroup analysis was performed according to age (<50 or ⩾50 years). in this study, the possibility of publication bias was evaluated by using the visual inspection of a funnel plot and egger's test. a p value of egger's test <0.10 was considered as an indication of potential publication bias. all analysis was performed using the package of 'meta' in r software (version 3.6.3), and significance was defined as p < 0.05 with the use of a two-sided test unless otherwise specified.a total of 929 articles were obtained by the electronic and manual search. of these, duplicated articles were excluded at the first stage (n = 314). then, 175 studies were removed after screening titles and abstracts. in addition, 17 studies were excluded after thoroughly reviewing the full texts due to the following reasons: studies without available data (n = 6), patients were not classified into severe (severe/critical) and non-severe (mild/moderate) groups (n = 6), and case reports or other study design (n = 5). finally, 18 studies recorded with 4505 patients were included in this analysis. figure 1 summarised the flow diagram of the studies selection.as the results shown in table s1 , all included patients were from china, including hubei [7, 8, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] , jiangxi [24] , beijing [25] , henan [26] , chongqing [27, 28] , anhui [29] and china cdc [5, 9] . among of them, 12 studies analysed the severity of covid-19 in hypertensive patients [8, 9, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] . significant associations between hypertension and covid-19 severity were reported in five studies [8, 9, 18, 19, 24] . additionally, among studies analysed the fatality of sars-cov-2 infection in hypertensive patients [5, 7, [21] [22] [23] 29] , three studies reported that hypertensive patients carried higher risk of covid-19 fatality [5, 7, 22] .all included studies were retrospective studies. as the results shown in table s1 , the methodological qualities of the included studies were similar. nine studies had a moderate risk of participant comparability and confounding variables [8, 9, 16-19, 22, 23, 25] . six, seven and five studies had 6, 7 and 8 points of assessment score in this analysis, respectively. in addition, no significant difference was observed between the results obtained from nos and strobe analysis (table s2) .twelve studies with 2389 covid-19 patients (674 severe cases) were included for the disease severity analysis. as shown in table 1 and figure 2a , the severity rate of sars-cov-2 infection in hypertensive patients was much higher than in nonhypertensive cases (37.58% vs 19.73%, pooled or: 2.27, 95% ci: 1.80-2.86). there was no considerable heterogeneity observed between study (i 2 = 8%, p-heterogeneity = 0.36). when the individual study was excluded from the analysis one-at-a-time, the pooled ors ranged from 2.11 (95% ci: 1.66-2.69) when the study by wang dw et al. [8] was excluded to 2.53 (95% ci: 1.94-3.31) when the study by cheng kb et al. [18] was excluded (fig. 2b) . there was neither evidence of publication bias with egger's test (p = 0.13), nor asymmetry indicated by the funnel plot (fig. s1a) .as severity of illness was significantly correlated to age in covid-19 cases, we performed a subgroup analysis to evaluate the effects of hypertension on the covid-19 severity in different age groups. as the results shown, the pooled ors of covid-19 severity for hypertensive patients vs. non-hypertensive cases was 2.21 (95% ci: 1.58-3.10) and 2.32 (95% ci: 1.70-3.17) in age <50 years and ⩾50 years patients, respectively (fig. 3) . no considerable heterogeneity was detected between studies within each group.six studies with 151 deaths among 2116 covid-19 patients were included in this meta-analysis. as shown in table 2 and figure 4a , the fatality rate of sars-cov-2 infection in hypertensive patients was 17.72%, which was much higher than in non-hypertensive cases (4.22%). pooled analysis showed that hypertensive patients carried a nearly 3.48-fold higher risk of dying from covid-19 (95% ci: 1.72-7.08), with a moderate heterogeneity betweenstudy (i 2 = 56%, p-heterogeneity = 0.04). sensitivity analysis showed that the exclusion of any single study one-at-a-time did not alter the direction or statistical difference (fig. 4b) .similarly, egger's test did not suggest the existence of potential publication bias (p = 0.67) (fig. s1b) .similarly, stratified analysis results further suggested the pooled ors of covid-19 mortality for hypertensive patients vs. non-hypertensive cases were 6.43 (95% ci: 3.40-12.17) and 2.66 (95% ci: 1.27-5.57) in age <50 years and ⩾50 years patients, respectively (fig. 5) . no significant heterogeneity was presented between studies within each subgroup.in this study, we reported that the overall rates of severity and fatality were 28.21% and 7.14% in the covid-19 patients from the included literatures, respectively. moreover, hypertensive patients with sars-cov-2 infection were shown to have 2.27-and 3.48-fold higher risks of severity and fatality compared to the covid-19 cases without hypertension, respectively. sensitivity analysis with exclusion of studies one by one did not change the results materially, suggesting that each included study might not have a particularly strong influence on the results. indeed, the chronic conditions influencing the severity of sars-cov-2 such as hypertension, diabetes and obesity have also been addressed in other respiratory illnesses such as mers, influenza and etc. for example, alqahtani et al. reported that hypertension and diabetes mellitus were prevalent in about 50% of cases of mers. moreover, hypertension showed significant association with fatality from mers-cov infection (or: 3.7, 95% ci: 2.02-6.9) [30] . in addition, compared to subjects without hypertension, severe pandemic influenza occurred significantly more often in those who had hypertension (or: 1.49, 95% ci: 1.10-2.01) [31] . currently, the exact mechanism of hypertension involvement in severe covid-19 remains unclear. one potential explanation is the direct injury mediated via angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). similar to sars-cov, a chinese study recently indicated that sars-cov-2 infection was caused by binding of the viral surface spike protein to ace2 receptor following activation of the spike protein [32] . ace2 is a monocarboxy peptidase best known for cleaving several peptides within the renin− angiotensin system [33] . since its discovery in 2000, ace2 has been considered as a protective factor against increases in blood pressure. therefore, it is rational to hypothesise that the binding of sars-cov-2 to ace2 can reduce the physiological function of ace2, and then lead to acute adverse outcomes of hypertension such as multi-organ dysfunction [34] . besides, severale studies have indicated that ace2 played a critical role in acute lung disease, especially acute respiratory distress syndrome [35] [36] [37] .in addition to the heart and lung, ace2 could be expressed in the intestinal epithelium, vascular endothelium, brain, liver and kidneys [38] , providing a potential mechanism for the severity symptoms and multi-organ dysfunction that can be seen with severe sars-cov-2 infection. the epidemiological data of sars-cov-2 infection suggested that severe covid-19 cases were more likely to be older patients with underlying comorbidities (such as diabetes mellitus and hypertension) [5, 7, 9] , indicating that age was an important risk factor of severity and fatality of covid-19. for example, the china cdc recently reported that patients aged ⩾80 years had the highest case fatality rate, 14.8%, among different age groups [39] . herein, we observed that hypertension was significantly associated with the severity and fatality in sars-cov-2 infection in both age <50 years and ⩾50 years groups, suggesting that hypertension could independently increase the risk of disease severity and predict poor outcomes of sars-cov-2 infection. although our present results implied that patients aged <50 years had more fatalities of covid-19 compared to those patients ⩾50 years, we could not conclude that younger patients are more likely to die of hypertension than older patients because of the paucity of related data. indeed, further subgroup analysis did not show a significant difference in covid-19 fatality between patients with and without hypertension in the group consisted of studies with small sample size (references 21, 23 and 29) (pooled or: 2.82, 95% ci: 0.20-39.15) ( fig s3) . however, these results should be carefully interpreted because of the wide confidence interval. therefore, more studies are needed to characterize the impacts of hypertension on the covid-19 severity and fatality in future.our study has several limitations. firstly, publication bias is inevitable in any meta-analysis, and some relevant articles might be missed as we only included english-and chinesewritten studies. secondly, we could not address the potential impact of anti-hypertension medicines although most hypertensive cases might be treated. thus, it would underestimate the true difference in severity and fatality of sars-cov-2 infection between patients with and without hypertension. thirdly, the estimate found in this study was derived from hospitalised cases. this might introduce a bias in disease severity and fatality. in addition, the overlap of cases could not be completely avoided because the patients in references 5 and 9 were collected from the china cdc, which did not provide the exact hospital information. for this reason, the pooled estimate would never represent the actual pooled outcome data. however, remove references 5 and 9 from our analysis, which had the largest sample size, did not alter the direction or statistical difference of the present results. fourthly, the sample size included in this meta-analysis was relatively small, thus it would introduce bias in the results. last, due to most of the included studies were retrospective studies, there may be a bias regarding collecting medical information in a retrospective manner. therefore, caution should be considered to interpret findings.in summary, the current results provided further evidence that hypertension could significantly increase the risks of severity and fatality of sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, it is necessary to establish awareness programmes, implement effective preventive policies to improve the outcomes of sars-cov-2 infection in persons with hypertension, which should be helpful for the reduction in the global burden of the disease. conflicts of interest. the authors declare that they have no competing interests. jingqi zhang et al.pulmonary hypertension is a chronic disease developing progressively with high mortality. pulmonary hypertension patients need persistent medical care; however, limited reports focused on them when there was an outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 in china. this national survey was aimed to evaluate the overall condition of pulmonary hypertension patients during this period. a questionnaire regarding the living condition of pulmonary hypertension patients during coronavirus disease 2019 was designed by pulmonary hypertension diagnostic experts in wuhan asia heart hospital. pulmonary hypertension patients and their family members were invited to participate in this survey online. one-hundred twenty pulmonary hypertension patients and 23 family members participated in the survey; 64.8% (n = 87) participants came from hubei, and others were from 15 other provinces; 98.6% (n = 141) participants were in home quarantine; 65.8% (n = 79) were pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with congenital heart disease; and 76.7% (n = 92) patients proclaimed their heart function was well maintained at class i or ii. one (0.8%) patient was confirmed severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection. two (1.7%) patients were hospitalized due to heart function worsening. nearly 70% (n = 100) participants implied shortage in medications during coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak. a total of 24.2% (n = 29) patients indicated that medications were discontinued due to the insufficient supply. most of the participants stayed optimistic on either coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak or their pulmonary hypertension disease, and 61.7% (n = 74) patients would go to the hospital for follow-up immediately after outbreak. these preliminary data show pulmonary hypertension patients are able to avoid severe disease when they are in home quarantine. medication supplement is important for pulmonary hypertension patients when their heart function is well maintained. in addition, there might be increasing requirements of medical care for pulmonary hypertension patients after the outbreak.understanding the current status of patients with pulmonary hypertension during covid-19 outbreak: a small-scale national survey from chinapulmonary hypertension (ph) is a chronic and progressive lung disease caused by multiple differing etiologies. increasing pulmonary vascular resistance led to overloading of the right ventricle and eventually death. 1 ph is characterized by a mean pulmonary artery pressure (mpap) ! 25 mmhg at rest. in addition to the treatment of relieving symptoms, targeted therapy aiming to improve heart function extended three-year survival of pulmonary arterial hypertension (pah) from 39% to 75%. 2, 3 coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was first reported in wuhan, china, in last december. 4 studies observed severe damage in the lung, which raised the hypothesis that ph patients might be more vulnerable than others. 5 subsequently, the whole country was placed in lockdown to prevent the spread of the disease, which potentially could compromise ph patient care. all these factors made ph patients a potentially vulnerable group. hereby, we designed a questionnaire for ph patients to understand their disease condition, mental condition, medication supplement, and requirements in medical care during covid-19 outbreak. the survey would provide general information for future medical care and support to ph patients in such conditions.the study was conducted by experts from congenital heart disease center at wuhan asia heart hospital in wuhan in collaboration with other ph centers and unofficial patients groups. patients diagnosed with ph and their families were considered for the survey. ph was defined as mpap ! 25 mmhg at rest. all diagnosis was made according to right heart catheter examination.a small-scale national online survey was performed. ph patients and one of their family members were invited to participate in the survey via quick response (qr) code. all answers were listed in non-medical descriptions and reviewed by unprofessional individuals for better understanding. no personal information was included. the study protocol and questionnaire were reviewed and approved by the ethics committee of wuhan asia heart hospital (2020-s-002). participants were given informed consent during the survey.the questionnaire was designed by experts on ph in wuhan asia heart hospital, wuhan, china. to understand the status of ph patients during covid-19 outbreak in china, the questions were designed to cover the following issues: (1) basic clinical information of the patients, including age, gender, medical history of ph, and current heart function; (2) physical and mental conditions associated with covid-19; and (3) details of the medications they were using and requirements for medical care if any. questions were designed in single choice and multiple choices. ''yes'' or ''no'' were offered for most questions, and answers other than choices were required to fill. the questionnaire is still open for recruitment (questionnaire in supplement). here, we present the preliminary data from the first respondents.baseline characteristics are presented as number for categorical data, and mean ae standard deviation or median with interquartile range as appropriate for continuous data. percentage is applied for illustrating constitution. comparison was made between variables using student's t-test or wilcoxon signed-rank test for continuous variables regarding their distributions and with the v 2 test for categorical variables. a p-value of < 0.05 was considered as statistically significant. all statistical analyses were performed with spss 23.0 (ibm corp, armonk, ny).over 300 individuals were invited to participate in this survey. a total of 120 ph patients and 23 family members from 16 provinces responded from 1 march 2020 to 11 march 2020. all questionnaires were included in final analysis. a total of 64.8% (n ¼ 87) participants were from hubei, among which 29.9% (n ¼ 26) were from wuhan; 13.3% (n ¼ 19) were from henan, 7.0% (n ¼ 10) from anhui, and 18.9% (n ¼ 27) came from other 13 provinces (as shown in fig. 1 ). both patients and their family members completed the survey in 13 families; however, we failed to identify them due to the design. table 1 shows general information of the participants. overall participants were aged 32.3 ae 11.5 years. a total of 61 patients suffered ph more than seven years. three family participants did not know ph history of their relatives. possibly due to the different etiology, 6 chd-pah contributed most in ph groups (79, 65.8% in patients; 13, 56.5% in family participants; p < 0.001).a total of 98.6% (n ¼ 141) participants were in home quarantine during covid-19 outbreak. table 1 shows the majority of participants (121, 84.6%) felt not much change on disease progress. surprisingly, most patients were with less severe symptoms as 46.9% (n ¼ 67) participants proclaimed new york heart association heart functional class i and 44 (30.8%) were class ii. a total of 83.3% (n ¼ 100) patients and 91.3% (n ¼ 21) family participants reported the disease progression was the same as before. fatigue and less active was more reported in patients (20% vs 0, p ¼ 0.026); however, cough was common in both patients and family participants (5.8% vs 13.0%, p ¼ 0.203) (as shown in fig. 2 ). symptoms in ''others'' included not sleeping well, chest pain, aching pain in limbs, and catching a cold but recovered. there were three (2.5%) patients hospitalized during covid-19 outbreak, two of them were because of heart failure and one was due to pneumonia. none of the family participants reported death of patients. actually, three patients passed away by 11 march 2020. one of the patients died due to an unexpected fall and unable to go to hospital during outbreak. two died from worsening of pah. all deaths were reported by family privately, and not included in the survey.fever is an important symptom indicating covid-19. in our survey, 5.0% (n ¼ 6) patients had fever with highest temperature of 39.8 c. one patient was confirmed sars-cov-2 infection, and two patients reported covid-19 related symptoms (cough) in their families. all family participants denied covid-19 related symptoms in either themselves or patients.bosentan, ambrisentan, tadalafil, and sildenafil were most commonly used medications for target therapy (as shown in fig. 3 ). specifically, ambrisentan was preferred in 57.5% (n ¼ 69) patients and 60.9% (n ¼ 14) family participants. a total of 21.6% (n ¼ 26) patients and 26.1% (n ¼ 6) family participants chose chinese generic ambrisentan because of the lower price in chinese generic medication. there were 17 patients enrolling in clinical trial and using macitentan for free. patients were more sensitive to the shortage of medications than family participants (62, 51.7% vs 4, 17.4%, p ¼ 0.003). there were 26.6% participants (29 in patients; 9 in family participants) who thought they had enough medications by the time of survey, when it was at least 40 days after national lockdown (as shown in fig. 4a) . a total of 40.0% (n ¼ 48) patients were able to buy more medications with great effort; however, 24.2% (n ¼ 29) discontinued one or more medications. there were 10 (7.0%) patients changing their medications without consulting their doctors (as shown in fig. 4a) , two of which previously took macitentan. a total of 100 participants (69.9%) thought they had medications shortage during covid-19 outbreak (as shown in fig. 4b ).psychological conditions over 20.0% patients (n ¼ 29) and family participants (n ¼ 6) had panic, but most of them (89, 62.2%) thought protection was important (as shown in fig. 5a ). though 48.3% (n ¼ 58) patients and 39.1% (n ¼ 9) family participants felt bad due to the disease, more than 70% (85 in patients; 18 in family participants) participants still kept optimistic at the same time (as shown in fig. 5b ).both ph patients and their families requested further medical care despite of a lack of clear clinical worsening according to our survey. a total of 11.7% (n ¼ 14) patients and 26.1% (n ¼ 6) family participants would like to contact their doctors during covid-19 outbreak; 61.7% (n ¼ 74) patients would go to the hospital for follow-up immediately after public transportation was available, eight of whom preferred hospitalization; and 60.9% (n ¼ 14) family participants would ask their relatives with ph go to the hospital as soon as possible, which was similar to patients. additionally, 73.9% (n ¼ 17) family participants would also encourage patients to be more positive.the outbreak of covid-19 changed most people's life in last winter. specifically, patients with chronic diseases might suffer from the high risk of covid-19 and uncontrolled existing diseases at the same time. ph patients require sustained medical care similar to other chronic diseases. any interruption in medications may result in clinical worsening and death. however, their living condition during covid-19 was unknown. our small-scale national survey brought an insight to this group. the results of the questionnaire indicated that the incidence of covid-19 was not higher in ph patients according to our survey. regardless of incidental cough and fever in our patients, only one patient was confirmed sars-cov-2 infection. medication insufficiency was the most common problem in our patients as nearly 70% participants implied their medications shortage during covid-19 outbreak. a total of 24.2% patients discontinued medications, and 7.0% patients changed their medications without consulting their doctor. a total of 98.6% participants stayed at home during outbreak, and most of them were not depressed by either ph or covid-19 according to our survey. however, further requirements in medical care might significantly increase due to the high desire of follow-up, even hospitalization, from both patients and their families when covid-19 outbreak is over.in early studies, covid-19 patients often stayed in wuhan for a while or had a history of exposure to confirmed cases. family cluster was also observed in several cases. 7 there were 18.2% (n ¼ 26) participants from wuhan in our study, which might be the result of hospital location, and one of the patients groups were from hubei. none of them reported covid-19, neither in patients nor in family participants. person-to-person transmission is confirmed in covid-19, 8 and lockdown in wuhan began in 24 january 2020 to prevent further spread of this infectious disease. a total of 98.6% of our patients and their families were in home quarantine during covid-19 outbreak, which might be a key factor that prevented our patients being infected. previous studies showed 32-51% patients with covid-19 had existing diseases, such as diabetes, hypertension, and other cardiovascular diseases. males were more vulnerable. mean age of the patients were 49-55 years from different study cohort. [9] [10] [11] our participants were 33 years old at mean age, which was much younger than previous covid-19 patients. our study cohort consisted of 80% females, which was quite different from the proportion of covid-19. in addition, most of our patients were chd-pah and maintained a fairly well heart function. therefore, the younger age, more females, different etiology, and better cardiac function in our ph patients might result in a lower incidence of covid-19.similar to any other chronic diseases, ph patients have to take life-time medications, and most of them had higher medication adherence. 12 bosentan was first used in pah in 2002, 13 and it significantly improved six-minute walk distance and heart function. since then, targeted treatment has extended more than half of patients' life to three or even five years. 14 combination therapy recommended in recent years has further reduced adverse events and slowed down the ph progression. 3, [15] [16] [17] in our study, patients took ambrisentan more than bosentan partly due to the lower price in chinese generic medication. a total of 17 patients were taking macitentan for free. treprostinil was used in very few patients because of the high price and inconvenience of chd-pah: pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with congenital heart disease; cteph: chronic thrombotic embolism pulmonary hypertension; ctd-pah: pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with connective tissue disease; ipah: idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension; na: not applicable; nyha: new york heart association; ph: pulmonary hypertension.intravenous application. 18 luckily, 40.0% of patients were able to continue their medications with great effort during the national lockdown. different from other cardiovascular diseases, ph target medications are expensive and unavailable in small cities, which might result in the shortage of medications in our ph patients. the lockdown in cities additionally prevented patients from getting supplement. nearly 30% of patients either discontinued their medications or changed without consultation. we have tried to help some of our patients to buy medications; however, shutdown of most public transportations made the process very difficult. we could hardly predict the prognosis of those who changed their treatment for less than 40 days. an interruption of treatment around three days might be tolerated, 19 but clinical worsening might happen due to the discontinuation of medications. 20 patients preferred clinic visiting to consult doctors for any modification. our patients showed higher desire to contact their doctors even though we had provided online consultation before the survey. mental condition of ph patients has aroused attentions in recent years. their concerns about the invasive examination, disease progression, and social interactions may directly impact their tolerance to treatment. 21 the outbreak of covid-19 brought an unexpected crisis first in wuhan, then spread to other cities. surprisingly, our ph patients and their families were mostly not panicking during the outbreak. they were overall positive and optimistic even though there were shortages on their medications. the reasons for such response might be as follows: first, most ph patients stayed at home which was familiar and comfort for them. second, there were not many clinical worsening in our patients. their disease condition was mostly constant during the outbreak, which maintained their optimism. third, we, the doctors, were active in patients groups, including being available for consultation online, and offering assistance for medication supplement. all these might be helpful to reduce their anxiety.our results provided preliminary view in living condition of ph patients during covid-19 in china; however, several limitations in our study need to be addressed: first of all, there were only 120 ph patients participating in the survey. the small-scale survey might give us some general information, which also might bring bias in some aspects. the results might highlight chd-pah, due to that chd-pah contributed most in the study population. further study should try to include more patients to get more details. the questionnaire was designed to generate the information from both patients and their family members; however, we failed to match patients with their family members from the beginning. studies could avoid such mistakes and focus on patients more. second, the survey was started 35 days after wuhan lockdown and lasted 10 days. most ph patients might be still stable in such a short time. studies conducted later or longer might observe more clinical worsening and anxiety in patients and their families. although no death was reported in our survey, three patients passed away based on our knowledge. neither patients nor their families would participate in the survey if they were in critical condition. therefore, our results might be more optimistic than real world. follow-up to the real mortality has been initialed. third, there were many uncertainties in online survey. we involved a question to estimate whether participants were seriously taking the survey. the result showed 86.7% patients and 91.0% family participants went through the survey carefully, which indicated there might be misunderstanding and incorrect answers.our small-scale national survey first investigated the living condition of ph patients during covid-19. as the disease is spreading all over the world, doctors should be aware that ph patients could be invulnerable to covid-19 if they are in good protection. sustaining medical care, including medication supplement, is important for ph patients at this time. covid-19 might impact ph patients psychologically other than physically. higher hospitalization even death might been seen when the outbreak is over.since december 2019, an unexperienced pneumonia emerged in wuhan, china, and soon spread globally (guo et al., 2020 , wu et al., 2020 . this pneumonia was verified to be caused by a novel coronavirus and named as coronavirus disease 2019 by the world health organization (who). based on phylogeny, taxonomy and established practice, this novel coronavirus was designated as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) by the coronavirus study group (csg) (gorbalenya et al., 2020) . similar to the former two pathogenic coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) andmiddle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) at the beginning of the 21st century (cui et al., 2019) , sars-cov-2 is likely originated from bat (zhou peng et al., 2020) , have the ability to spread from person to person (chan et al., 2020) , cause pneumonia and severe respiratory syndrome (chen n. et al., 2020) with a typic an evaluation version of novapdf was used to create this pdf file. purchase a license to generate pdf files without this notice. regardless of most covid-19 patients are mild, patients with severe type may quickly progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), multiple organ failure (mof) and even death (wang y. et al., 2020) . therefore, exploring potential risk factors for the severity of covid-19 is crucial for delay or halt the progression of the disease. previous studies have revealed that patients with old age and underlying diseases are more likely to be aggravated (wang d. et al., 2020 , wang z. et al., 2020 , and aberrant immune-inflammatory response and cytokine storm may played an important role in the disease progression (zhou yonggang et al., 2020) .therefore, a retrospective study was performed to compare the clinical features, immune-inflammatory parameters and cytokines between the severe and non-severe groups, and tried to establish a predict model for assessing the severe cases in hwa pj-nbey-ky-2020-061-01), and a written informed consent was obtained from all enrolled patients.throat-swab, nasopharynx-swab and sputum specimens from all suspected sars-cov-2 infection patients were collected, and sars-cov-2 rna was detected table 2 showed the baseline laboratory parameters of included patients.neutrophil%, neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (nlr), fibrinogen, sialic acid (sa), c-reaction protein (crp), il-6, interleukin-10 (il-10) and interferon-γ (ifn-γ) in the severe group were significantly higher than those in the non-severe group (p<0.05).while lymphocyte%, lymphocyte count and platelet count were significantly lower in the severe group when compared with the non-severe group (p<0.05). there were no significant differences in ctni and nt-probnp between the severe and non-severe groups. as for the arterial blood gas parameters, higher levels of po 2 and pco 2 were found in the non-severe group (p<0.05), while ph and lactate showed no differences between the two groups.the result of multivariate logistic regression analysis demonstrated that the high level of peripheral blood cytokine il-6, crp and hypertension were independent risk factors for assessing the severity of covid-19, with odd ratios ( figure 1 ).the baseline il-6 was positively correlated with neutrophil% (r=0.398, the dynamic changes of il-6 were analyzed in 45 non-severe cases and 12 severe cases. the level of il-6 in the severe group was significantly higher than non-severe group at baseline and 5-10 days after disease onset, but dropped gradually day-by-day, and reached a level equal to non-severe group at ≥ 10 days after an evaluation version of novapdf was used to create this pdf file. purchase a license to generate pdf files without this notice. this study was performed at hwa mei hospital, university of chinese academy of sciences, ningbo, a largest local designated hospital treating covid-19. different from wuhan, all patients treated immediately once relative symptoms appeared. the time interval from illness onset to hospitalization was 5.35±3.72 days, most of them (87.40%) were non-severe cases. therefore, it may sever as a representative of the general situation, except for the severely affected area. we found higher age, bmi index and proportion of hypertension, highest temperature>39 , chest distress and dyspnea in the severe group, but nausea was more often in non-severe group. we also observed significant increases of neutrophil%, nlr, fibrinogen, sa, crp, il-6, il-10, ifn-γ, po 2 and pco 2 and decreases of lymphocyte%, lymphocyte count and platelet count in the severe group.previous studies have indicated that the severe and aberrant host immune response are responsible for the severity of covid-19 (zhou yonggang et al., 2020).meanwhile, it was companied by a sharp change in the peripheral blood immune-inflammation parameters. therefore, emerging studies were focus on these accessible laboratory data for assessing the severity of disease. the increased of neutrophil counts indicate the intensity of inflammatory response, while the decreased an evaluation version of novapdf was used to create this pdf file. purchase a license to generate pdf files without this notice.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 11 of lymphocyte counts suggest the damage of immune system, therefore, higher nlr maybe a potential maker for risk factor (liu jing et al., 2020) . cytokines are small protein molecules aimed for cell-to-cell communications, and play an immunomodulating function (chousterman et al., 2017) . however, in some infection diseases, excessive inflammation activate cytokine storm, lead to an evaluation version of novapdf was used to create this pdf file. purchase a license to generate pdf files without this notice. 12 serious pathological changes, even is responsible for multiorgan dysfunction (liu et al., 2016) . cytokine storm have been implicated in severe influenza (liu et al., 2016) , sars and mers (channappanavar and perlman, 2017) , and evidence has revealed that cytokine storm may as a cause for deleterious consequence during sars-cov-2 infection (zhou yonggang et al., 2020) . in consist with the previous studies (liu jing et al., 2020) , cytokine il-6, il-10 and ifn-γ in the severe group were significantly higher than those in the non-severe group, especially for il-6, and it was recognized as an independent risk factor by using multivariate logistic regression analysis, with or of 1.090 (95% ci: 1.040-1.147).as mentioned above, il-6 had the highest auroc among the inflammation parameters in this study, so we further analyzed their correlations. it was found that il-6 was significantly correlated with other inflammation parameters, and a most close relationship was observed between il-6 and il-10 (r=0.638, p<0.001). il-10 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine, the increased of il-10 maybe reflect a self-protection during cytokine storm, the level of il-10 was also directly related to the degree of inflammation (chousterman et al., 2017) , and high il-10 was associated with immunosuppression in sepsis (hotchkiss et al., 2013) .il-6 plays a key role in cytokine storm owing to its pleiotropic property (gupta et al., 2020) . apart from its robust proinflammatory function, it induces a variety of in line with prior studies, our study also demonstrated that severe cases were older and more likely to have underlying diseases (wang d. et al., 2020 , wang z. et al., 2020 . however, apart from hypertension, the number of patients with and without diabetes, cardiovascular disease, hepatic disease, chronic lung disease and cancer an evaluation version of novapdf was used to create this pdf file. purchase a license to generate pdf files without this notice.14 showed no differences in non-severe and severe groups. low number of patients in these underlying diseases may cause certain bias, while a relatively large number in hypertension is sufficient to make a certain comparison. additionally, the level of il-6 in patients with hypertension was higher than those without hypertension in this study, demonstrated a severe inflammation lesion in the hypertension patients. hypertension patients are always associated with immune activation, resulted in immune system impaired (norlander et al., 2018) . therefore, we speculated that the abnormal immune function of hypertension patients may played a role in the covid-19 progression.intriguingly, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace-2) played a protect role in hypertension (povlsen et al., 2020) , while sars-cov-2 use ace-2 to enter target cells, and may reduce ace-2 expression just like sars-cov do (kuba et al., 2005) , which was likely to carry a burden to those weakness patients and aggravate the disease eventually. in this study, the existing of hypertension severed as an independent risk factor for the severity of covid-19, it reminded us to take specially care of these high-risk patients to prevent the development of disease.ctni and nt-probnp are two biomarkers for cardiac dysfunction. the baseline level of ctni in the most patients with covid-19 was below 0.03 ng/ml, no significant difference was found between the severe and non-severe groups, so did the level of nt-probnp. it was consistent with the study by peng et al., in which tests were performed on admission (peng et al., 2020) . however, chen et al. found the elevated ctni and nt-probnp during hospitalization were significantly correlated with the critical disease status (chen chen et al., 2020) . unfortunately, we did not test an evaluation version of novapdf was used to create this pdf file. purchase a license to generate pdf files without this notice.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 15 these two markers dynamically, the value of them deserve further investigation.a blood gas analysis can measures the level of oxygen, carbon dioxide, lactate and ph in the blood, which is helpful to show how well the lungs are working. a previous study has indicated that higher level of lactate and lower levels of po 2 and pco 2 were found in the death patients with covid-19 (peng et al., 2020) . the present study also showed lower levels of po 2 and pco 2 in the severe group, but ph and lactate showed no differences between the two groups. however, only few patients in the non-severe group performed blood gas analyses and partial patients received oxygen therapy before blood gas analysis, thus making it difficult to explore their role in the present study.however, this study has some limitations. first, il-6 is not a routine laboratory test, which would limit its usage. second, the sample size included in this study is relatively small, especially of those in severe group. third, it is a retrospective single-center study, the effectiveness of this model has not been validated by us and others. forth, some laboratory analyses (e.g. blood gas analysis) were performed on partial patients. therefore, a prospective multi-center study with a larger sample size is warranted.our study demonstrated that high level of peripheral blood cytokine il-6, crp and the existence of hypertension were independent risk factors for assessing the severity of covid-19. the risk model established upon il-6, crp and hypertension an evaluation version of novapdf was used to create this pdf file. purchase a license to generate pdf files without this notice. coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a current pandemic disease caused by the positive-sense rna virus named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). along with the highly infectious capacity of the virus, the mortality rates have been reported to range from 1% to >5%. 1 it has been reported that patients with covid-19 and hypertension may have an increased risk for adverse outcomes in unadjusted epidemiological studies summarizing the characteristics of the covid-19 epidemic in china. despite limited sample sizes, previous studies have reported that hypertension had a hazard ratio (hr) of 1.70 [95% confidence interval (ci) 0.92- 3.14 ] to 3 .05 (95% ci 1.57-5.92 ) for mortality, respectively. 2, 3 however, neither of these previous studies has adjusted for confounding factors, for example, age, which is emerging as the strongest predictor of covid-19-related death. 3, 4 angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is required for viral entry of sars-cov-2. 5 ace2 is widely expressed in the human body, with expression found in the gastrointestinal tract, heart, and kidney, and alveolar cells in the lungs. 6, 7 angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) are the two types of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) inhibitors widely used for treating hypertension, and heart and renal failure. there are reports in animal models 8 and humans 9 suggesting that the expression of ace2 may be increased after treatment with an acei or arb (some reports incriminated only arbs 10 ), which might augment patients' susceptibility to viral host cell entry and propagation. 11 although the effects of aceis or arbs on ace2 in humans are still inconclusive, previous findings have led to a growing concern that aceis or arbs may increase (or decrease) mortality in patients with covid- 19. 12,13 therefore, evidence of the impact of these medications in patients with covid-19 is urgently needed.here, we investigated 2877 consecutive patients admitted to huo shen shan hospital, which is a hospital dedicated solely to the treatment of covid-19, in wuhan, china. we tested the hypothesis that treatment of hypertension, especially with raas inhibitors, might impact on the mortality of patients with covid- 19 .this is a retrospective observational study comparing the association of both hypertensive status and antihypertensive treatment class with mortality among hospitalized patients with covid- 19 14, 15 in brief, clinical manifestations of covid-19 are defined as the development of fever and/or respiratory symptoms; computed tomography (ct) imaging showing characteristics consistent with covid-19; or normal or decreased white blood cell (wbc) count, and normal or decreased lymphocyte count in the early stage of the disease. patients with a suspicious epidemiological history (i.e. contact with novel coronavirus-infected people or patients from wuhan who have fever or respiratory symptoms) plus any two clinical manifestations or no clear epidemiological history but with all three clinical manifestations were considered as possible covid-19 case. patients who were considered as possible covid-19 cases, with or without laboratory confirmation of sars-cov-2 infection, were admitted to the huo shen shan hospital.the confirmation of sars-cov-2 infection was defined as suspect cases with one of the following serological findings; (i) real-time fluorescent reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr) positive for new coronavirus nucleic acid; (ii) viral gene sequence highly homologous to known new coronaviruses; and (iii) sars-cov-2-specific igm or igg are detected in serum, or sars-cov-2-specific igg is detectable or reaches a titration of at least a four-fold increase during convalescence compared with the acute phase.this study was approved by the national health commission of china and the institutional review board at huo shen shan hospital (wuhan, china). written informed consent was waived by the ethics committee of the designated hospital for patients with emerging infectious diseases.patients' demographic characteristics and clinical data (symptoms, comorbidities, laboratory findings, and outcomes) during hospitalization were collected from electronic medical records by two investigators (r.z. and y.c). all data were independently reviewed and entered into the computer database by two analysts (c.g. and y.c.).the primary endpoint was all-cause mortality during hospitalization. other endpoints included the time elapsed between onset of symptoms and discharge, the rates of use of invasive mechanical ventilation, and the severity of covid- 19 . the severity of covid-19 was categorized as mild, severe, or critical. mild included non-pneumonia and mild pneumonia cases. severe was characterized by dyspnoea, respiratory frequency > _30/min, blood oxygen saturation < _93%, pao 2 /fio 2 ratio <300, and/or lung infiltrates >50% within 24-48 h. critical cases were defined as respiratory failure requiring mechanic ventilation, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction/failure. 1, 16 the final date of follow-up was 1 april 2020 and the median duration of follow-up (hospitalization) was 21 (12-32) days.the diagnosis of hypertension was given by the patient's physician prior to the infection with sars-cov-2. these data were collected from patients' documented medical files (e.g. the diagnosed patients with antihypertensive drugs and blood pressure <140/90 mmhg upon admission were still identified as 'with a history of hypertension'). there was no impact of antihypertensive treatments in covid-formal committee to adjudicate the status of hypertension; however, these diagnoses were rechecked by two individual investigators (r.z. and y.c) during data collection, using office systolic blood pressure > _140 mmhg and/or diastolic blood pressure values > _90 mmhg 17 as the criteria. figure 1 shows the flow chart of the study. the antihypertensive regimens were in principle unchanged during hospitalization whenever the patients had previous prescriptions before admission. discontinuation or alteration of the antihypertensive treatment during hospitalization was at the physician's discretion. those who required antihypertensive medication during hospitalization with no prior prescription, or those who had discontinued the medications prior to admission, were treated with calcium channel blockers (ccbs) or diuretics. the cohorts of 'without antihypertensive' and 'with antihypertensive treatments', as well as the cohorts of 'raas inhibitors' (acei/arbs) and 'non-raas inhibitors' (beta-blockers, ccbs, or diuretics) , were stratified at the time of their admission and according to their pre-admission medications. there were 15 patients (no death events) taking spirolactone but were categorized in the 'non-raas inhibitors' group in the analysis. patients were included in the raas inhibitor cohort whenever at least one raas inhibitor (an acei or arb) was prescribed, disregarding whether or not they were treated with a beta-blocker, ccb, or diuretics. nevertheless, a sensitivity analysis was performed by including patients who were treated solely with one medication (supplementary material online, table s3 ).continuous variables with normal distribution are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (sd), and those with skewed distribution are expressed as median ± interquartile range (iqr). categorical variables are presented as counts and percentages. means of two continuous variables were compared by independent student's t-test or mann-whitney u-test when appropriate. the frequencies of categorical variables were compared using fisher's exact test. survival was estimated by the kaplan-meier method ( figure 2 ). the variances in outcomes between exposure cohorts were assessed by the multivariable cox proportional hazards model. the covariates in the multivariable model included age (as a continuous variable), sex, medical history of diabetes, insulin-treated diabetes, myocardial infarction, treatment by percutaneous coronary intervention (pci) or coronary artery bypass grafting (cabg), renal failure, chronic heart failure, asthma, chronic obstructive coronary disease (copd), and stroke (as binary variables). cox proportionality assumptions were checked by using the schoenfeld residuals against the transformed time, and the assumptions were met in all models. there was no formal correction for multiple testing, taking into account the observational nature of the analysis. 18 the details of statistical approaches for the meta-analysis are provided in supplementary material online, methods. analyses were performed using the r-project (r foundation, vienna, austria). a two-sided p-value <0.05 was considered as statistically significant.in total, 2877 consecutive hospitalized patients with confirmed covid-19 were enrolled in the study. the median time from symptom onset to discharge (last follow-up) was 39 (30-50) days. baseline characteristics are presented in table 1 . the results of the laboratory tests are presented in the supplementary material online, tables s6-s8 . among these patients, 29 .5% (850/2877) had a medical history of hypertension. when compared with patients without hypertension, those with hypertension were older, more often had a prior history of diabetes, angina, stroke, renal failure, or previous revascularization (pci or cabg), and were receiving more medication for diabetes and hypertension. the spectrum of symptoms of covid-19 at admission between the two cohorts did not differ significantly. there were 710/850 (83.5%) patients with hypertension taking antihypertensive medications. the medical history, symptoms onset, and blood pressure at admission did not differ significantly between patients with no antihypertensive medications and those with medications, except that patients with antihypertensive medications were treated more often with oral medication for diabetes. there were 183 (25.7%) patients treated with raas inhibitors and 527 (74.2%) treated with beta-blockers, ccbs, or diuretics (non-raas inhibitors) (supplementary material online, table s1 ). the medical history and blood pressure at admission did not differ significantly between the raas inhibitor-treated [raasi (þ)] and non-raas inhibitor-treated patients [raasi (-)]. there were 14 patients who reported shivering at admission in the raasi (-) cohort, compared with none in the raasi (þ) cohort ( table 1) .a total of 34/850 (4.0%) patients died in the hypertension cohort and 22/2027 (1.1%) died in the no hypertension cohort (crude hr 3.75, 95% ci 2.19-6.41, p < 0.001; figure 1a ). after adjustment for confounders, hypertension was still associated with a two-fold increase in the risk of mortality as compared with no hypertension (adjusted hr 2.12, 95% ci 1.17-3.82, p = 0.013; table 2 ). the time from symptom onset to discharge was comparable between the two cohorts; however, patients with hypertension had the propensity to develop more severe/critical covid-19 disease (p for trend < 0.001) and were more likely to receive invasive mechanical ventilation (p < 0.001) ( table 3) .for the patients with hypertension, those without antihypertensive treatment (11/140) had a significantly higher rate of mortality compared with those with antihypertensive (23/710) treatments (7.9% vs. 3 .2%, hr 2.52, 95% ci 1. 23-5.17 , p = 0.012; figure 1b ; table 2 ). after adjustment, the risk of mortality was still higher in patients without antihypertensive treatment (hr 2.17, 95% ci 1.03-4.57, p = 0.041).there were 183 (25.7%) patients treated with raas inhibitors and 527 (74.2%) with beta-blockers, ccbs, or diuretics (non-raas inhibitors). the numerical difference in rates of mortality between the raas inhibitor and non-raas inhibitor cohorts were nonsignificant before or after adjustment (2.2% vs. 3 .6%, adjusted hr 0.85, 95% ci 0.28-2.58, p = 0.774). the time from symptom onset to discharge, the severity of the covid-19, and percentage of ventilation were all similar between the two cohorts.to understand whether aceis and arbs had distinct effects on outcomes, we have also compared the influence of aceis and arbs with those of non-raas inhibitors. compared with non-raas inhibitors, the risks of mortality in patients with arbs or aceis were both numerically lower. since the sample size was small in both groups, any results could be largely due to play of chance; however, these results did not show an obvious propensity that arbs and aceis had an adverse hr (>1) as far as the mortality is concerned (supplementary material online, table s2 ).to further explore the potential risk factors for mortality, we performed a multivariable cox regression analysis with backwardsstepwise selection to identify the predictors of mortality. a total of seven variables were identified, namely fatigue, age, hypertension, myocardial infarction, renal failure, respiratory rate, and chronic heart failure. these results are shown in the supplementary material online, tables s4 and s5; figure s1 .most recently, there are three other groups in china who have reported their data regarding the influence of raas inhibitors in covid-19 patients. we have summarized all the available data in a meta-analysis. [19] [20] [21] together with our current data, we found that compared with non-raas inhibitors, raas inhibitors were associated with a lower risk of mortality (relative risk 0.65; 95% ci, 0.45-0.94, p = 0.02), regardless of the model used.the main findings of this analysis can be summarized as follows: (i) after adjustment for confounders and compared with the nonhypertensive patients, the hypertensive patients continued to demonstrate a two-fold relative increase in the risk of covid-19 mortality; (ii) the patients with a history of hypertension but without antihypertensive treatment were associated with a significantly higher risk of mortality compared with those with antihypertensive treatments; and (iii) the relative rates of mortality, the severity of covid-19, and percentages of ventilation were not statistically different between the patients treated with raas inhibitors and non-raas inhibitors. however, in the meta-analysis, raas inhibitors tend to be associated with a lower risk of mortality.patients with covid-19 and hypertension have been reported to have an increased risk of adverse outcomes. chen et al. suggested that chronic hypertension was more frequent among patients who died compared with recovered patients. 22 in line with this finding, wu et al. found that hypertension has an hr of 1.70 for death in 201 patients with covid-19, 2 and zhou et al. found hypertension had an hr of 3.05 for in-hospital mortality in 191 patients with covid- 19. 3 meanwhile, there was also a study which enrolled 416 patients which suggested that after the adjustment for confounders, hypertension was no longer an independent risk factor for covid- 19. 23 in the current study, we found that after adjustment for confounders, patients with hypertension still had a significantly two-fold higher risk of mortality when compared with patients with no hypertension.so far, there is limited clinical evidence demonstrating that antihypertensive treatments could influence the prognosis of covid- 19. despite the lack of evidence, the council on hypertension of the european society of cardiology (esc) recommends that physicians and patients should continue treatment with their usual antihypertensive therapy. 24 our analysis showed that patients with antihypertensive treatments pre-admission had a lower rate of mortality compared with those without treatment of hypertension. these data support esc's recommendation stating that patients should not discontinue or change their antihypertensive treatment, unless instructed by a physician.recently ace2 has been identified to be necessary for viral entry for sars-cov-2. as ace generates angiotensin ii from angiotensin i, ace2 degrades angiotensin ii to angiotensin (1-7), which, after binding to the mas receptor, shifts the balance from vasoconstriction with angiotensin ii to vasodilation. under normal circumstances, the circulating levels of soluble ace2 are low and the functional role of ace2 in the lungs appears to be relatively limited, 25 but may be upregulated with certain medications or clinical states. this has led to a two-fold concern whereby aceis and arbs might affect the severity and mortality of covid- 19. 12,13 one is that aceis could directly inhibit ace2. however, despite substantial structural homology between ace and ace2, their enzyme active sites are distinct. as a result, aceis in clinical use do not directly affect ace2 functions. 26 in addition, there is the concern that the use of aceis and arbs will increase the expression of ace2 8 and therefore increase patient susceptibility to viral host cell entry and propagation. conflicting and limited evidence stemming from laboratory or clinical studies has shown changes in serum or pulmonary ace2 levels in response to aceis or arbs. 12 however, even if an acei or arb could actually modify ace2 levels or activity (or both) in target tissue beds, evidence is still lacking to indicate whether this would facilitate greater involvement of spike protein and cell entry of sars-cov-2.given the uncertainty due to lack of clinical data, there are both advocates and objectors toward the use of raas inhibitors during the covid-19 pandemic. in our study, we found that the risks of mortality after adjustment were not significantly different between raas inhibitors and non-raas inhibitors. furthermore, after pooling with previously published data [19] [20] [21] in a study-level meta-analysis, we found that patients with raas inhibitor use were possibly associated with a lower risk of mortality (take home figure) .the underlying mechanism of why patients could eventually benefit from raas inhibitors during covid-19 is putative. however, results from laboratory studies reported that after the initial engagement of sars-cov-1 spike protein, ace2 abundance was downregulated on cell surfaces. 27 the down-regulation of ace2 and the dysregulation of its activity in the lungs may facilitate the initial neutrophil infiltration in response to bacterial endotoxin and may result in unopposed angiotensin ii accumulation and local raas activation. 28 an animal study has also shown that in mouse models, exposure to sars-cov-1 spike protein induced acute lung injury, which is limited by raas blockade. 27 therefore, some researchers have hypothesized that high ace2 expression could be deleterious during the contamination phase, whereas the high ace2 expression could, in contrast, be beneficial during the inflammation phase 27 and may possibly prevent organ injury in covid- 19. 29,30 to further verify our results, as well as this hypothesis, we have also designed a randomized controlled trial, which is ongoing, investigating this issue (nct04330300).as described above, these data showed that untreated hypertensive patients are at the highest risk. there are remaining questions: (i) which kind of medication should be given to those patients (ccbs or raas inhibitors); (ii) could such medications mitigate the risk of these patients; and (iii) will the use of raas inhibitors affect the risk of infection when equally exposed to the virus? limitations i. the multivariable-adjusted cox proportional hazard models were performed in an attempt to estimate the true treatment effects of antihypertensive medications. however, the usual deficiency of observational studies exists, such as the inability to include all relevant confounders, especially those unmeasured, causing bias that cannot be adjusted. ii. although the current study enrolled 2877 patients, to our knowledge so far one of the largest cohorts reported, only 183 patients with raas inhibitors and 527 patients with non-raas inhibitors were compared. statistically underpowered, our findings should be interpreted cautiously. iii. as a retrospective study, some data such as electrocardiogram and echocardiography were not recorded in detail in the study owing to the limitations imposed in the isolation ward and the urgency of containing the covid-19 epidemic. iv. the data in this study permit a short-term assessment of the clinical outcomes of the impact of antihypertensive treatments. long-term prospective studies investigating the effects of these treatments are still needed.while hypertension is independently associated with mortality from covid-19, the discontinuation of the antihypertensive treatment is suspected to be associated with an increased risk of mortality. patients with raas inhibitors were not exposed to a higher risk of mortality in our study and, after pooling previously published data in a study-level meta-analysis, the use of raas inhibitors was shown to be possibly associated with lower risk of mortality. nevertheless, due to the observational nature of the study, the results should be interpreted cautiously and considered as no obvious additional risk to continue raas inhibitors in patients with covid-19 infection.the recent outbreak of the novel covid-19 disease and its rapid worldwide spread poses a global health emergency. the novel virus is thought to belong to the same family as middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronavirus and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus, but it is unique in its own right [1] . researchers around the globe are investigating several risk factors that may contribute to the severity of covid-19. the world health organization (who) indicated that elderly individuals, as well as those with underlying medical conditions, are at higher risk of developing severe covid-19 disease [2] . as of today, june 14 th , 2020, more than 7.800 million people are infected by the virus and more than 430,500 have lost their lives. most of the deaths are believed to be associated with the existence of comorbidities. generally, patients with compromised immune systems are considered to be particularly vulnerable [3] . several research works have targeted the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of patients infected with covid-19; however, the risk factors for severity and mortality have not been sufficiently investigated [4] . identifying major risk factors and taking corresponding clinical measures could contribute massively to saving lives. most of the previous studies have identified comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, stroke, cancer, kidney issues, and high cholesterol among the high-risk factors. thus, this paper represents a systematic review of the literature to shed light on the effects of these preexisting conditions on covid-19 disease severity. additionally, as no method currently exists that can determine the level of risk these comorbidities pose, this paper serves the purpose of achieving the only reasonable option: to draw lessons from earlier experiences and practices.a search was conducted on the freely available covid-19 open research dataset (cord-19) [5] . cord-19 is a resource consisting of 128,000 scholarly articles, including over 59,000 articles with full text related to covid-19, sars-cov-2, and coronaviruses. the dataset is frequently updated when new research appears in peer-reviewed publications and archive services became available. to screen every article in the dataset, we developed a search engine in addition to the bm25 search index [6] . bm25 is a retrieval function that ranks a set of documents based on the query terms appearing in each document, regardless of their proximity within the document. all papers are indexed by simply applying a preprocessing function to clean and tokenize the abstracts. once all documents were indexed, we created document vectors by loading optimized, cached json tokens followed by applying a document similarity index using annoy [7] . for more details of the implantation, please visit https://github.com/dgunning/cord19. filtering of the articles was then undertaken using keywords and questions, e.g. "effects of hypertension on covid/normal coronavirus/sars-cov-2/ncov/covid-19 disease severity, mortality, icu?". the search terms are repeated for all the comorbidities considered in this paper.as illustrated in fig. 1 , a systematic approach was used to screen the full covid-19 open research dataset [5] . through the systematic method, 68 articles were found that scored highly on the confidence rating. an additional search was run, employing google scholar and pubmed, to ensure every relevant article was included. each of the 68 papers was read thoroughly, causing 34 articles to be excluded from the list and an additional 19 articles to be manually added to the list. the ultimate list of 54 articles was split into six categories, with 7 articles focusing on cancer, 11 on diabetes mellitus, 7 on kidney issues, 9 on stroke, 12 on hypertension, and 8 on high cholesterol. diabetes is one of the most serious comorbidities linked to the severity of all three well-known human pathogenic coronavirus infections, including sars-cov 2. patients with diabetes have an increased risk of severe complications, including adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multi-organ failure. depending on the global region, 20-50% of covid-19 pandemic patients had diabetes, which emphasizes the importance of the link between covid-19 and diabetes [8] . according to gupta et al. [9] , individuals with diabetes are at risk of infections, especially influenza and pneumonia. patients with diabetes are severely affected when they contract respiratory viruses. therefore, diabetes was seen as an important risk factor for mortality in patients infected with pandemic influenza a 2009 (h1n1), sars coronavirus, and middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (merscov) [10] , [11] , [12] .several studies show that among the covid-19 patients, there was also a noticeable percentage of patients suffering from diabetes mellitus (dm). yang et al. [13] found that among the 32 non-survivors, from a group of 52 covid-19 patients, 22% were diabetes patients. additionally, out of 1,099 patients with confirmed covid-19 from autonomous regions in china, 173 had severe disease with comorbidities in which 16.2% were dm [14] . zhang et al. [15] analyzed data for 140 patients who were admitted to hospitals in wuhan, china with confirmed covid-19 cases; 12.1% of these patients had diabetes.moreover, zhang et al. [16] reviewed 258 confirmed covid-19 patients who were hospitalized in wuhan, china. the authors indicated that patients with diabetes had significantly higher leukocyte and neutrophil counts as well as higher levels of fasting blood glucose, serum creatinine, urea nitrogen, and creatine kinase isoenzyme mb at admission, compared to those without diabetes. the cox proportional hazard model showed that diabetes (adjusted hazard ratio [ahr]=3.64; 95% ci: 1.09-12.21) and fasting blood glucose (ahr=1.19; 95% ci: 1.08-1.31) were associated with the fatality of covid-19, adjusting for potential confounders. the authors concluded that dm is associated with greater disease severity and therefore, recommended that primary and secondary prevention strategies are needed for covid-19 patients with diabetes.bloomgarden et al. [17] stated that mortality rates from pneumonia among patients with diabetes in hong kong (age ≥ 75) exceed mortality rates in this age group from cardiovascular disease and cancer [18] . similar evidence of risk amid persons with diabetes has been reported for the two earlier cov infections: sars in 2002 [19] , [20] and mers in 2012 [21] .furthermore, diabetes was present in 42.3% of 26 fatalities due to covid-19, in a study from wuhan, china [22] . huang et al. [23] investigated 41 hospital-admitted patients identified as having a laboratory-confirmed 2019-ncov infection. however, these cases are only a small proportion of the patients affected. a report of 72,314 cases (with 44,672 confirmed covid-19 cases) published by the chinese centre for disease control and prevention showed an increased mortality rate in people with diabetes (2.3% overall and 7.3% in patients with diabetes) [24] .bello-chavolla oy. [25] predicted mortality due to sars-cov-2 and developed a mechanistic score relating to obesity and diabetes to covid-19 outcomes, in data from mexico. among 71,103 subjects, the authors observed 15,529 subjects with sars-cov-2 and 1,434 deaths (from sars-cov-2 or other causes). risk factors for lethality in covid-19 included early-onset diabetes, obesity, advanced age, immunosuppression, and ckd. the authors used stratified points; the score of diabetes was 1 which indicated mild risk. out of the 137 deaths from sars-cov-2, 2.76% had diabetes.a total of 174 patients confirmed with covid-19 were studied by guo et al. [26] . the authors found that 24 patients with no other comorbidities except diabetes were at higher risk of severe pneumonia, the release of tissue injury-related enzymes, excessive uncontrolled inflammation responses, and hypercoagulable state associated with dysregulation of glucose metabolism. the authors recommended that diabetes should be considered as a risk factor for rapid progression and poor prognosis of covid-19. the authors described a mortality rate of covid-19 amongst diabetic patients, without other comorbidities, of about 16%. the abovementioned studies are summarized in table 1 . na* -not available it is apparent that individuals with diabetes are at an increased risk for covid-19 infection and medical complications including death. suggestions are made on the possible pathophysiological mechanisms of the relationship between diabetes and covid-19, and its management. no definite conclusions can be made based on current limited evidence and data [9] . further research regarding this relationship and its clinical management is warranted [27] . furthermore, the article by guo et al. [28] has left several relevant questions to be addressed: does the association between covid-19 and diabetes differ by different types of diabetes? do antidiabetic drugs have an impact on disease progression? is the impact of aging the same in diabetics as is in those without diabetes? while the results of this study should be read in the light of some limitations, such as the small sample size and the large age difference between study groups when patients with other comorbidities were excluded, it still provides relevant insights that could inform about how covid-19 interacts with preexisting conditions [29] .according to a few recently published results (mainly chinese cohort), patients with cancer are more vulnerable to covid-19 complications. however, how susceptible cancer patients are to infection with covid-19 has yet to be established.liang et al. [30] collected and analyzed 2,007 cases from 575 hospitals, in 31 provincial administrative regions in china. all cases were diagnosed with laboratory-confirmed covid-19. the number of covid-19 cases with a history of cancer is 18 (1%; 95% ci: 0.61-1.65) out of 1,590 covid-19 cases, which according to 2015 cancer epidemiology statistics seems to be higher than the incidence of cancer in the overall chinese population [0·29%] per 100,000 people. lung cancer was the most frequent type (28%). compared with patients without cancer, patients with cancer were relatively older, had no significant differences in sex, other baseline symptoms, other comorbidities, or baseline severity of x-ray. most importantly, patients with cancer were observed to have a higher risk of severe events compared to patients without cancer (39% vs 8% of 1,572 patients: fisher's exact p=0.0003). the authors concluded that patients with cancer might have a higher risk of covid-19 than individuals without cancer. additionally, they showed that patients with cancer had poorer outcomes from covid-19, providing a timely reminder to physicians that cancer patients require intensive care while infected.zhang, et al. [31] non-small-cell lung carcinoma (nsclc). the authors stated that patients with nsclc older than 60 years had a higher incidence of covid-19 than those aged 60 years or younger (4.3% vs 1.8%). in table 2 , we summarize the details of the three mentioned case studies. in these mentioned studies, lung cancer was most frequently observed, and the covid-19 cases analyzed were all from hospitals in china. however, according to moujaess et al. [33] , such reports could lead many oncologists to change their daily practice in cancer care, without solid evidence and recommendations. the data presented should be carefully interpreted, not only because of the small sample but also because cancer patients in this cohort (mentioned in [30] for instance) had a significantly older median age than their control (63·1 vs 48·7 years) as well as a more significant history of smoking, suggesting that these two factors might be associated with the poor covid-19 outcomes than the cancer history itself. moreover, these results should be interpreted with caution in the absence of adjustment to the prevalence of the different comorbidities in the chinese population [33] . also, xia, et al. [34] commented on the mentioned studies and highlighted reasons to be cautious, suggesting that current evidence remains insufficient to explain a conclusive association between cancer and covid-19. though one effect that has risen concern, is due to the number of covid-19 patients surpassing hospital and healthcare capacity, cancer patients may be overlooked resulting in negative consequences in their treatments.high blood pressure (hypertension) is one of the most common conditions in severe covid-19 patients [35] . in this section, we review several studies that looked at the relationship between hypertension and the severity of covid-19. the relationship between high blood pressure and increased risk of pneumonia was a subject of a study that analyzed uk biobank data of 107,310 hypertension patients, with 3% of patients developing pneumonia afterward [36] . the data analysis shows that the risk of respiratory disease is significantly higher in patients with hypertension. patients with hypertension were also found to be at higher risk of acute respiratory disease and chronic lower respiratory disease, independent of age, sex, smoking status, and bmi. generalizing these results to covid-19 is plausible and led to many studies that focus on hypertension as a strong indication of covid-19 severity.several recent studies have investigated the variability in covid-19 disease severity in patients with hypertension and its medicinal therapy. in [37] , the authors reported that among 3,017 hospitalized covid-19 patients, 53% were diagnosed with hypertension. furthermore, the mortality rates among patients on angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (acei) for hypertension treatment (27%, p=0.001) as well as for patients on angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) (33%, p=0.12) were lower compared to other anti-hypertensive agents (39%). therefore, these results support the continuation of acei and arb therapy for covid-19 hypertensive patients.these results are supported by another study [38] , where 126 covid-19 patients with hypertension were retrospectively grouped into arbs/aceis (n=43) and non-arbs/aceis (n=83) according to their antihypertensive medications. a group of covid-19 patients without hypertension were then randomly selected to match the previous group based on age and sex. the results of this study show that the arbs/aceis group had a lower proportion of critical patients (9.3% vs 22.9%; p=0.061), and a lower death rate (4.7% vs 13.3%; p=0.216). however, these differences are not statistically significant.similarly, liu et al. [39] , investigated the disease severity in patients with hypertension who used acei, arb, ccb, and beta-blockers (bb) compared to patients who did not take any hypertension medication. considering only 46 elderly patients (age > 65), the results show that patients who took arb have a significantly lower risk of developing a severe disease compared to patients who took no drugs. however, although patients who took acei, ccb, and bb also had a lower risk of developing severe disease, there was no statistical significance compared to patients who took no drugs. this could be due to the limited number of patients on these drugs compared to arb.in another study [40] , the authors argued, based on their retrospective investigation of different hypertension drugs, that calcium channel blockers (ccbs) show significant efficacy on covid-19 patients. they also conducted in vitro experiments to examine the efficacy of ccbs and other hypertension drugs on blocking sars-cov-2 replication in cells. the results show that only ccbs block virus replication. however, the blocking mechanism is not apparent. therefore, further investigations of ccbs efficacy on post-entry virus replication in vitro and clinically are needed.although the studies cited above show hypertension medications are beneficial for covid-19 patients, a recent retrospective, observational study [41] found that patients with hypertension, who took acei/arb drugs, have a higher risk of developing a severe case of covid-19 (p = 0.064). however, this is not a statistically significant difference and may be due to the limited number of patients with hypertension (75 out of 274 covid-19 patients). also, the group of patients with hypertension were older and had more comorbidities, such as chronic renal insufficiency, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and cerebrovascular disease, than patients without hypertension.interestingly, another study [42] hypothesizes that hypertension treatment with acei and arbs, which results in an upregulation of ace2, may increase the risk of developing severe covid-19. this is based on a structural study suggesting that sars-cov-2 uses ace2 as its receptor [43] . it was also noted that ccb treatment of hypertension does not lead to an upregulation of ace2 which in turn makes it a safe treatment of hypertension in covid-19 patients. however, this theory is not supported by the previously cited retrospective studies on covid-19 patients who took acei and arbs [37] . besides, sanchis-gomar et al. [44] , noted that several health organizations have recommended the continued use of aceis and arbs for treating hypertension in covid-19 patients. they also found, based on their review study, that there are no significant differences between aceis and arbs for managing hypertension, with arbs being a more favorable option for severe cases of covid-19.we also reviewed several articles that employed systematic reviews and meta-analysis of published studies on the effects of hypertension on covid-19 disease severity. in [45] , systematic reviews show that hypertension is one of the major comorbidities of fatality table 3 . hypertension, like diabetes, has been proven to be linked to a significantly higher risk of respiratory infection, making it a solid indicator of covid-19 severity. additionally, systematic reviews indicate hypertension to be common comorbidity in covid-19 death cases as well as be linked to significantly higher mortality risk and increased incidence of icu admission. although, it should be noted that further studies of other comorbidities connected to hypertension are necessary. nonetheless, it is evident that many patients with the virus also suffer from hypertension and as a result, the comorbidity as well as its medicinal therapies on covid-19 have been observed. it is also found that hypertension treatment should be continued to lower the severity risk. some researchers recommended ccbs treatment and others found there are no significant differences in using aceis, arbs, or ccbs. however, there seems to be a general agreement with most health organizations, who recommended hypertension treatment to be continued in covid-19 patients [44] .cholesterol level alteration has been found to occur during a viral infection such as (hiv) and hepatitis c virus (hcv) [48] . the mechanism of alteration involves the virus binding to the scavenger receptor b type 1 (sr-b1) that facilitates the selective uptake of high-density lipoprotein (hdl) cholesterol and other lipid components of receptor-bound hdl particles, including free cholesterol (fc) and triglycerides (tg) [49] . also, it has been found that membrane cholesterol is an important component to facilitate viral entry into host cells [50] . the role of cholesterol in viral infection was investigated even before the current pandemic of sars-cov-2. ren et al. [51] , found that cholesterol depletion from the cellular membrane significantly impaired the efficiency of viral infection.wei et al., [49] studied the cholesterol metabolism of covid-19 patients compared to the normal reference population. in general, they found that fc, hdl, and ldl cholesterol level is significantly low for covid-19 patients compare to the reference population. tg levels were also lower, but not at a significant level. moreover, cholesterol metabolism of mild, moderate, severe, and critical covid-19 patients was also presented and discussed. the levels of hdl-c were significantly lower in patients with severe and critical disease than in patients with moderate or mild disease.in another study [52] , hdl cholesterol levels along with serum albumin levels were used as predictors for the severity of covid-19 disease. the study investigated the differences in clinical features between mild and severe covid-19 patients. other features studied included: hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and decreased apoa1. patients were grouped into two types: mild and severe, and those in critical condition were not included. it was also noted that patients with severe disease were significantly older (median age: 58) compared to patients with mild disease (median age: 37). their results show that patients with severe disease have significantly lower hdl cholesterol. they also observed increased levels of albumin and hdl cholesterol in patients who were at the late stage of recovering from covid-19.another recent study [53] , looked at the serum cholesterol level in patients with covid-19 in wenzhou, china. the laboratory test results show that patients had significantly low fc, hdl-cholesterol, and ldl-cholesterol levels compared to healthy control. moreover, they investigated the cholesterol levels in two categories of patients: primary infection cases being those who had been in wuhan, and secondary infection cases being those who had never been in wuhan but were infected by person-to-person transmission. they reported that hdl-cholesterol in the primary infection group was significantly lower than in the secondary infection group. similar to the results in [52] , the cholesterol levels of fc, hdl, and ldl were improving as patients recovered.the inverse correlation between hdl cholesterol level and severity of covid-19 is also highlighted in [54] . the author argued that taking statin drug therapy for cholesterol may increase covid-19 infections. statins are drugs used to lower cholesterol and protect against a heart attack and stroke. taking statins results in very low or no production of endogenous cholesterol, which leads to the upregulation of ldl in the cell membrane. this, as stated earlier, is found to be an important component to facilitate viral entry into host cells. overview of articles investigating cholesterol levels in covid-19 patients is summarized in table 4 . cholesterol has previously been investigated concerning many viral infections. typically, there is a selective uptake of cholesterol as viruses bind to the cellular membrane, which ultimately enables severe infection. therefore, analyses have been conducted on the connection between covid-19 and cholesterol. most publications indicated that fc, hdl, and ldl cholesterol levels were significantly low in patients with a viral infection, compared to the control. these studies explained the ability of sars-cov-2 virus to use serum cholesterol for its entry into host cells. therefore, low serum cholesterol level can be used as an early predictor of covid-19 severity in patients. also, observing improvement in serum cholesterol levels may indicate the improvement of conditions in patients. it is also worth noting that statin drugs for cholesterol may contribute to the severity of covid-19 disease by inhibiting endogenous cholesterol, leading to the upregulation of ldl. this leads to higher membrane cholesterol levels that enhance the ability of sars-cov-2 to enter host cells.apart from fever and respiratory complications, acute kidney injury has been observed in some patients with covid-19. to investigate the possible cause of kidney damage in covid-19 patients, lin et al. [55] used both published kidney and bladder cell atlas data as well as an independent, unpublished kidney single-cell rna-seq data generated in-house, to evaluate ace2 gene expressions in all cell types of healthy kidneys and bladders. the results showed the enriched expression of all subtypes of proximal tubule cells of the kidney and low but detectable levels of expression in bladder epithelial cells. these results indicated the urinary system is a potential route for covid-19 infection, along with the respiratory system and digestion system. the findings suggested the kidney abnormalities of sars and covid-19 patients may be due to proximal tubule cell damage and subsequent systematic inflammatory response induced kidney injury. beyond that, laboratory tests of viruses and related indicators in urine may be needed in some special patients of covid-19.as for the novel coronavirus, a recent study reported that the human kidney is a specific target for sars-cov-2 infection [56] . the authors examined the viral nucleocapsid protein in situ in the kidney post-mortem and found that sars-cov-2 antigens accumulated in kidney tubules, suggesting that sars-cov-2 infects the human kidney directly, inducing aki and contributing to viral spreading in the body [57] .alberici et al. [58] describe 20 kidney transplant recipients (median age 59 years, 80% male) with sars-cov2 induced pneumonia. all patients presented with fever but only one complained of difficulty in breathing. overall, 5 kidney transplant recipients died after a median period of 15 days from symptom onset. these preliminary findings describe a rapid clinical deterioration, associated with chest radiographic deterioration and escalating oxygen requirement in renal transplant recipients with sars-cov2 pneumonia. thus, in this limited cohort of long-term kidney transplant patients, sars-cov-2 induced pneumonia is characterized by a high risk of progression and significant mortality.wang et al. [59] conducted a study on one male patient (age 49) with a history of close contact with a confirmed covid-19 case, type 2 diabetes for 20 years, and hypertension for 10 years. the patient underwent comprehensive treatment for covid-19. organ transplant patients with covid-19 infection might have poorer prognosis because of their systemic immunosuppressive state. however, this severe case was cured even without discontinuing or reducing his immunosuppressant therapy. this immunosuppressed case might help physicians to establish optimal treatment strategies for similar severe cases.whether covid-19 causes significant acute kidney injury (aki) remains controversial. zhou et al. [60] retrospectively analyzed the clinical characteristics, urine, and blood routine tests as well as other laboratory parameters of 178 hospitalized covid-19 patients in wuhan, china. a total of 5 (2.8%) patients showed increased blood urea nitrogen (bun), indicating a few cases with "kidney dysfunction". however, among the 83 (46.6%) patients with no history of kidney disease who received routine urine test upon hospitalization, 45 (54.2%) patients displayed abnormality in urinalyses, such as proteinuria, hematuria, and leukocyturia, and none of the patients were recorded to have acute kidney injury (aki) throughout the study. meanwhile, the patients with abnormal urinalysis typically displayed worse disease progression that was reflected through laboratory parameter presentations, including markers of liver injury, inflammation, and coagulation. the authors concluded that urinalysis is better in unveiling potential kidney impairment of covid-19 patients than blood chemistry tests. additionally, urinalysis could be used to reflect and predict disease severity.cheng et al. [61] determined the prevalence of acute kidney injury (aki) in patients with covid-19 and evaluated the association between markers of abnormal kidney function and death in patients with covid-19. the authors studied a cohort of 701 patients with covid-19, in wuhan during 2020, of whom 113 (16.1%) died in hospitals. during the study period, aki occurred in 5.1% of patients. kaplan-meier analysis demonstrated that patients with kidney disease had a significantly higher risk of in-hospital death. thus, the authors believed that the prevalence of kidney disease on admission and the development of aki during hospitalization in patients with covid-19 is high and is associated with in-hospital mortality. hence, clinicians should increase their awareness of kidney disease in patients with severe covid-19. overview of articles investigating kidney disease among covid-19 patients is summarized in table 5 . in addition to the multiple complications observed, acute kidney injury has also been detected in covid-19 patients. results indicated the urinary system, respiratory system, and digestion system as potential routes for the covid-19 infection; one study indicating the human kidney to be a specific target of the virus. findings propose kidney abnormalities in covid-19 patients may be due to proximal tubule cell damage and subsequent systematic inflammatory response induced kidney injury. additionally, in one study, sars-cov-2 antigens were seen to accumulate in kidney tubules, implying the direct impact on the kidney, leading to aki induction and viral spread within the body. there have also been studies describing a rapid clinical deterioration, escalating oxygen requirement, high risk of progression, and significant mortality in kidney transplant patients. similarly, the incidence of kidney disease on admission as well as the development of aki is correlated with fatality in covid-19 patients. however, if covid-19 causes acute kidney injury remains uncertain. many authors concluded that clinicians must still try to increase their awareness of kidney issues in patients with severe infection, and a urinalysis may be used to predict the extent of disease severity. in a note to eur. neurol journal editor, morelli et al. [66] mentioned that between february 21, 2020 (first covid-19 patient recorded in italy), and march 25, 2020, there were only 6 admissions from the casualty department for ischemic stroke. the authors suggested that the reason could be the controversial role il-6 plays in stroke.although high il-6 levels have been reported to harm brain infarct volume and long-term outcome [67] , in ischemic stroke there has also been experimental evidence that il-6 has a protective effect and helps in the improvement of poststroke angiogenesis [68] . this could also be due to the presence of thrombocytopenia in covid-19 patients. indeed, what may be true for influenza pneumonia (i.e., increased stroke risk) may not be true for sarscov-2. the main limitation of the remark, however, is certainly the short observation period of just 1 month.oxley et al. [69] reported 5 (4 male, 1 female) large-vessel stroke patients with confirmed sars-cov-2, who presented in the health system of new york city. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection was diagnosed in all five patients. although the patients were having covid-19 related symptoms such as fever, cough, and lethargy, all of them had a reduced nih stroke scale/score (nihss). overview of articles investigating stroke among covid-19 patients is summarized in table 6 . one study identified 36.4% of covid patients to have neurological symptoms (mainly in patients with severe disease) and several mechanisms of covid-19 that increase stroke risk have been recognized but neither has been proven as significant. further studies are required to investigate the neurological pathology during covid-19 infection. additionally, there may be a need to improve specific vte diagnostic strategies, the safety of thromboprophylaxis, and further, identify the role il-6 plays in ischemic stroke. however, the risks associated with ischemic stroke in covid-19 patients are still uncertain. as with cancer patients, medical resources must be allocated to target the strain covid-19 has placed on ischemic stroke care. meanwhile, the relationship between covid-19 and stroke must be examined further.the studies reviewed in this paper have assessed the effects of diabetes, cancer, hypertension, high cholesterol, kidney issues, and stroke, on covid-19 severity. through a thorough examination of the evidence provided in these reports, inferences on the relationship between these preexisting conditions and covid-19 can be made.in conclusion, it can be observed that diabetes, hypertension, and cholesterol levels possess an apparent relation to covid-19 severity. other comorbidities, such as cancer, kidney issues, and stroke, must be further evaluated to detect a strong relationship to the virus. additionally, treatment options must be examined further to provide optimal treatment and ensure better outcomes for patients suffering from these comorbidities. however, it should be noted that, whether definitive measurements exist or not, the care of patients as well as the research involved should be largely prioritized to tackle this deadly pandemic.the recent outbreak of the novel covid-19 disease and its rapid worldwide spread poses a global health emergency. the novel virus is thought to belong to the same family as middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronavirus and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus, but it is unique in its own right [10] . researchers around the globe are investigating several risk factors that may contribute to the severity of covid-19. the world health organization (who) indicated that elderly individuals, as well as those with underlying medical conditions, are at higher risk of developing severe covid-19 disease [11] . as of today, june 14 th , 2020, more than 7.800 million people are infected by the virus and more than 430,500 have lost their lives. most of the deaths are believed to be associated with the existence of comorbidities. generally, patients with compromised immune systems are considered to be particularly vulnerable [12] . several research works have targeted the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of patients infected with covid-19; however, the risk factors for severity and mortality have not been sufficiently investigated [13] . identifying major risk factors and taking corresponding clinical measures could contribute massively to saving lives. most of the previous studies have identified comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, stroke, cancer, kidney issues, and high cholesterol among the high-risk factors. thus, this paper represents a systematic review of the literature to shed light on the effects of these pre-existing conditions on covid-19 disease severity. additionally, as no method currently exists that can determine the level of risk these comorbidities pose, this paper serves the purpose of achieving the only reasonable option: to draw lessons from earlier experiences and practices.a search was conducted on the freely available covid-19 open research dataset (cord-19) [14] . cord-19 is a resource consisting of 128,000 scholarly articles, including over 59,000 articles with full text related to covid-19, sars-cov-2, and coronaviruses. the dataset is frequently updated when new research appears in peer-reviewed publications and archive services became available. to screen every article in the dataset, we developed a search engine in addition to the bm25 search index [15] . bm25 is a retrieval function that ranks a set of documents based on the query terms appearing in each document, regardless of their proximity within the document. all papers are indexed by simply applying a preprocessing function to clean and tokenize the abstracts. once all documents were indexed, we created document vectors by loading optimized, cached json tokens followed by applying a document similarity index using annoy [16] . annoy is a c++ library with python bindings to search for documents in space that are close to a given query. for more details of the implantation, please visit https://github.com/dgunning/cord19.filtering of the articles was then undertaken using keywords and questions, e.g. "effects of diabetes on covid/normal coronavirus/sars-cov-2/ncov/covid-19 disease severity, mortality?". the search terms are repeated for all the comorbidities considered in this paper.as illustrated in fig. 1 , a systematic approach was used to screen the full covid-19 open research dataset [14] . through the systematic method, 68 articles were found that scored highly on the confidence rating. an additional search was run, employing google scholar and pubmed, to ensure every relevant article was included. each of the 68 papers was read thoroughly, causing 34 articles to be excluded from the list and an additional 19 articles to be manually added to the list. the ultimate list of 54 articles was split into six categories, with 7 articles focusing on cancer, 11 on diabetes mellitus, 7 on kidney issues, 9 on stroke, 12 on hypertension, and 8 on high cholesterol.diabetes is one of the most serious comorbidities linked to the severity of all three well-known human pathogenic coronavirus infections, including sars-cov 2. patients with diabetes have an increased risk of severe complications, including adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multi-organ failure. depending on the global region, 20-50% of covid-19 pandemic patients had diabetes, which emphasizes the importance of the link between covid-19 and diabetes [17] . according to gupta r. et al. [1] , individuals with diabetes are at risk of infections, especially influenza and pneumonia. patients with diabetes are severely affected when they contract respiratory viruses. therefore, diabetes was seen as an important risk factor for mortality in patients infected with pandemic influenza a 2009 (h1n1), sars coronavirus, and middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (merscov) [18] , [19] , [20] .several studies show that among the covid-19 patients, there was also a noticeable percentage of patients suffering from diabetes mellitus (dm). yang x. et al. [21] found that among the 32 non-survivors, from a group of 52 covid-19 patients (median age of 59.7, 67.31% male), 22% were diabetes patients. additionally, out of 1,099 patients with confirmed covid-19 (median age of 47, 58.1% male) from autonomous regions in china, 173 had severe disease with comorbidities in which 16.2% were diabetes mellitus [22] . zhang jj. et al. [23] analyzed data for 140 patients (median age of 57, 50.7% male) who were admitted to hospitals in wuhan, china with confirmed covid-19 cases; 12.1% of these patients had diabetes. [24] reviewed 258 confirmed covid-19 patients (63 with diabetes) who were hospitalized at the west court of union hospital in wuhan, china. the patient median age was 64 and no significant difference was observed between males and females. however, as indicated by the authors, patients with diabetes had significantly higher leukocyte and neutrophil counts as well as higher levels of fasting blood glucose, serum creatinine, urea nitrogen, and creatine kinase isoenzyme mb at admission, compared to those without diabetes. the cox proportional hazard model showed that diabetes (adjusted hazard ratio [ahr]=3.64; 95% ci: 1.09-12.21) and fasting blood glucose (ahr=1.19; 95% ci: 1.08-1.31) were associated with the fatality of covid-19, adjusting for potential confounders. the authors concluded that diabetes mellitus is associated with greater disease severity as well as a higher risk of mortality in patients with covid-19, and recommended that primary and secondary prevention strategies are needed for covid-19 patients with diabetes.bloomgarden zt. et al. [25] stated that mortality rates from pneumonia among patients with diabetes in hong kong (age >= 75) exceed mortality rates in this age group from cardiovascular disease and cancer [26] . similar evidence of risk amid persons with diabetes has been reported for the two earlier cov infections: sars in 2002 (affecting more than 8,000 individuals, mainly in asia [27] , [28] ) and mers in 2012 (affecting more than 2,000 individuals, mainly in saudi arabia [29] ). furthermore, diabetes was present in 42.3% of 26 fatalities due to covid-19, in a study from wuhan, china [30] . huang c. et al. [31] investigated 41 hospital-admitted patients identified as having a laboratory-confirmed 2019-ncov infection. most of the infected patients were men (73%), the median age was 49 years and 20% had diabetes. however, these cases are only a small proportion of the patients affected. a report of 72,314 cases (with 44,672 confirmed covid-19 cases) published by the chinese centre for disease control and prevention showed an increased mortality rate in people with diabetes (2.3% overall and 7.3% in patients with diabetes) [32] .bello-chavolla oy. [33] predicted mortality due to sars-cov-2 and developed a mechanistic score 2 relating obesity and diabetes to covid-19 outcomes, in data from mexico. among 71,103 subjects (predominantly male, the median age of 56.9), the authors observed 15,529 subjects with sars-cov-2 and 1,434 deaths (from sars-cov-2 or other causes). risk factors for lethality in covid-19 included early-onset diabetes, obesity, advanced age, immunosuppression, and ckd. additionally, it was observed that obesity mediates 45.5% of the effect of diabetes on covid-19 lethality. the authors used stratified points according to categories of low risk (≤0), mild risk (1-3), 141 moderate risks (4-6), high risk (7) (8) (9) , and very high risk (≥10); the score of diabetes was 1. out of the 137 deaths from sars-cov-2, 2.76% had diabetes.a total of 174 patients (median age of 59, 43.7% male) confirmed with covid-19 were studied by guo w. et al. [34] . demographic data, medical history, symptoms, signs, laboratory findings, chest computed tomographies (ct), as well as the treatment measures, were collected and analyzed. the authors found that 24 covid-19 patients with no other comorbidities except diabetes were at higher risk of severe pneumonia, the release of tissue injuryrelated enzymes, excessive uncontrolled inflammation responses, and hypercoagulable state associated with dysregulation of glucose metabolism. the authors recommended that diabetes should be considered as a risk factor for rapid progression and poor prognosis of covid-19. extensive care should be administered to patients with diabetes in case of rapid deterioration. the authors described a mortality rate of covid-19 amongst diabetic patients, without other comorbidities, of about 16%. the above-mentioned studies are summarized in table 1 .according to a few recently published results (mainly chinese cohort), patients with cancer are more vulnerable to covid-19 complications. however, how susceptible cancer patients are to infection with covid-19 has yet to be established.liang w. et al. [6] collected and analyzed 2,007 cases from 575 hospitals, in 31 provincial administrative regions in china. all cases were diagnosed with laboratory-confirmed covid-19. a total of 417 cases were excluded because of insufficient records of previous disease history. the number of covid-19 cases with a history of cancer is 18 (1%; 95% ci: 0.61-1.65) out of 1,590 covid-19 cases, which according to 2015 cancer epidemiology statistics seems to be higher than the incidence of cancer in the overall chinese population (285.83 [0·29%] per 100,000 people. lung cancer was the most frequent type (five [28%] of the 18 patients). compared with patients without cancer, patients with cancer were older (mean age 63.1 years), had no significant differences in sex, other baseline symptoms, other comorbidities, or baseline severity of x-ray. most importantly, patients with cancer were observed to have a higher risk of severe events compared to patients without cancer (seven [39%] of 18 patients vs 124 [8%] of 1,572 patients; fisher's exact p=0.0003). the authors concluded that patients with cancer might have a higher risk of covid-19 than individuals without cancer. additionally, they showed that patients with cancer had poorer outcomes from covid-19, providing a timely reminder to physicians that cancer patients require intensive care while infected. diabetes should be considered as a risk factor for rapid progression and poor prognosis of covid-19.na* -not available . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . zhang l., et al. [38] regarded cancer patients as a highly vulnerable group in the current covid-19 pandemic. the authors included 28 cancer patients with laboratory-confirmed covid-19, from 3 designated hospitals in wuhan, china, from jan. 2020 to 26 feb. 2020. the median age of the patients was 65, 60.7% were males, and 25% had lung cancer. the authors mentioned that cancer patients show deteriorating conditions and poor outcomes from the covid-19 infection.in addition, yu j. et al. [39] reviewed the medical records, including demographic, clinical, and treatment data, of 1,524 patients with cancer who were admitted to zhongnan hospital of wuhan university, china, from dec. 30, 2019, to feb. 17, 2020. outcomes of covid-19 among patients with cancer were reported. the authors estimated the infection rate of sars-cov-2 in patients with cancer, from a single institution, to be 0.79% (12 of 1524 patients: 95% ci: 0.3-1.2). this was higher than the cumulative incidence of all diagnosed covid-19 cases that were reported in the city of wuhan over the same time (0.37%; 41 152 of 11 081 000 cases; data cutoff on february 17, 2020). the median age of infected patients was 66 years. seven of 12 (58.3%) patients had non-small cell lung carcinoma (nsclc). five (41.7%) were being treated with either chemotherapy with or without immunotherapy (n = 3) or radiotherapy (n = 2). three patients (25.0%) developed sars; and one patient required intensive-level care. by march 10, 2020, 6 patients (50.0%) were discharged, whereas 3 deaths (25.0%) were recorded. of the 1,524 patients with cancer who were screened, 228 had nsclc. the authors stated that patients with nsclc older than 60 years had a higher incidence of covid-19 than those aged 60 years or younger (4.3% vs 1.8%). in table 2 , we summarize the details of the three mentioned case studies. high blood pressure (hypertension) is one of the most common conditions in severe covid-19 patients [8] . in this section, we review several studies that looked at the relationship between hypertension and the severity of covid-19. the relationship between high blood pressure and increased risk of pneumonia was a subject of a study that analyzed uk biobank data of 107,310 hypertension patients, with 3% of patients developing pneumonia afterward [9] . the data analysis shows that the risk of respiratory disease is significantly higher in patients with hypertension. patients with hypertension were also found to be at higher risk of acute respiratory disease and chronic lower respiratory disease, independent of age, sex, smoking status, and bmi. generalizing these results to covid-19 is plausible and led to many studies that focus on hypertension as a strong indication of covid-19 severity.several recent studies have investigated the variability in covid-19 disease severity in patients with hypertension and its medicinal therapy. in [40] , the authors reported that among 3,017 hospitalized covid-19 patients, 53% were diagnosed with hypertension. furthermore, the mortality rates among patients on angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (acei) for hypertension treatment (27%, p=0.001) as well as for patients on angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) (33%, p=0.12) were lower compared to other anti-hypertensive agents (39%). therefore, these results support the continuation of acei and arb therapy for covid-19 hypertensive patients.these results are supported by another study [41] , where 126 covid-19 patients with hypertension were retrospectively grouped into arbs/aceis (n=43) and non-arbs/aceis (n=83) according to their antihypertensive medications. a group of covid-19 patients without hypertension were then randomly selected to match the previous group based on age and sex. the results of this study show that the arbs/aceis group had a lower proportion of critical patients (9.3% vs 22.9%; p=0.061), and a lower death rate (4.7% vs 13.3%; p=0.216). however, these differences are not statistically significant.similarly, liu et al. [42] , investigated the disease severity in patients with hypertension who used acei, arb, ccb, and beta-blockers (bb) compared to patients who did not take any hypertension medication. considering only 46 elderly patients (age > 65), the results show that patients who took arb have a significantly lower risk of developing a severe disease compared to patients who took no drugs. however, although patients who took acei, ccb, and bb also had a lower risk of developing severe disease, there was no statistical significance compared to patients who took no drugs. this could be due to the limited number of patients on these drugs compared to arb.in another study [43] , the authors argued, based on their retrospective investigation of different hypertension drugs, that calcium channel blockers (ccbs) show significant efficacy on covid-19 patients. they also conducted in vitro experiments to examine the efficacy of ccbs and other hypertension drugs on blocking sars-cov-2 replication in cells. the results show that only ccbs block virus replication. however, the blocking mechanism is not apparent. therefore, further investigations of ccbs efficacy on post-entry virus replication in vitro and clinically are needed.although the studies cited above show hypertension medications are beneficial for covid-19 patients, a recent retrospective, observational study [44] found that patients with hypertension, who took acei/arb drugs, have a higher risk of developing a severe case of covid-19 (p = 0.064). however, this is not a statistically significant difference and may be due to the limited number of patients with hypertension (75 out of 274 covid-19 patients). also, the group of patients with hypertension were older and had more comorbidities, such as chronic renal insufficiency, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and cerebrovascular disease, than patients without hypertension.interestingly, another study [45] hypothesizes that hypertension treatment with acei and arbs, which results in an upregulation of ace2, may increase the risk of developing severe covid-19. this is based on a structural study suggesting that sars-cov-2 uses ace2 as its receptor [46] . it was also noted that ccb treatment of hypertension does not lead to an upregulation of ace2 which in turn makes it a safe treatment of hypertension in covid-19 patients. however, this theory is not supported by the previously cited retrospective studies on covid-19 patients . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . who took acei and arbs [40] . besides, sanchis-gomar et al. [47] , noted that several health organizations have recommended the continued use of aceis and arbs for treating hypertension in covid-19 patients. they also found, based on their review study, that there are no significant differences between aceis and arbs for managing hypertension, with arbs being a more favorable option for severe cases of covid-19.we also reviewed several articles that employed systematic reviews and meta-analysis of published studies on the effects of hypertension on covid-19 disease severity. in [48] , systematic reviews show that hypertension is one of the major comorbidities of fatality covid-19 cases. similarly, zuin et al. [49] carried out a systematic review and meta-analysis that show covid-19 patients with hypertension have a significantly higher mortality risk. however, it is noted that further studies of other comorbidities either linked or not linked to hypertension are needed. also, roncon et al. [50] looked at the rate of icu admission of covid-19 patients with hypertension. they found that among the 1,382 patients (mean age = 51.5 years, 57.74% males), patients with hypertension had a significantly increased risk of icu admission (or=2.54; 95% ci: 1.83 -3.54; p<0.0001). the above-mentioned cases are summarized in table 3 . cholesterol level alteration has been found to occur during a viral infection such as (hiv) and hepatitis c virus (hcv) [51] . the mechanism of alteration involves the virus binding to the scavenger receptor b type 1 (sr-b1) that facilitates the selective uptake of high-density lipoprotein (hdl) cholesterol and other lipid components of receptor-bound hdl particles, including free cholesterol (fc) and triglycerides (tg) [52] . also, it has been found that membrane cholesterol is an important component to facilitate viral entry into host cells [53] . the role of cholesterol in viral infection was investigated even before the current pandemic of sars-cov-2. ren et al. [54] , found that cholesterol depletion from the cellular membrane significantly impaired the efficiency of viral infection.wei et al., [52] studied the cholesterol metabolism of covid-19 patients compared to the normal reference population. in general, they found that fc, hdl, and ldl cholesterol level is significantly low for covid-19 patients compare to the reference population. tg levels were also lower, but not at a significant level. moreover, cholesterol metabolism of mild, moderate, severe, and critical covid-19 patients was also presented and discussed. the levels of hdl-c were significantly lower in patients with the severe and critical disease than in patients with moderate or mild disease. in another study [55] , hdl cholesterol levels along with serum albumin levels were used as predictors for the severity of covid-19 disease. the study investigated the differences in clinical features between mild and severe covid-19 patients. other features studied included: hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and decreased apoa1.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.16.20132639 doi: medrxiv preprint patients were grouped into two types: mild and severe, and those in critical condition were not included. it was also noted that patients with severe disease were significantly older (median age: 58) compared to patients with mild disease (median age: 37). their results show that patients with severe disease have significantly lower hdl cholesterol. they also observed increased levels of albumin and hdl cholesterol in patients who were at the late stage of recovering from covid-19.another recent study [56] , looked at the serum cholesterol level in patients with covid-19 in wenzhou, china. the laboratory test results show that patients had significantly low fc, hdl-cholesterol, and ldl-cholesterol levels compared to healthy control. moreover, they investigated the cholesterol levels in two categories of patients: primary infection cases being those who had been in wuhan, and secondary infection cases being those who had never been in wuhan but were infected by person-to-person transmission. they reported that hdl-cholesterol in the primary infection group was significantly lower than in the secondary infection group. similar to the results in [55] , the cholesterol levels of fc, hdl, and ldl were improving as patients recovered.the inverse correlation between hdl cholesterol level and severity of covid-19 is also highlighted in [57] . the author argued that taking statin drug therapy for cholesterol may increase covid-19 infections. statins are drugs used to lower cholesterol and protect against a heart attack and stroke. taking statins results in very low or no production of endogenous cholesterol, which leads to the upregulation of ldl in the cell membrane. this, as stated earlier, is found to be an important component to facilitate viral entry into host cells. overview of articles investigating cholesterol levels in covid-19 patients is summarized in table 4 . apart from fever and respiratory complications, acute kidney injury has been observed in some patients with covid-19. to investigate the possible cause of kidney damage in covid-19 patients, lin w. at al. [58] used both published kidney and bladder cell atlas data as well as an independent, unpublished kidney single-cell rna-seq data generated in-house, to evaluate ace2 gene expressions in all cell types of healthy kidneys and bladders. the results showed the enriched expression of all subtypes of proximal tubule cells of the kidney and low but detectable levels of expression in bladder epithelial cells. these results indicated the urinary system is a potential route for covid-19 infection, along with the respiratory system and digestion system. the findings suggested the . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . kidney abnormalities of sars and covid-19 patients may be due to proximal tubule cell damage and subsequent systematic inflammatory response induced kidney injury. beyond that, laboratory tests of viruses and related indicators in urine may be needed in some special patients of covid-19.as for the novel coronavirus, a recent study reported that the human kidney is a specific target for sars-cov-2 infection [59] . the authors examined the viral nucleocapsid protein in situ in the kidney post-mortem and found that sars-cov-2 antigens accumulated in kidney tubules, suggesting that sars-cov-2 infects the human kidney directly, inducing aki and contributing to viral spreading in the body [60] .alberici f. et al. [61] describe 20 kidney transplant recipients (median age 59 years, 80% male) with sars-cov2 induced pneumonia. all patients presented with fever but only one complained of difficulty in breathing. overall, 5 kidney transplant recipients died after a median period of 15 days from symptom onset. these preliminary findings describe a rapid clinical deterioration, associated with chest radiographic deterioration and escalating oxygen requirement in renal transplant recipients with sars-cov2 pneumonia. thus, in this limited cohort of long-term kidney transplant patients, sars-cov-2 induced pneumonia is characterized by a high risk of progression and significant mortality.wang j. et al. [62] conducted a study on one male patient (age 49) with a history of close contact with a confirmed covid-19 case, type 2 diabetes for 20 years, and hypertension for 10 years. the patient underwent comprehensive treatment for covid-19. organ transplant patients with covid-19 infection might have poorer prognosis because of their systemic immunosuppressive state. however, this severe case was cured even without discontinuing or reducing his immunosuppressant therapy. this immunosuppressed case might help physicians to establish optimal treatment strategies for similar severe cases.whether covid-19 causes significant acute kidney injury (aki) remains controversial. zhou h. et al. [63] retrospectively analyzed the clinical characteristics, urine, and blood routine tests as well as other laboratory parameters of 178 hospitalized covid-19 patients in wuhan, china. no patient presented increased serum creatinine (scr), and 5 (2.8%) patients showed increased blood urea nitrogen (bun), indicating a few cases with "kidney dysfunction". however, among the 83 (46.6%) patients with no history of kidney disease who received routine urine test upon hospitalization, 45 (54.2%) patients displayed abnormality in urinalyses, such as proteinuria, hematuria, and leukocyturia, and none of the patients were recorded to have acute kidney injury (aki) throughout the study. meanwhile, the patients with abnormal urinalysis typically displayed worse disease progression that was reflected through laboratory parameter presentations, including markers of liver injury, inflammation, and coagulation. the authors concluded that urinalysis is better in unveiling potential kidney impairment of covid-19 patients than blood chemistry tests. additionally, urinalysis could be used to reflect and predict disease severity.cheng y. et al.[64] determined the prevalence of acute kidney injury (aki) in patients with covid-19 and evaluated the association between markers of abnormal kidney function and death in patients with covid-19. the authors studied a cohort of 701 patients (median age of 63, 52.35% male) with covid-19, in wuhan during 2020, of whom 113 (16.1%) died in hospitals. during the study period, aki occurred in 5.1% of patients. kaplan-meier analysis demonstrated that patients with kidney disease had a significantly higher risk of in-hospital death. thus, the authors believed that the prevalence of kidney disease on admission and the development of aki during hospitalization in patients with covid-19 is high and is associated with in-hospital mortality. hence, clinicians should increase their awareness of kidney disease in patients with severe covid-19.acute stroke remains a medical emergency even during the covid-19 pandemic. avula a. et al. [65] investigated 4 patients with covid-19 that also presented acute stroke. all 4 patients (table 5 ) had radiographic evidence of stroke and pcr-confirmed covid-19 infection. the authors elucidated the clinical characteristics, imaging findings, and the clinical course. they warned that covid-19 patients can present with cerebrovascular accidents and . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . should use appropriate personal protective equipment in every suspected patient. further studies are urgently needed to improve the current understandings of neurological pathology in the setting of covid-19 infection. , in ischemic stroke there has also been experimental evidence that il-6 has a protective effect and helps in the . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . improvement of poststroke angiogenesis [71] . this could also be due to the presence of thrombocytopenia in covid-19 patients. indeed, what may be true for influenza pneumonia (i.e., increased stroke risk) may not be true for sarscov-2. the main limitation of the remark, however, is certainly the short observation period of just 1 month.oxley tj. et al.[72] reported 5 (4 male, 1 female) large-vessel stroke patients with confirmed sars-cov-2 (mean age is 40.4, all patients are younger than 50 years) who presented in the health system of new york city. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection was diagnosed in all five patients. although the patients were having covid-19 related symptoms such as fever, cough, and lethargy, all of them had a reduced nih stroke scale/score (nihss).the studies reviewed in this paper have assessed the effects of diabetes, cancer, hypertension, high cholesterol, kidney issues, and stroke, on covid-19 severity. through a thorough examination of the evidence provided in these reports, inferences on the relationship between these preexisting conditions and covid-19 can be made.it is apparent that individuals with diabetes are at an increased risk for covid-19 infection and medical complications including death. suggestions are made on the possible pathophysiological mechanisms of the relationship between diabetes and covid-19, and its management. no definite conclusions can be made based on current limited evidence and data [1] . further research regarding this relationship and its clinical management is warranted [2] . furthermore, the article by guo et al. [3] has left several relevant questions to be addressed: does the association between covid-19 and diabetes differ by different types of diabetes? do antidiabetic drugs have an impact on disease progression? is the impact of aging the same in diabetics as is in those without diabetes? while the results of this study should be read in the light of some limitations, such as the small sample size and the large age difference between study groups when patients with other comorbidities were excluded, it still provides relevant insights that could inform about how covid-19 interacts with preexisting conditions [4] .a few recently published reports provided results suggesting that cancer patients are susceptible to covid-19 complications. in these studies, lung cancer was most frequently observed, and the covid-19 cases analyzed were all from hospitals in china. however, according to moujaess e. et al. [5] , such reports could lead many oncologists to change their daily practice in cancer care, without solid evidence and recommendations. the data presented should be carefully interpreted, not only because of the small sample but also because cancer patients in this cohort (mentioned in [6] for instance) had a significantly older median age than their control (63·1 vs 48·7 years) as well as a more significant history of smoking, suggesting that these two factors might be associated with the poor covid-19 outcomes than the cancer history itself. moreover, these results should be interpreted with caution in the absence of adjustment to the prevalence of the different comorbidities in the chinese population [5] . also, xia y., et al. [7] commented on the mentioned studies and highlighted reasons to be cautious, suggesting that current evidence remains insufficient to explain a conclusive association between cancer and covid-19. though one effect that has risen concern, is due to the number of covid-19 patients surpassing hospital and healthcare capacity, cancer patients may be overlooked resulting in negative consequences in their treatments.hypertension, like diabetes, has been proven to be linked to a significantly higher risk of respiratory infection, making it a solid indicator of covid-19 severity. additionally, systematic reviews indicate hypertension to be common comorbidity in covid-19 death cases as well as be linked to significantly higher mortality risk and increased incidence of icu admission. although, it should be noted that further studies of other comorbidities connected to hypertension are necessary. nonetheless, it is evident that many patients with the virus also suffer from hypertension and as a result, the comorbidity as well as its medicinal therapies on covid-19 have been observed. it is also found that hypertension treatment should be continued to lower the severity risk. some researchers recommended ccbs treatment and others found there are no significant differences in using aceis, arbs, or ccbs. however, there seems to be a general agreement with most health organizations, who recommended hypertension treatment to be continued in covid-19 patients [47] .cholesterol has previously been investigated concerning many viral infections. typically, there is a selective uptake of cholesterol as viruses bind to the cellular membrane, which ultimately enables severe infection. therefore, analyses have been conducted on the connection between covid-19 and cholesterol. most publications indicated that fc, hdl, and ldl cholesterol levels were significantly low in patients with a viral infection, compared to the control. these studies explained the ability of sars-cov-2 virus to use serum cholesterol for its entry into host cells. therefore, low serum cholesterol level can be used as an early predictor of covid-19 severity in patients. also, observing improvement in serum cholesterol levels may indicate the improvement of conditions in patients. it is also worth noting that statin drugs for cholesterol may contribute to the severity of covid-19 disease by inhibiting endogenous cholesterol, leading to the upregulation of ldl. this leads to higher membrane cholesterol levels that enhance the ability of sars-cov-2 to enter host cells.in addition to the multiple complications observed, acute kidney injury has also been detected in covid-19 patients. results indicated the urinary system, respiratory system, and digestion system as potential routes for the covid-19 infection; one study indicating the human kidney to be a specific target of the virus. findings propose kidney abnormalities in covid-19 patients may be due to proximal tubule cell damage and subsequent systematic inflammatory response induced kidney injury. additionally, in one study, sars-cov-2 antigens were seen to accumulate in kidney tubules, implying the direct impact on the kidney, leading to aki induction and viral spread within the body. there have also been studies describing a rapid clinical deterioration, escalating oxygen requirement, high risk of progression, and significant mortality in kidney transplant patients. similarly, the incidence of kidney disease on admission as well as the development of aki is correlated with fatality in covid-19 patients. however, if covid-19 causes acute kidney injury remains uncertain. many authors concluded that clinicians must still try to increase their awareness of kidney issues in patients with severe infection, and a urinalysis may be used to predict the extent of disease severity.one study identified 36.4% of covid patients to have neurological symptoms (mainly in patients with severe disease) and several mechanisms of covid-19 that increase stroke risk have been recognized but neither has been proven as significant. further studies are required to investigate the neurological pathology during covid-19 infection. additionally, there may be a need to improve specific vte diagnostic strategies, the safety of thromboprophylaxis, and further identify the role il-6 plays in ischemic stroke. however, the risks associated with ischemic stroke in covid-19 patients are still uncertain. as with cancer patients, medical resources must be allocated to target the strain covid-19 has placed on ischemic stroke care. meanwhile, the relationship between covid-19 and stroke must be examined further.on december 31, 2019, a cluster of cases of "pneumonia of unknown origin" in people associated with the huanan seafood wholesale market has been reported in wuhan, china. only a few days later, chinese health authorities confirmed that this cluster was associated with a novel coronavirus 1 of them had comorbidities. importantly, the patients admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) had a higher number of comorbidities(72.2%) than those not admitted to the icu(37.3%). this suggests that complications may be a risk factor for adverse outcomes 4 . assessing the prevalence of these chronic diseases is the basis for mitigating complications in patients with covid-19 infections. however, the effort was hampered by the limited number of cases.to get a more convincing result, we will provide a systematic evaluation and detail not only estimate the prevalence of comorbidities in all patients, also assess the risk of underlying diseases in severe patients compared to non-severe patients. the result may aid the management while developing policies for prevention, and response to covid-19 and its critical outcomes. the two investigators (j yang and yp wang) who performed the literature search also independently extracted the data from included studies. disagreements were resolved with a third investigator (yn zhou) or by consensus. we extracted the following variables: author, date, age, gender, number of participates in severe and non-severe, the prevalence of clinical symptoms such as fever, cough, fatigue, and dyspnea, together with comorbidities including hypertension, diabetes, respiratory system disease, and cardiovascular diseases. all calculations were performed by stata mp version 13.0. the odds ratio (or, 95% confidence intervals (ci)) was used to describe the ratio of the probability of the coronavirus occurring in severe patients vs.non-severe. owing to heterogeneity within and between studies, a random effect model was used to estimating the average effect and its precision, which would give a more conservative estimate of the 95% ci. using the i 2 statistic and cochran's q test to assess statistical heterogeneity.terms initially searched a total of 108 articles. after we removed duplicates, checked the title and abstract, and reviewed full-text, eight studies 3-10 eventually met the predetermined inclusion and exclusion criteria. as of february 25, 2020, a total of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 46248 participants were included in our meta-analysis. as presented in table 1 , the median age was 46.0 years and 23871 (51.6%) were men.the result of this meta-analysis showed the most prevalent clinical symptom was fever ( 91±3, 95% ci 86-97% ), followed by cough (67±7, 95% ci 59-76%), fatigue ( 51±0, 95% ci 34-68% ) and dyspnea ( 30±4, 95% ci 21-40% ). however, the i 2 varying from 84.9% to 96.4% in the evaluates of the clinical features showed significant statistic heterogeneity (p=0.00). the prevalence of comorbidities including hypertension, diabetes, respiratory system disease, and cardiovascular diseases. as shown in figure 2 (inserts a, b, c, d), the most prevalent comorbidity were hypertension ( 17±7, 95% ci 14-22% ) and diabetes ( 8±6, 95% ci 6-11% ),followed by cardiovascular diseases ( 5±4, 95% ci 4-7% ) and respiratory system disease( 2±0, 95% ci 1-3% ). in analysis by the proportion of comorbidities, the significant heterogeneity observed for estimates of hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular diseases (p=0.000), but not respiratory system disease (p=0.126) with an i 2 index ranging from 39.9 to 87.5%.in figure 3 , we analyzed the relationship between complications and severe group and non-severe group. a higher risk of with hypertension, respiratory system disease, and cardiovascular diseases in the severe group compared to those in non-severe, the result were (or 2.36, 95% ci: 1.46-3.83), (or 2.46, 95% ci: 1.76-3.44) and (or 3.42, 95% ci: 1.88-6.22)respectively. they showed low heterogeneity, with i 2 from 0 to 39.3 %. however, it was not a statistically significant difference in diabetes, (or 2.07, 95% ci: 0.89-4.82).the meta-analysis was based on data from 8 studies with laboratory-confirmed covid -19. all the cases were from hospitals in china. the result we observed more men than women, statistics about 23871:22377 in the covid-19 infection. mers-cov and sars-cov have also been found to infect more males than females 11, 12 . it is customary to think women are less likely to affect many bacteria and viruses than men, partly because of their more robust innate and adaptive immune responses 13 .however, it may be related to the occupational risk factors for men in huanan wet market exposure history in huang's report 3 . aged people and severe patients are more susceptible to covid-19, this may be associated with a higher frequency of comorbidities 9 .a meta-analysis of the comorbidities suggests that hypertension prevalent in approximately 17% of the patients, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and respiratory system disease were present in 8%, 5%, and 2% of the cases, respectively.hypertension, diabetes mellitus consistent with the prevalence of hypertension and diabetes in china were 23.2% 14 16 . the comorbidities effect had also been noted to have similar effects in other respiratory illnesses, such as mers-cov 11 . in our study, the association also showed in hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, and respiratory system disease group. overall, the severe patients were older 4 and had a more significant number of comorbid conditions than those non-severe. these results suggest that age and comorbidities may be risk factors for critical patients.the diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, respiratory system disease, the study does not require ethical approval because the meta-analysis are based on published research and the original data are anonymous.the authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. coronavirus disease 2019 (covid -19) has been declared as a pandemic by word health organization on march 11, 2020, as soon as it satisfied the epidemiological criteria (infection in more than 100,000 people in 100 countries) [1] . as of march 27, 2020, world has witnessed more than half a million cases of covid-19 with more than 24,000 deaths [2] . this suggests the magnitude of its spread across the world, since it was first reported on december 31, 2019 from wuhan, hubei province in china. emerging data suggests that older covid-19 patients with other comorbid conditions such as diabetes, hypertension, cardiac and pulmonary disease are in particular more susceptible, compared to general populations and have higher mortality. therefore, it is necessary to re-look into these subgroups of covid-19 patients with associated comorbidities.in this review article, we have collated all the available evidence that has emerged so far on outcomes and comorbidities in patients with covid-19. here, we have focused on outcomes in patients of covid-19 with hypertension and analyzed the controversies surrounding the use of renin-angiotensin system blockers (rasb).we have systematically searched the pubmed medical database up till march 27, 2020 using mesh key words that include covid-19, coronavirus, hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, angiotensin receptor blockers, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. we have retrieved all the available literature published in english language on covid-19, that reported the outcomes in different co-morbidities.the association of hypertension and diabetes in patients with covid-19 is not unexpected, given the rising prevalence of both of these chronic diseases, globally. interestingly, in the pooled data from the ten chinese studies (n ¼ 2209) that have reported the characteristics of comorbidities in patients with covid-19; associations of hypertension, diabetes and presence of established cardiovascular disease (cvd) are larger, varying from 15 to 30% (average 21%), 5e20% (average 11%) and 2e40% (average 7%) respectively (table 1) . established cvd was also present in nearly 43% in italian study of 355 patients with covid-19. while consistent association of hypertension in patients with covid-19 across all these studies is unique, the concern which needs a serious attention is the increase in mortality. two chinese studies have worked in this direction to-date. in 191 patients with covid-19, zhou et al. found hypertension to have an odds ratio (or) of 3.05 (95% ci, 1.57 to 5.92; p < 0.006), diabetes with or of 2.85 (95% ci, 1.35 to 6.05; p < 0.001), whereas presence of coronary artery disease had an or of 21.40 (95% ci, 4.64 to 98.76; p < 0.0001) for in-hospital mortality, in an univariate analysis [8] . however, the association between these disorders and covid-19 mortality were no longer significant after a multivariate regression analysis. similarly, in an analysis of 201 patients with covid-19, wu et al. found hypertension to have a hazard ratio (hr) of 1.82 (95% ci, 1.13 to 2.95; p ¼ 0.01) for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and 1.70 (95% ci, 0.92 to 3.14, p ¼ 0.09) for death. the diabetic patients had a hr of 2.34 (95% ci, 1.35 to 4.05; p ¼ 0.002) for ards and hr of 1.58 (95% ci, 0.80 to 3.13, p ¼ 0.19) for death, in a bivariate cox regression analysis [11] . it should be noted however, that neither of these studies were adjusted for all confounding variables. nevertheless, a study of 187 patients with covid-19, guo et al. reported nearly a twice increase in mortality in patients with established cvd and raised troponin t (tnt), compared to patients without cvd and raised tnt (69.4% vs. 37.5% respectively) [14] .the chinese center for disease control and prevention in a summary report of covid-19, reported a case fatality rate (cfr) of 2.3% (1023 deaths among 44,672 confirmed cases). however, cfr was elevated to 6.0% for hypertension, 7.3% for diabetes, and 10.5% for presence of cvd [15] . unsurprisingly, based on the above findings, researchers have recently proposed that the course of treatment and prognosis of covid-19 should be stratified based on the absence or presence of co-morbidities in to type a, b and c. type a denotes covid-19 patients with pneumonia but without comorbidities, type b denotes covid-19 pneumonia and comorbidities, whereas, type c denotes covid-19 patients with multi-organ dysfunction [16] .nonetheless, it still remains unclear whether these increased association of hypertension with covid-19 and heightened risk of mortality is directly related to hypertension or other associated comorbidities, or, anti-hypertensive treatment. there has been a growing concern that this association with hypertension and or cvd may be confounded by the treatment with certain antihypertensive medications such as rasb. although a recent paper has proposed to stop rasb and suggested to replace it with the calcium channel blocker, while treating hypertension in patients with covid-19 [17] , this hypothesis has been questioned by several other colleagues [18e22].the entry of coronavirus into the cell is facilitated by the spike (s) protein. before attachment to the receptor on host cell, the s protein needs to be primed by a serine protease named tmprss2. the s proteins of different coronaviruses may utilise different receptors; mers utilises cd26 while sars cov and sars cov2 utilise angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) [23] . the efficiency of the interaction between s-protein and ace-2 may be a key determinant of the transmissibility of the virus, viral replication and the severity of disease. in theory, this efficiency could be influenced by changes or amino acid substitutions in either the viral s-protein or [24] . the major outbreak of sars cov occurred in 2002e2003 with a minor localised outbreak with mild symptoms in 2003e2004. it was observed that the s-protein of sars cov in the 2002e2003 outbreak bound to ace-2 receptor much more efficiently than that of sars cov in the 2003e2004 outbreak, consistent with the absence of human-to-human transmission during the latter outbreak. several molecular changes in the s-protein influence the binding with human ace-2; for example, the substitution of threonine by serine at position 487 in s protein reduces the binding [25] . similarly, asparagine at position 479 increased the binding affinity [26] . methylation at position 487 has also been shown to influence binding. recently, s-protein of sars cov2 has been shown to be similar to that of sars cov, barring a few gains of function mutations. the most important of these is a glutamine at position 493 at the receptor binding domain, which explains its increased transmissibility compared to sars cov [27] . b) changes in ace-2 receptor: with regard to mers-cov, which employs cd26 (dpp-4) as its receptor for cellular entry, there are naturally-occurring polymorphisms in dpp4 that impact cellular entry of mers-cov and might thus modulate mers development in infected patients [28] . there is a possibility that similar variations or polymorphisms in ace-2 could affect the viral entry and disease course. polymorphisms of ace-2 gene have been identified; however, there is no evidence that they affect susceptibility to or severity of sars cov2 infection [29] . a recent study found differential ace-2 gene expression in human lung tissue with no racial/gender differences, but a higher gene expression in lungs of smokers compared to non-smokers, which could explain the higher risk of infection in smokers [30] .the role of ace-2 on vascular bed is opposite to that of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace). ace converts angiotensin i to angiotensin ii, which is a vasoconstrictor. ace-2 converts angiotensin ii to angiotensin (1e7) which causes vasodilatation after binding to the mas receptor in the vascular bed [31] . downregulation of ace-2 was observed in animal models of lung injury induced by sars cov [32] . recombinant ace-2 improved pulmonary blood flow and oxygenation in animals with lung injury, indicating that ace-2 may be the main determinant of lung injury caused by sars cov [33] . however, there is lack of human data except a small study in 10 patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome which showed that recombinant ace-2 was well tolerated and led to an increase in angiotensin (1e7) [34] .there has been considerable interest regarding the role of ras blockers in covid-19 infection. both benefit and harm have been postulated. figure 1 illustrates the interactions between the effect of rasb and covid-19. fig. 1 a) rationale and evidence for harm: there is evidence that ace-2 expression increases with the use of ace inhibitors and arb, especially in heart and kidney [35, 36] . this has raised a theoretical concern that by increasing ace-2 expression, aceis and arbs could facilitate the entry of virus into the host cell and increase the chances of infection or its severity [17] . also, there is increased ace-2 expression in elderly [37] .to what extent this predisposes the elderly to infection with sarscov2 is not known. in a study of 187 patients with covid-19, guo et al. reported an increased trend in mortality with those receiving rasb, compared to those not receiving. mortality was 36.8% (6 of 19) and 25.6% (43 of 168) in patients with or without rasb, respectively [14] . indeed, increased association and heightened mortality with covid-19 have been observed consistently across the studies in elderly, hypertensive, diabetics and known cvd; however, it is not exactly known whether it has any causal relation with the use of rasb or these subgroups are more on rasb due to these illness, compared to the rest of population. moreover, there is no solid evidence to back this concern either in covid-19 or in infection by other coronaviruses. b) rationale and evidence for benefit: as discussed above, increasing ace-2 levels in coronavirus infection could reduce lung injury. in an experimental study with mice, kuba et al. found that losartan showed significantly diminished lung injury and pulmonary edema after acid aspiration-induced acute lung injury (with addition of sars-cov spike protein) compared to placebo [32] . similarly, severe lung injury and pulmonary edema were prevented by both recombinant human ace-2 infusions or losartan in ace2-knockout mice [38] . mice with coronavirus induced lung injury showed improvement when treated with losartan [39] . moreover, a retrospective analysis found reduced rates of death and endotracheal intubation in patients with viral pneumonia who were continued on ace inhibitors [40] . treatment with arbs was reported to reduce mortality in ebola virus infection [41] . the exact mechanism of apparent benefit of these drugs in coronavirus infection is not yet clear. however, there could be several explanations [42] . i. increased ace-2 expression may not result in more viral entry into the cell because of the limited availability of the serine protease tmprss2. camostat mesylate, which is a tmprss2 inhibitor, has been shown to inhibit cellular entry of sars cov2 and could be a potential therapeutic option [43] . ii. increased ace-2 expression on the cell membrane may also lead to increased soluble ace-2 in blood, which may actually bind to most of sars cov2 and prevent its interaction with the membrane bound receptor. iii. ras blockers increase angiotensin ii, which is a substrate for ace-2. the interaction of ace-2 with angiotensin ii could induce a conformational change in the receptor binding domain of ace-2, limiting its ability to bind with sars cov2 [44] . iv. ace-2 receptors are present at a much higher density in lung tissue of children and young adults, compared to older individuals. thus, the upregulation of ace-2 receptors by the use of rasb over time in older people may emulate ace expression in young people. it is also possible that having more ace-2 receptors and increased ace-2 functions will likely produce more angiotensin (1e7) that might provide resilience against target-mediated destruction and development of pulmonary failure in patients with covid-19 [22] . this postulated positive effects on lung can be also protective during overwhelming infection with covid-19. v. indiscriminate discontinuation of rasb in patients with heart failure may also lead to readmission to hospital and increase in mortality [45] .collectively, relationship between ras activity and use of rasb in sars cov2 infection is very scarce. the only indirect evidence of ras activation in covid-19 is high incidence of hypokalaemia [46] . with regards to the use of rasb, a retrospective analysis of 112 covid-19 hospitalised patients with cardiovascular disease in wuhan, there was no significant difference in the proportion of acei/arb medication between non-survivors and survivors [47] . however, a study of 187 patient reported by guo et al., there was a trend of increase in mortality in patients with covid-19 receiving rasb (36.8%), compared to those not receiving (25.6%) [14] .covid-19 is increasingly associated with comorbidities that include hypertension and diabetes. special care is required in patients with covid-19 with associated comorbidities, given the heightened risk of in-hospital death.in view of lack of robust evidence for either benefit or harm, and with bulk of the experimental evidence in favour of benefit, it is reasonable for patients to continue using ace inhibitors and arb, as recommended by the european society of cardiology, hypertension canada, the canadian cardiovascular society, uk renal association, the international society of hypertension, and european society of hypertension and american heart association [48e50]. future studies reporting the outcome stratified on the basis of different anti-hypertensive agents in covid-19 may further enlighten us in this regard.we hereby declare that we have no conflict of interest related to this article.the coronavirus disease (covid-19) has spread all around the world in a very short period of time. recent data are showing significant prevalence of arterial hypertension and cardiovascular diseases (cvd) among patients with covid-19, which raised many questions about higher susceptibility of patients with these comorbidities to the novel coronavirus, as well as the role of hypertension and cvd in progression and the prognosis of covid-19 patients. there is a very limited amount of data, usually obtained from a small population, regarding the effect of the underlying disease on the outcome in patients with covid-19. the evaluation of the treatment of these comorbidities at baseline and during covid-19 is scarce and the results are conflicting. hypertension and cvd, after the adjustment for other clinical and demographic parameters, primarily age, did not remain independent predictors of the lethal outcome in covid-19 patients. some investigations speculated about the association between the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) and susceptibility to covid-19, as well as the relationship between raas inhibitors and the adverse outcome in these patients. withdrawing or switching raas inhibitors would have uncertain benefits, but it would definitely have many disadvantages such as uncontrolled hypertension, cardiac function deterioration and renal function impairment, which could potentially induce more complications in patients with covid-19 than the infection of coronavirus itself. the aim of this review article was to summarize the prevalence of hypertension and cvd in patients with covid-19, their influence on the outcome and the effect of treatment of hypertension and cvd in covid-19 patients.covid-19, hypertension and cardiovascular diseases: should we change the therapy?the outbreak of the infection of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) caused a pandemic of disease called covid-19 at the beginning of 2020 [1] . there is almost no country in the world that is not affected by covid-19 and the healthcare systems around the globe have never worked under j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f this enormous pressure. tens of thousands of newly infected patients and thousands of deaths have been reported each day. everything started in wuhan, china, but it has rapidly spread around the world. europe and the united states are currently the center of the pandemic.covid-19 is a respiratory infection caused by the novel coronavirus with high virulence and considerable high mortality, which is difficult to estimate before the pandemic is over. however, the currently available data show that the mortality rate in china is 4.1%, italy 12.8%, spain 10.2%, usa 3.9% and germany 2.3% [2] , which is significantly higher than for influenza (0.1%), comparable or lower than for sars (10%), but significantly lower than for mers (34%) [3, 4] .the data coming predominantly from china are showing a significant percentage of arterial hypertension and cardiovascular diseases (cvd) among patients with covid-19, which raised many questions about higher susceptibility of patients with these comorbidities to the novel coronavirus, as well as the role of hypertension and cvd in progression and the prognosis of covid-19 patients .recent findings showed an important role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) in these patients, which was explained by the fact that sars-cov-2 is using angiotensin-converting-enzyme 2 (ace2) for binding to the surface of epithelial cells [28] . there are conflicting data on the effect of raas inhibitors in covid-19 patients [9, 13, 29] . however, it seems that first studies about the adverse impact of raas inhibitors were premature because the newly published data even showed a positive effect of raas on survival in patients with covid-19 [29] . it is obvious that more data on this topic are necessary, considering the high prevalence of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f hypertension and cvd in patients with covid-19 and regular use of raas inhibitors in treatment of both -hypertension and cvd.the aim of this article was to provide an overview of prevalence of hypertension and cvd in patients with covid-19, their influence on the outcome and the effect of treatment of hypertension and cvd in covid-19 patients.the prevalence of hypertension ranged from 4.5% in non-critically ill patients to >30% in older patients with covid-19, whereas the prevalence of cvd was significantly lower and varied from 1% to 18% (table 1 ). it is expected that the prevalence was significantly higher in older patients and those with other comorbidities such as diabetes and kidney impairment. one should notice that different studies used various definitions of cvd. some included coronary heart disease and heart failure, whereas others also included cerebrovascular disease. therefore, one should be cautious in the interpretation of these results.meta-analyses confirmed considerable prevalence of hypertension and cvd among patients with covid-19 [20-24] ( table 2 ). this indicated the importance of hypertension and cvd in covid-19 patients and raised the question about susceptibility of cvd and hypertensive patients to sars-cov-2. nevertheless, other risk factors, such as smoking and obesity, should not be underestimated and, in most studies, the effect of obesity is not possible to be estimated due to the lack of data.a limited number of studies provided follow-up data, which is the consequence of rapid publication and large interest of healthcare professionals around the world in all information regarding covid-19 (table 3) guan et al. included 1,590 patients and reported that those with hypertension, diabetes, copd and malignancy were more likely to reach the composite endpoints (admission to intensive care unit, or invasive ventilation, or death) after adjusting for age and smoking status [5] . patients with 2 comorbidities had a significantly increased risk of the adverse outcome. in a small study by wu et al. hypertension and diabetes were predictors of the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), but not the lethal outcome in covid-19 patients [12] .a recently published study that involved 1,012 patients with covid-19 demonstrated that cvd, but not hypertension, was more prevalent in patients with aggravation of disease comparing with those who did not experience deterioration of covid-19 [7] . however, the analysis of the predictors of disease deterioration was not performed. another investigation revealed that the incidence of all comorbidities was higher in the covid-19 patients with a severe and critical clinical course than in the patients with a moderately severe clinical course [9] .chen et al. reported that hypertension, cvd and diabetes were more prevalent among the covid-19 patients with the lethal outcome comparing to the survivors [11] (table 3 ). however, there was a large difference in age and sex distribution between the groups and the authors did not investigate the effect of comorbidities on the outcome in this population [11] . zhou et al. reported that hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic renal disease and copd j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f were more frequent among non-survivors than survivors [15] . the authors found that hypertension, diabetes, and coronary heart disease were predictors of mortality in covid-19 patients. nevertheless, after adjustment for age, none of these comorbidities remained significant predictors of mortality.ace2 has gained a widespread interest as the cellular receptor of sars-cov-2 cause of the covid-19 pandemic. ace2 is a master regulator of raas, and both reduced or increased function of ace2 can induce systemic and pulmonary hypertension, heart failure, myocardial infarction, and diabetic cardiovascular complications [30] . ace2 is highly expressed in the heart, lungs, kidney, and gastrointestinal tract, and it plays an important role in several cardiovascular and immune pathways. the binding affinity of the novel coronavirus with ace2 appears to be stronger than the virus that causes sars, which may explain the significantly higher global influence of covid-19 than the initial sars. potential therapeutic strategies may include preventing the binding of human ace2 and sars-cov-2.in the post-mortem autopsy of the heart tissues from the patients with sars, about 30% had a detectable viral sars-cov genome and their myocardium was characterized by increased myocardial fibrosis, inflammation, and reduced myocardial ace2 expression [31, 32] . these patients had a much more aggressive disease associated with earlier mortality. these data are still not available in covid- 19 patients, but the studies that investigated cardiac injury by elevation of cardiac enzymes showed that the prevalence of cardiac injury is frequent and more prevalent among patients with the lethal outcome [10, 13] . chen et al. recently revealed that human cardiac pericytes have high expression of ace2, which could be j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the target cell of sars-cov-2 [33] . the virus-induced pericytes damage can provoke capillary endothelial cells dysfunction and further microvascular dysfunction.patients with heart failure disease at baseline demonstrated elevated ace2 expression at both mrna and protein levels, which further increases the risk of heart attack and the critically ill condition in patients infected by this coronavirus [33] .the biological effects of ace2 are focused on the formation of angiotensin-(1-7) from angiotensin ii. ace2, unlike ace, does not convert angiotensin i to angiotensin ii, nor do ace inhibitors block its activity, which is crucial for understanding of its biological properties and the effect of raas inhibitors.the influence of raas inhibitors on ace2 activity and expression is known from animal and human studies. the large confusion and panic regarding usage of angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors (acei) and angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arb) erupted for two reasons: (i) confusion between ace and ace2 inhibitors, and (ii) some studies reported a significantly higher percentage of raas inhibitors usage among covid-19 patients with the lethal outcome. ace and ace2 are two different enzymes with two different active sites and any effect of acei on ace2 activity must, therefore, be an indirect one, through their corresponding substrates. sars-cov-2 binding is unlikely to have any relationship with ace or acei. nevertheless, there are limited data that aceis affect the expression of ace2 in the heart and the kidney [34] . on the other hand, there is more evidence that arbs modify ace2 expression [35, 36] . upregulation has been primarily found in the cardiac tissue and in the renal vasculature. however, the results are inconsistent, require high arbs dosages and vary according to arb and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the organ. additionally, most investigations measured blood ace2 activity that reveals the soluble ace2 protein circulating at very low levels, which is not the same as membrane-bound ace2. if arbs upregulated membrane-bound ace2, it is reasonable to hypothesize that this would be the consequence of at1 receptor blockade. aceis would have a similar effect as arbs, even though there are only limited data about acei-induced upregulation of ace2. however, the currently available data are mostly obtained in animal studies and could not be directly applied to humans. therefore, there is no sufficient evidence that arbs or aceis could facilitate sars-cov-2 entry and cause covid-19.in the recent state-of-art review, sanchis-gomar et al. suggested that arbs might be a better treatment option in covid-19 patients at higher risk of severe forms of disease due to the equal efficacy but fewer side effects than aceis [37] .nevertheless, the existing studies that included a large number of patients did not give advantage to any group of medications within raas inhibitors. disease than those with a severe and critical course of disease [9] . there was no difference in usage of aceis between covid-19 patients with different severity of disease. there are no data regarding the association between raas inhibitors and the outcome. however, the investigators studied the use of raas inhibitors only in hypertensive patients, but not in the patients with other indications for acei and arb (heart failure, diabetes, renal impairment). moreover, the number of patients who were taking aceis and arbs was very low, 7% and 24%, respectively [9] .interestingly, the percentage of arbs was significantly higher than aceis. inhibitors was significantly higher in the patients with detected cardiac injury than in the patients without this injury (21.1% vs. 5.9%) [13] . underlying diseases such as hypertension, coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathy and chronic renal disease were also significantly more prevalent in the patients with cardiac injury [13] . these comorbidities may have largely contributed to cardiac injury in these patients, but these diseases are also the reason for taking raas inhibitors. this explains the higher prevalence of raas inhibitors in covid-19 patients with cardiac injury, defined by the elevated serum level of troponin.there was a great confusion in the social media and among healthcare professionals after these preliminary studies due to uncertainties whether aceis and reported that aceis/arbs are not associated with the severity or mortality of covid-19 patients [38] . a recent large study from italy that involved 6,272 patients with covid-19 and 30,759 non-covid patients showed that the use of aceis and arbs was more frequent among the covid-19 patients than in the control group due to the higher prevalence of cardiovascular disease [39] . nevertheless, there was no association between acei/arb use and the risk of covid-19 [39] . an american study that included 5,894 patients with covid-19 found no association between any single medication class, including raas inhibitors, and the positive test for covid-19 [40] .europe, and north america and revealed no association between the use of acei/arb and the increased in-hospital mortality [41] .a study that investigated covid-19 patients with hypertension treated with raas inhibitors showed that the patients receiving acei or arb therapy had a lower rate of severe diseases and a trend toward a lower level of il-6 in peripheral blood [29] . moreover, acei or arb treatment increased the level of cd3 and cd8 t cell in peripheral blood and reduced the peak viral load compared to other antihypertensive drugs. these findings were the first evidence which supports the benefit of aceis or arbs in covid-19 patients with hypertension because they can potentially improve clinical outcomes in these patients. the authors hypothesized that raas inhibitors did not directly inhibit the viral replication, but had an indirect antiviral role by regulation of the immune function and inhibition of the inflammatory response. nevertheless, the potential mechanisms need to be clarified in the future large human studies. a large study that included 1,128 hypertensive patients with covid-19 showed that inpatient use of acei/arb, after adjustment for age, gender and comorbidities, was related with lower all-cause mortality compared with acei/arb non-users [42] . further analysis revealed that the use of raas inhibitors was also associated with reduced mortality in covid-19 patients with hypertension in comparison to the use of other antihypertensive drugs [42] . itself. this is why several specialty societies recommended that covid-19 patients continue therapy with raas inhibitors [43] [44] [45] [46] . this is in agreement with the latest studies that did not find any association between raas inhibitors and increased morbidity and/or mortality in the covid-19 patients.it is important to discuss evident limitations of the available data. one of the most important limitations is the self-reporting of comorbidities on hospital admission, which can cause significant underestimation of comorbidities because of the lack of awareness and/or the lack of diagnostic testing. the follow-up period was short and some patients remained in hospital when the data were being analyzed, meaning that the actual outcome is unknown, which can interfere with the published results. obesity was not reported in any of these studies and the influence of bmi could not be investigated or included in the adjustment, which would be of great importance.the data about the therapy at baseline and during the therapy are poor, which is an important potentially confounding factor in evaluation of hypertension and cvd as independent predictors of susceptibility to sars-cov-2 or the outcome of covid-19. the investigations that reported negative association between raas inhibitors and covid-19 included only a limited number of covid-19 patients, which is an additional limitation for reaching statistical significance.the prevalence of hypertension and cvd is clinically relevant in patients with covid-19, and particularly in the elderly. the impact of hypertension and cvd on acei=angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor -arb=angiotensin receptor blocker-ards -acute respiratory distress syndrome, copd -chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cvdcardiovascular disease (coronary heart disease, heart failure, with/without cerebrovascular disease) 36.8% of patients had 1 or more comorbidities. the most significant were hypertension, cvd, and diabetes. ards -acute respiratory distress syndrome, copd -chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cvdcardiovascular disease (coronary heart disease, heart failure with/without cerebrovascular disease) the sars-cov-2 virus, a newly discovered member of the coronavirus family, was first described at the end of 2019 in wuhan, china, as the third severe respiratory syndrome caused by a coronavirus [1] . due to its easy spread via droplets and direct contact, it quickly spread globally, leading the world health organization to declare it a public health emergency [2] . most countries around the world are taking measures aimed at preventing the spread of the coronavirus as the main mechanism of fighting the disease [2] . some of those measures have had a significant impact on people's lives. many countries have imposed travel restrictions [3] [4] , leaving millions of people having to change travel plans. the psychological and economic impact of mandatory isolation following possible exposure to the virus is another matter of concern [5] [6] [7] .clinically, the disease presents after an incubation period of between 2 and 14 days [8] . the cdc reports that the most common symptoms are fever, cough, and shortness of breath, while dyspnea, chest pain, confusion, and cyanosis represent alarm symptoms that should prompt people to seek medical attention [8] . the largest meta-analysis available at the time of writing this article reports that fever and cough are the presenting symptoms in 89% and 72% of patients, respectively [9] . fatigue and gastrointestinal symptoms were also frequently reported [10] . hypertension and diabetes mellitus were the most commonly reported comorbidities [10] [11] [12] . older individuals and those with comorbidities were more likely to develop end-organ damage requiring icu admission [11] . acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), acute kidney injury (aki), and cardiac injury were all reported in severe cases, with ards being the most common [11] . leukopenia and, less commonly, eosinopenia were the most typical laboratory findings, while bilateral ground-glass or patchy opacities in the lungs were the most common radiologic abnormalities [10] [11] [12] . c-reactive protein, d-dimer, and procalcitonin levels were elevated, especially in cases of severe disease [12] . at the time of this writing, no clear guidelines on treating sars-cov-2 infections have been published, and most clinicians seem to be treating them in a manner similar to that of seasonal flu.the purpose of this article is to look at the impact the sars-cov-2 infection is having on hypertensive patients. considering the extremely high prevalence of hypertension in society and the fact that hypertension is among the most frequent comorbidities of patients with severe cases of sars-cov-2 infections, we believe it is important to look more deeply into the relationship between the two conditions.the angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) enzyme is an essential component of human metabolism, and its dysregulation is associated with a number of different clinical conditions, including hypertension. many studies were done to assess the potential role of ace in ards development. multiple animal models have shown a protective effect of ace ii against ards development [13] [14] [15] . sars-cov-2, similarly to sars-cov, uses the ace ii receptor to invade the alveolar epithelium and can be considered a potential target for future anti-covid-19 therapies [13, 16] . cardiovascular pathology and ace inhibitors/angiotensin receptor (ar) blockers lead to increased ace ii levels, potentially increasing the risk of sars-cov-2 infections, as pointed out by hanff et al. [17] . there is also some evidence that sars-cov-2 can lead to the downregulation of ace ii and toxic accumulation of angiotensin ii [17] . it should also be noted that ace ii is expressed in other organs and tissues as well. the fact that ace is expressed in the gut, heart, and kidney and that sars-cov infections can be associated with gastrointestinal symptoms (and the virus can often be isolated from the stool), cardiac damage, and aki speaks in favor of there being a strong correlation between ace expression and covid infection [18] .overall, the exact role of ace enzyme and angiotensin in lung injury in general, as well as in the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 (covid 19) infections, is not clear. if the models are true and ace ii does have a protective role against ards and ards is the feared complication of covid 19, it would be reasonable to assume ace ii would have a protective effect against covid 19. as the ace ii receptor is used by the virus to infect the alveolar epithelium, it raises the issue of whether the availability of the receptor is associated with the severity of clinical findings. moreover, a large percentage of the population is treated with ace inhibitors and arbs. whether those treatments are associated with a change in outcomes of covid 19 infections is currently debated. while we recognize the difficulties of performing basic science research, especially on animal models, in light of the current epidemic, we agree with hanff et al. and would strongly encourage scientists to keep researching the possible connection between ace receptor, angiotensin, and ards.the ace inhibitors and ar blockers are currently among the most frequently prescribed medications in the western world. they are most commonly used in patients suffering from hypertension, congestive heart failure, and proteinuria (most commonly due to diabetes mellitus). they act by reducing the activity of the renin-angiotensin system (ras). if the ras plays a significant role in sars-cov-19 pathogenesis and ards development, it would be reasonable to assume that patients treated with ace inhibitors/ar blockers would be impacted. the animal models suggest that the administration of ace inhibitors and ar blockers leads to an elevated number of ace ii receptors in the pulmonary circulation [19] . marin reported that many patients from latin america and spain were intending to discontinue taking their ace inhibitors/ar blockers due to fear of the infection [20] . despite some animal models showing a potential association between ace inhibition and worsening lung injuries due to sars-cov, there has been no clinical evidence to support such an association [21] . the european society of cardiology recommends not discontinuing either of the drugs as the potential risks associated with uncontrolled hypertension seem to outweigh the risks of ace inhibition worsening the covid 19 infection [22] . danser et al. reached the same conclusion [23] . french health minister claimed that the use of anti-inflammatory medications such as ibuprofen could worsen covid 19 symptoms [24] . although ace ii levels can be increased by the use of nsaids, the evidence for an association with the severity of covid 19 symptoms is weak [25] . fang et al. do, however, recommend monitoring patients who are taking any of the controversial drugs and, when possible, choosing alternative treatments [25] . despite that, most health authorities, including the nhs, suggest using paracetamol/acetaminophen instead as a precautionary measure [26] .the overall impact of ace inhibition on sars-cov-19 (covid 19) pathogenesis is at this point of time difficult to establish. the belief that an association between the two exists is mostly based on animal models, while the clinical evidence for such association is lacking. despite the lack of clinical evidence, it appears to be the case that a number of patients plan on discontinuing their long-term therapies believing that this would decrease their risk of contracting and/or dying from covid 19. the evidence for a relationship between nsaid use and more severe sars-cov-19 infections is also weak, although a possible pathophysiologic link can be hypothesized. in this case, however, many health authorities recommend against using nsaids until further evidence comes to light. we believe that a lot more basic science research into the pathophysiology of both coronavirus infections and ards development, in general, is needed before clearer patterns emerge. at this point, it may be reasonable to avoid starting new patients on nsaids and ace inhibitors/arbs if it can be avoided. when it comes to patients who require those treatments for other conditions, discontinuation of them is unlikely to benefit patients as the evidence for exacerbations of their comorbidities is stronger than the evidence for the covid 19 disease severity.there have been news reports and expert opinions on patients with hypertension presenting with more severe cases of covid 19. moreover, hypertension was among the most frequently reported comorbidities of those patients [10] [11] [12] . it should be taken into account, however, that hypertension is among the most prevalent chronic conditions in the western world, affecting millions of people. fang et al. point out that the association between diabetes and hypertension and covid 19 infections is likely due to their association with ace ii enzyme [25] . li et al. reported a significantly higher prevalence of hypertension and other cardiovascular comorbidities among covid 19 patients treated in the icu compared to those who did not require icu treatment [27] . they also reported that over 8% of those infected by sars-cov-2 developed cardiac injury [27] . chen et al. have also reported a similar association [28] . the elevated troponin levels seen in icu patients also pointed towards the development of myocardial injury [28] . the odds ratio of developing a severe case compared to a nonsevere case for hypertensive patients was 2.36, with a 95% confidence interval between 1.46 and 3.83 [29] . none of the studies analyzed age as a potential confounder considering that the prevalence of hypertension rises with age, and older patients are, in general, more likely to suffer serious complications of infectious diseases. that was addressed by the international society of hypertension, who point out that there is no evidence that patients with hypertension are overrepresented among those with severe sars-cov-2 infections when adjusted for age [30] .it is difficult to assess the impact hypertension has on the outcome of patients infected by sars-cov-2. multiple studies point to a significant association between hypertension and adverse outcomes; however, the number of potential confounders, the main of which is age is vast. the previously mentioned association between antihypertensives and severe covid 19 presentations also needs to be taken into account. the number of studies that have been published so far is insufficient to properly address all those questions. we hope that as more case reports and review articles become available in the literature, a clearer pattern will emerge. the outcomes of patients with uncontrolled hypertension should be compared to those of normotensive controls of similar baseline characteristics. the outcomes of hypertensive patients managed with ace inhibitors/ar blockers should be compared to those of hypertensive patients managed with calcium channel antagonists.besides hypertension, other cardiovascular comorbidities were also frequently reported in patients with severe cases of covid 19. considering the significant associations between hypertension and cardiac disease, a correlation would be expected. moreover, there is a significant association between heart failure and pulmonary disease, particularly pulmonary hypertension. the possible consequences of even mild cardiac damage would be expected to be more significant among patients with pre-existing cardiac disease. as li et al. reported, the cardio-cerebrovascular disease was among the most prevalent comorbidities among patients with severe cases of covid 19, second only to hypertension (17.1% and 16.4%, respectively) [27] . zhou et al. reported that coronary disease was the third most prevalent comorbidity, after hypertension and diabetes [31] . chen et al. also found that previous history of coronary disease was an independent risk factor for adverse outcomes [28] . the proposed mechanism of such findings is that pericytes with high ace ii expression might be the cells targeted by sars-cov-2 [32] . pericyte injury could then lead to endothelial dysfunction [32] . patients with pre-existing heart failure are more likely to have elevated ace ii expression due to the pathophysiology of chf, which could then increase the risk of infection [32] . he et al. found the mortality of critically ill patients infected by sars-cov-2 who develop cardiac injury to be as high as 60% [33] . they also found an elevation in n-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide levels (usually a biomarker for congestive heart failure) associated with the myocardial injury caused by covid 19.considered together, these studies point to an association between pre-existing cardiovascular comorbidities and adverse outcomes following sars-cov-2 infections. the most likely contributing factor to such finding is the observed myocardial damage in a subset of covid 19 patients which patients with pre-existing heart disease are less likely to recover from. moreover, the increased expression of ace ii with congestive heart failure could explain the increased susceptibility to the virus. the ability to address myocardial damage in the icu may prove to be the most important prognostic factor for those patients. considering the lack of currently approved treatments aimed at the virus itself, it is especially important to ensure that people with such comorbidities are not exposed to it in the first place. more research is needed into the exact impact of sars-cov-2 on the cardiovascular system in order to develop both protective and, potentially, curative strategies. covid 19 , caused by sars-cov-19, has been the most talked-about disease of the first half of 2020. the elderly and those suffering from chronic conditions are most at risk for adverse outcomes. hypertension was the most frequently reported comorbidity among patients with severe infections, followed by diabetes and other cardiovascular diseases; possibly related to their expression of ace ii facilitating viral entry into cells. the relationship between ace inhibitor/ar blocker use and the incidence of severe covid-19 has been conflicting and at present, where most authorities do not recommend discontinuing long-term ace inhibitor/ar blocker treatments. a concern remains that some patients may be inclined to stop taking the prescribed medicines out of fear. another point of contention has been the use of nsaids and a number of public health authorities have released statements claiming no evidence of such association existed. nevertheless, most recommended choosing alternative drugs if possible, pending further investigation into nsaids. finally, the available evidence clearly points to a correlation between pre-existing cardiovascular comorbidities and adverse outcomes with sars-cov-2 infections as severe cases are associated with myocardial damage. considering the very high prevalence of hypertension and cardiovascular diseases, it is important to continue researching the association between these conditions and covid-19.disclosuresrespectively), diabetes (17.4% and 6.7%, respectively), and cardiovascular disease (8.7% and 3.2%, respectively) and presented with fever (84.1% and 60.4%, respectively) and shortness of breath (10.1% and 3.8%, respectively) compared with those who did not. nonspecific antiviral therapy did not prevent clinical progression to severe pneumonia, although fewer hypertensive patients on angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers (acei/arb) therapy developed severe pneumonia in contrast with those on non-acei/arb that hypertension without receiving acei/arb therapy was an independent risk factor (odds ratio[or], 2.07; 95% ci, 1.07 to 4.00) for developing severe pneumonia irrespective of age. besides, none of patients treated with chloroquine developed severe pneumonia, though without significance (difference, 12.0%; 95% ci, -3.5% to 30.0%) by propensity score matching.conclusions and relevance hypertensive patients on acei or arb may be protective from severe pneumonia in covid-19 and hence these therapies should not be ceased unless there is a strong indication or further epidemiological evidence. though none of the current antiviral and immunoregulation therapy showed benefit in preventing covid-19 progression, chloroquine deserved further investigation.the world has witnessed the rapid escalation of 2019 coronavirus disease , caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), now becoming a global pandemic. 1 while many patients may be asymptomatic or experience only mild symptoms, reports so far have identified the elderly and patients with chronic comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease to be at higher risk of progression to severe covid-19 pneumonia, characterized by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and/or multiorgan failure. [2] [3] [4] these severe patients require more intensive medical resource utilization and have worse prognosis, with a case fatality rate about 20 times higher than that of non-severe patients. 5, 6 while the implementation of effective prevention measures is essential, there clearly exists an urgent need for interventions to modulate disease progression in the face of an increasing number of infected individuals, which have overwhelmed the capacity of hospital systems in some countries.while there is no specific therapy for covid-19, current progress with investigational therapies includes the development and trial of a coronavirus vaccine and interrogation of several orphan drugs in randomized control trials (rcts). 7 this includes remdesivir, which has garnered the most interest in an ongoing adaptive rct and other nucleotide analogues including ritonavir, favipiravir and galidesvir. 8 a recently published open-label rct showed no benefit of the protease inhibitors lopinavir/ritonavir in reducing clinical severity or mortality associated with covid-19, despite in vitro evidence of activity against sars-cov-2. 9 other drugs of interest include antiviral therapy (pegylated interferon-alpha, arbidol) and immunomodulators (hydroxychloroquine) are also under investigation and results are eagerly monitored. 10, 11 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .inhibition of the spike glycoprotein (s-protein) may also be a viable target and has recently garnered increasing interest -particularly the potential interactions with angiotensinogen converting enzyme 2 (ace2). it is proposed that the binding of the sars-cov-2 s-protein to the functional receptor ace2 results in proteolytic cleavage by type ii transmembrane serine proteases (tmprss2). [12] [13] [14] there has been considerable interest and debate regarding the risk of severe covid-19 pneumonia in patients on angiotensinogen converting enzyme inhibitors (acei) or angiotensin receptor blocker (arb) therapy, presumably through the modulation of ace2 expression. 4, 15, 16 the role of acei and arb in covid-19 infection remains controversial -as the data is not adjusted for confounding factors of age and other comorbidities to definitively show that acei or arb are independently associated with worse outcomes -and of course, this does not show causality either. 17 hence, various independent medical societies have put out position statements that recognize the potential risks but given the current quality of evidence, recommend against inappropriate cessation or switch from acei/arb therapy for hypertension, given its proven benefits. 18, 19 therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate the role of several adjuvant treatments in preventing severe pneumonia in covid-19 patients from seven cities in hunan province, china.the institutional review board of third xiangya hospital of central south university approved our study and waived informed consent for the retrospective nature of this study. all consecutive adult patients with confirmed covid-19 who were treated at third xiangya hospital of central . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . we extracted the demographic, exposure history, comorbidities, clinical symptoms, and laboratory data on admission from electronic medical records. medication history among individuals with hypertension was recorded, including acei/arb, calcium-antagonists, β -blocker, and diuretic agents. all laboratory tests were performed according to the clinical care needs of the patient during hospitalization, including a complete blood count, assessment of liver and renal function, coagulation testing, and measures of electrolytes, creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, procalcitonin, and c-reactive protein. the use of antiviral therapy (arbidol, lopinavir/ritonavir, and interferon α ) and chloroquine were obtained from the medication administration record. the severity degree of covid-19 at the time of admission is defined as follows: (1) mild type, with fever or respiratory tract symptoms but without radiological pneumonia. (2) moderate type, with fever, respiratory tract symptoms, and radiological evidence of pneumonia. (3) severe type, with . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .one of the following: a) respiratory distress (respiratory rate ≥ 30 beats/min); b) hypoxia (oxygen saturation ≤ 93% in the resting state); c) hypoxemia (arterial blood oxygen partial pressure/oxygen concentration ≤ 300mmhg). (4) critical type, with one of the following: a) respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation; b) shock; c) intensive care unit (icu) admission is required for combined other organs failure. in this study, severe covid-19 pneumonia broadly included severe and critical types.the ct images were acquired on admission and at intervals of 3-5 days and were reviewed independently by two experienced radiologists. typical ct findings for covid-19 were defined as peripherally distributed multifocal ground-glass opacities (ggos) with patchy consolidations and posterior part or lower lobe involvement predilection. 20 each of the five lung lobes was reviewed for ggo and consolidation. the lesions extent within each lung lobe was semi-quantitatively evaluated by scoring from 0 to 5 based on the degree of involvement: score 0, none involvement; score 1, ≤ 5% involvement; score 2, 6%~25% involvement; score 3, 26%~50% involvement; score 4, 51%~75% involvement; score 5, > 75% involvement. the total score was calculated by summing up scores of all five lobes to provide a lung ct score ranging from 0 to 25. 21 the mean value of lung ct scores evaluated by the two radiologists was used for analysis.our primary outcome of analysis was progression to severe covid-19 pneumonia. continuous variables are presented as the median and interquartile range (iqr), and categorical variables are presented as frequency and percentage. differences between groups were analyzed using student's t-test or mann-whitney u test for quantitative variables according to the normal distribution and chi-square test or fisher's exact test for categorical variables. meanwhile, the differences in . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .distributions were also reported using differences with 95% confidence intervals (cis). univariate and multivariate logistic regression with backward stepwise selection based on likelihood ratio was used to identify the risk factors for the development of severe pneumonia, and the corresponding odds ratios (ors) and 95% cis were determined. we also employed the propensity score matching (psm) with a 1:1 ratio to minimize selection bias and adjust for the imbalance between patients with or without chloroquine therapy. a one-to-one nearest-neighbour matching algorithm with an optimal calliper of 0.2 without replacement was used to generate pairs of patients. the analyses regarding different factors were based on non-missing data, and missing data were not imputed. all statistical analyses were performed using spss statistics software (version 22.0, ibm spss inc, chicago, il, usa). a two-sided p value of less than 0.05 considered to be statistically significant.the study population included 564 adult patients with confirmed covid-19 from nine hospitals in seven cities (figure 1 ), and their clinical characteristics on admission are presented in table 1 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .with a median lung ct score of 6 (iqr, 4-11; range, 0-25).in total, 69 of 564 (12.2%) patients were identified to have severe pneumonia. as summarized in table 1 , these patients were older and more likely to have pre-existing comorbidities, including hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, copd, and chronic renal disease compared with the non-severe patients. the clinical symptoms at illness onset also differed, with severe patients more likely to present with fever and shortness of breath. 95% ci, -10 to -7; p < 0.001). however, lymphocyte count (difference, 0.4; 95% ci, 0.3 to 0.5; p < 0.001) was significantly lower in patients with severe pneumonia.thirty patients were classified with severe pneumonia on admission and were excluded, to leave 534 patients with non-severe covid-19 on admission for further analysis. amongst this group, 39 (7.3%) patients developed severe pneumonia during hospitalization. most (n = 503 [94.2%]) patients received single or combined antiviral therapy during their admission. after adjusting for age, gender, smoking history, hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, copd, and lung ct score, none of these investigational antiviral therapies (all p > 0.05) were associated with reduced risk of progression to severe disease, as shown in table 2 .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .eighty-two individuals were recorded to have hypertension and only 16 patients were on acei/arb therapy (including 6 cases receiving arb monotherapy, 9 cases receiving combined arb and calcium-antagonist, and 1 case receiving aeci monotherapy). there were 49 patients on non-acei/arb antihypertensive therapy (including 39 cases receiving calcium-antagonist monotherapy, 3 cases receiving β -blocker monotherapy, 2 cases receiving diuretic monotherapy, and 5 cases receiving combined calcium-antagonist and β -blocker) and all were maintained on their usual antihypertensive regimen during hospitalization. the remaining 17 cases were not on antihypertensive medications or limited by unavailable data and received amlodipine or nitrendipine to control blood pressure as necessary. as summarized in table 3 cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . table 1 ). none of patients treated with chloroquine developed severe pneumonia, though without significance (difference, 12.0%; 95% ci, -3.5% to 30.0%; p = 0.074). in addition, there was no significant difference in reported adverse events and ≥ grade 3 adverse events between the two groups (p = 0.777 and 0.440, respectively).in this study, we described the use of several adjuvant treatments in preventing severe pneumonia development in covid-19 patients. hypertensive patients who received acei/arb therapy had a lower risk of developing severe pneumonia compared with those on non-acei/arb antihypertensive therapy, which suggested that acei/arb therapy may be protective from severe pulmonary injury for hypertensive patients. however, these results should be interpreted with caution owing to potential bias and residual confounders in this observational study.consistent with earlier reports and clinical experience around the world, our cohort confirmed that . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .that older age and hypertension without acei/arb therapy were independently associated with developing severe pneumonia in covid-19. 2, 3, 22 the association between age and severe pneumonia may be attributed to the accumulation of medical comorbidities with age or decline in immune function over time. given the close collinearity between age and hypertension, our study adjusted for age by multivariate regression analysis and revealed that hypertension remained an independent risk factor for disease progression irrespective of age for patients without receiving acei/arb therapy.our study examined the controversial topic of covid-19 and acei/arb therapy in hypertensive patients. we found that hypertensive patients on acei/arb therapy were less likely to develop severe pneumonia, although we acknowledged that the analysis was conducted in limited sample size -with only 16 of 82 patients on acei/ arb therapy. the dynamic profile of laboratory and radiological findings further showed that in patient on acei/arb therapy, lactose dehydrogenase and ct lung score were lower in than those on non-acei/arb therapy at about 3 days after admission. together, these findings were suggestive that acei/ arb therapy may be protective in hypertensive patients with covid-19.covid-19 patients with hypertension may endure worse outcomes due to decreased ace2 levels.ace2, an important component of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas), is highly expressed in both the lung and myocardium and converts angiotensin ii (aii) into angiotensin 1-7, which can downregulate ace and directly cause vasodilatation. [23] [24] [25] downregulation of ace2 level has also been shown in hypertensive animal models, although there has been limited success in translational confirmation in human studies. 26, 27 none the less, this may be exacerbated by the further reduction in available ace2 following coronavirus infection. both sars-cov and . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .sars-cov-2 can gain entry into the host cell through binding of the s-protein to the membrane-bound ace2 aminopeptidase, which then is cleaved by serine proteases to allow for membrane fusion and invasion. 14,28 following infection, there is a reduction in pulmonary ace2, either through internalization with viral entry and/or downregulation of ace2 enzyme during this process. hence this may exacerbate the lower baseline ace2 function in hypertensive patients to lead to the accumulation of aii and reduced angiotensin 1-7 and subsequently worse immune-related cytolysis and lung injury, which was validated by the linear association between elevated plasma aii level and viral load or lung injury in covid-19 patients. 29 the use of acei or arb likely promotes feedback upregulation of ace2 expression in hypertension, although there are animal and human studies which have also found either no effect or downregulation of ace2 level in the setting of diabetes, hypertension or cardiovascular disease, with or without ace/arb therapy. 25, [30] [31] [32] [33] nonetheless, this may explain our finding that acei/arb therapy can be protective in sars-cov-2 infection. further evidence that would support this come from earlier studies in which acei/statins were protective in severe pneumonia, recombinant ace2 protected mice from lung injury following sars-cov infection, and raas blockade reduced acute lung injury in rats injected with sars-cov s-protein. 34, 35 currently, there is still no specific treatment for covid-19 except for supportive care. in our cohort, 94.2% of non-severe patients received nonspecial antiviral therapy from just after admission. the combination protocol and medication dose varied in different hospitals. however, our results did not support any single or combined antiviral treatments to limit the progression of covid-19. in addition, none of 25 patients treated with chloroquine developed severe pneumonia, though without statistical significance. this is unfortunately limited by the degree of heterogeneity . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .in our cohort and relatively small size. chloroquine is known to block virus infection by increasing endosomal ph required for virus/cell fusion, as well as interfering with the glycosylation of cellular receptors of coronavirus, which has been confirmed to inhibit sars-cov-2 in vitro. [36] [37] [38] a recent open label non randomized clinical trial reported that hydroxychloroquine combined with azithromycin is significantly associated with viral load reduction/disappearance in covid-19 patients. 39 even so, more rcts to assess the therapeutic effects of chloroquine on covid-19 need to be conducted.there were several limitations in this study. first, our study was conducted by retrospective data analysis. second, some cases had incomplete laboratory test results, given the variation in the clinical management among different hospitals. all data generation was clinically driven and not systematic. third, because most patients had recovered and discharged at the time of data cutoff and only 2 patients died during admission, the impact of adjuvant treatment on the clinical outcomes cannot be analyzed. forth, there were limited hypertensive patients who received acei or arb therapy, so we cannot analyze the effect of aeci and arb respectively. a larger cohort study of covid-19 patients with hypertension from other cities in china and other countries would help to further validate the potential protective effect of aeci/arb therapy.covid-19 is a fast-evolving, global pandemic with high mortality from severe pneumonia, ards, and multiorgan failure, with the highest risk in the elderly and patients with underlying hypertension. the current adjuvant antiviral and immunoregulation therapies have not yet proven . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20057539 doi: medrxiv preprint benefits in clinical settings. but importantly, our results show the potential protective effects of acei or arb therapy to limiting progression to severe lung disease in hypertensive patients.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . figure 1 the study design flow chart of the included patients . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20057539 doi: medrxiv preprint abbreviations: acei, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors; arb, angiotensin-receptor blockers; ci, confidence interval; copd, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ct computed tomography.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20057539 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is an ongoing pandemic of acute respiratory 59 disease caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the 60 mortality rates as well as the infectious capacity of the virus, ranging from 1% to >5%, has 61 raised a major concern worldwide. older people with comorbid conditions such as pulmonary 62 disease, cardiac disease, kidney disease, diabetes, and hypertension are associated with higher 63 mortality rates. 1 according to recent literature reports, it is now well accepted that 64 hypertension is associated with increased mortality rates in covid-19 patients. the mechanism for sars-cov-2 infection necessitates the binding of the virus to the 70 membrane-bound form of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor and internalization 71 of the complex by the host cell (figure 1) . apart from its role as a receptor for sars-cov-2 (and 72 for both the sars-cov and the related human respiratory coronavirus nl63), ace2 is well-73 known for its role in hypertension. ace2 modulates blood pressure and maintains blood 74 pressure homeostasis through negatively regulating the renin-angiotensin system (ras). 4,5 75angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) and its homolog ace2 are two key enzymes involved in 76 the synthesis of bioactive components of the ras. 6 ace2 exerts its functions through cleaving 77 either angiotensin i or angiotensin ii into the inactive peptides angiotensin (1-9) and 78angiotensin (1-7) respectively (figure 1) . angiotensin (1-9) gets further metabolized into 79angiotensin (1-7). angiotensin (1-7) is a vasodilator, hence, ace2 counteracts the 80 vasoconstrictor effects of the ace-angiotensin ii axis. the mechanism by which ace2 81 antagonizes the effects of angiotensin ii is either by cleaving the precursor angiotensin i which 82 reduces ang ii synthesis in tissues or by directly hydrolyzing angiotensin ii and reducing its 83 levels in plasma. 84both ace and ace2 are endothelium-bound carboxypeptidases that can be cleaved by 85 different metalloproteases located on the cell surface and released in a soluble form. contrary 86 to ace which is widely expressed in many tissues and organs, ace2's high expression is confined 87 to the endothelial cells of the arteries, arterioles, and venules of the heart and kidney. 4 88 therefore, ace2 has been a potential therapeutic target in treating hypertension as well as 89 cardiac dysfunctions. several animal studies, carried out on diet-induced hypertension rat 90 models, have established a link between increased blood pressure and reduced mrna 91 expression and protein levels of ace2. data showed that low levels of ace2 can lead to elevated 92 levels of ang ii and consequently hypertension. 4 animal studies have suggested that 93 angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor blockers (arbs) may 94 upregulate ace2 expression, thus increasing the availability of target molecules for sars-cov-2. 95the leeds family study by rice et al (2006) , is one of the first studies to demonstrate 96 the link of ace2 polymorphisms and inheritance of hypertension, and levels of circulating 97 ace2. 7 several genetic association studies have examined the relationship between ace2 98 genetic variants and the risk of developing hypertension in different ethnic populations (table  99 1). 8 one of the highly reported variants is rs2285666; ag genotype at this variant is protective 100 as it poses a lower risk to develop hypertension in females. 9,10 in contrast, aa genotype as 101 opposed to ag+gg at the same snp rs2285666 has been reported to be associated with a 102 higher risk of hypertension in different ethnic populations. 11-13 other highly reported variants 103 known to be associated with high risk to develop hypertension are rs2106809 with tt genotype 104 and rs879922 with c allele. 10,14-18 however, the european population study revealed the 105 absence of an association between rs879922 and high blood pressure. 19 there are concerns on whether medical management of hypertension involving the use of 112 inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) (such as aceis and arbs) have a 113 favorable impact on people infected with sars-cov-2 or a deleterious one mainly because acei 114 and arb therapies can modulate the expression of ace2. the concern is that the use of aceis 115 and arbs will increase the expression of ace2 and increase patient susceptibility to viral host 116 cell entry and propagation. as a result, there has been a call for the discontinuation of 117 acei/arb usage prophylactically and in the context of suspected covid-19 cases. 118in this review, we shed light on the current debate about ace2 role in the mortality 119 associated with covid-19 cases with hypertension and weigh on the current argument about 120 the usage or discontinuation of acei/arb hypertensive medication. finally, we explore the role 121 of ace2 genetic variants in the predisposition for hypertension and the response to however, a critical question that remains unanswered is whether this 129 association is solely attributed to the pathogenesis of hypertension or to the associated 130 comorbidity or therapy. in this section, we review recent findings regarding the role of 131 antihypertensive medications, which have been at the center of a considerable debate, namely 132 angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs). the 133 main question has been whether they have a favorable impact on the people infected with 134 sars-cov-2 or a deleterious one mainly since acei and arb therapies can modulate the 135 expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), that has been identified as a receptor 136for sars-cov2. the concern is that the use of aceis and arbs will increase the expression of 137 ace2 and increase patient susceptibility to viral host cell entry and propagation. as a result, 138 there has been a call for the discontinuation of aceis/arbs usage prophylactically and in the 139on the other hand, other groups have been suggesting the opposite where increased 141 ace2 can act as a vasodilator, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory. this is since ace2 primarily 142 acts to counterpoise the effect of ace. as ace produces angiotensin ii from angiotensin i, ace2 143 generates angiotensin (1-9) from angiotensin i or angiotensin (1-7) from angiotensin ii that none of these medications (aceis, arbs, beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers, or 168 thiazide diuretics) was associated with increased infectivity to sars-cov-2 or increased covid-169 19 severity. the study predefined a 10% difference as a substantial difference, even though the 170 study was powered to detect as low as a 6% difference. it is worth mentioning that the data 171 pointed to a modest decrease in the likelihood of testing positive for sars-cov-2 but not the 172 severity in patients taking beta-blockers that was slightly significant in an analysis that included insurance, or health care access in propensity scores. 23 nonetheless, both the studies 176 highlighted that aceis and arbs, as well as other antihypertensive drugs were safe to use. 23 their data showed that treatment with ace-inhibitors was associated with a reduced risk of 188 rapidly deteriorating severe disease. there was a lesser rate of death or transfer to the icu 189 within 7 days in patients on an ace-inhibitor; an odds ratio of 0.29 (ci 0.10-0.75; p<0.01) was 190 observed after adjusting for age, gender, several comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes 191 mellitus, ischemic heart disease, and heart failure. they concluded that among hospitalized table 2) . 215while two of the variants, namely rs112171234 and rs75979613 downregulate the expression 216 of ace2, the others upregulate. the eqtl variants are from the following genes: the intergenic 217 region of (ace2, bmx), fancb, the intergenic region of (mospd2, asb9), ace2, the intergenic 218 region of (ca5bp1, ca5b) and cltrn. almost all these variants are "common" variants (minor 219 allele frequency ≥ 5%) in one or the other population raising the possibility that genetic 220 regulation of ace2 expression can be more widespread. however, none of these variants is 221 associated with hypertension in any of the global studies ruling out the possibility of a common 222 genetic mechanism for the onset of hypertension and sars-cov-2 infection. even at the level of 223 genes, which harbor these eqtl variants, none other than ace2 is known to be directly 224 involved in the onset of hypertension and the covid-19; however, it requires further studies to 225 examine whether these genes are contributing to more extensive pathways regulating 226 hypertension or covid-19 disease. 227 in several trials, covid-19 patients who already were taking these drugs are being 308 randomized to continue or to stop them. furthermore, we must consider the higher rate of 309 cardiac injury and adverse outcomes in hypertensive patients during the covid-19 pandemic. 310undeniably, the loss of aceis/arbs cardiopulmonary protective effects could be damaging. 311additionally, based on genetic analysis, the eqtl variants regulating the expression of ace2 312 gene are not so far shown to be associated with hypertension; however, the ace2 313 polymorphisms associated with hypertension or with the efficacy of acei or arb could have the 314 potential to alter the binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein with ace2 receptor. moreover, it 315 requires further studies involving large cohorts to evaluate the genetic association of the 316 above-mentioned eqtl variants and the gene loci with hypertension traits and to evaluate the 317 involvement of the above-mentioned gene loci that affect the efficacy of acei and arb in sars-318cov-2 infection and proliferation. hence, aceis/arbs chronic therapy should not be 319 discontinued in hypertensive patients with covid-19. moreover, in the absence of adequate 320 follow-up visits, changing aceis/arbs with another anti-hypertensive therapy could lead to 321 inadequate control of blood pressure. thus, as recommended by several medical associations, 322 and in light of more scientific evidence supporting their beneficial/non-harmful impact, 323aceis/arbs should be continued in covid-19 patients. in december 2019, a pneumonia caused by an unknown pathogen broke out in wuhan city, the capital of hubei province, china. in january 2020, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was identified as the pathogen underlying the disease. sars-cov-2 forms a unique clade of the sarbecovirus subgroup of the orthocoronavirus subfamily, having emerged as the seventh coronavirus that can infect human beings [1] . as of march 23, 2020, the number of confirmed cases of coronavirus disease 2019 caused by sars-cov-2 has surpassed 300,000 globally, resulting in more than 14,000 deaths [2] .previous studies have shown that patients with underlying comorbidities can have worse outcomes, and some laboratory indicators are also associated with mortality [3, 4] . some studies have shown that hypertension is a risk factor for patients with severe covid-19 [5] . there have been more patients with hypertension among those who have died than among survivors. however, the effect of hypertension on outcomes of covid-19 patients is not completely clear or uniform. therefore, we designed this study to investigate the effect of hypertension on the outcomes of these patients, using the propensity score-matching (psm) method to eliminate the influence of other confounding factors.this single-center, retrospective cohort study was conducted at the central hospital of wuhan, a tertiary teaching hospital that is responsible for the treatment for patients of covid-19 as assigned by the chinese government. all participants included in the study were local residents of wuhan who were hospitalized at central hospital of wuhan from january 1 to february 29, 2020. relevant laboratory examinations, commonpathogen detection, and chest computed-tomography (ct) scanning were conducted. each patient also underwent the sars-cov-2 nucleic-acid swab test, with some patients testing positive and others negative. the immaturity of the methods and an incorrect sampling method used for sars-cov-2 nucleic-acid detection might have contributed to false-negative results. high-resolution ct scans with a scan layer thickness of 5 mm and reconstruction of a 1-to 1.5-mm thick layer are recommended for radiological examination of covid-19 patients. the included patients were clinically diagnosed with covid-19 according to the world health organization (who)'s interim guidelines [6] . for patients who were suspected to have the illness, two senior respiratory doctors made a joint diagnosis.we divided the participants in our study into two groups: survivors and non-survivors. critically ill patients were defined as those who had the following clinical signs: fever or suspected respiratory infection plus one or more of the following: respiratory rate > 30 breaths/min, severe respiratory distress, or oxygen saturation (spo2) < 90% on room air. patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), sepsis, or septic shock were also included. patients with other viral, bacterial, or fungal infections on admission and those with missing data were excluded. participants with hypertension in the study had been previously diagnosed with same by a clinician and regularly took oral antihypertensive medications over a long period of time. the outcomes observed in the study were either in-hospital death or discharge from the hospital.this study was approved by the ethics committee of wuhan central hospital. as it was a retrospective study and did not require protection of patients' privacy, we were exempted from obtaining informed consent.we reviewed electronic medical records, from which we obtained chronic comorbidities, demographic data, laboratory examination results, and chest ct images. data on counts or levels of white blood cells (wbcs), lymphocytes (l), neutrophils (n), alanine transaminase (alt), aspartate aminotransferase (ast), serum albumin (alb), serum creatinine (scr), blood urea nitrogen (bun), d-dimer, and c-reactive protein (crp) were included. diagnoses of hypertension came from the electronic medical records system. length of hospital stay was obtained from discharge records, from which we also learned the patient's outcome. scores on the acute physiology and chronic health evaluation ii (apache ii) had been calculated for critically ill patients within 24 h of admission. we obtained dosage and duration of hormone use from physician medication order entry systems; the physicians had acquired these data via an examination on the first day after admission. all data were checked by another researcher to ascertain their accuracy.continuous variables were presented as means (standard deviation [sd] ) and compared using t tests if they were normally distributed, or described using medians (interquartile ranges [iqrs]) if they were not.. the mann-whitney u test was used for comparisons. we expressed descriptive data as number (%) for categorical variables and compared them via chi-square test or fisher's exact test. we used the kaplan-meier (k-m) method to evaluate the relationships between variables and outcome and cox proportional-hazard model (cphm) analysis to clarify the effects of each factor on outcome. a two-sided α value of < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. we analyzed all data using ssps software version 22.0 (ibm corp., armonk, new york, us).after performing statistical analysis as described above, we conducted psm analysis to minimize the effect of selection bias and to control for potential confounding factors. psm analysis attempts to compare outcomes between patients who have similar distributions of all covariates measured, thus enabling further clarification of variables' effects on outcome. matching was performed using a 1:1 matching protocol without replacement (greedy-matching algorithm), with caliper width = 0.2 of the standard deviation of the logit of the propensity score. we further adjusted for the comparative risks of outcomes in the matched cohort using a cphm.a total of 226 patients with covid-19 were enrolled in our analysis from january 1 to february 29, 2020. of these, 111 (49.12%) tested positive for sars-cov-2 nucleic acids. non-survivors accounted for 22.12% of all participants. the basic characteristics of the study population are shown in table 1 . non-survivors tended to be older and to have chronic comorbidities such as hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus (t2dm), and coronary heart disease (chd). however, there was no significant difference in the proportion of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) between the two groups. compared with survivors, non-survivors had significantly higher serum n counts and higher levels of crp, ast, scr, bun, and d-dimer. serum alb levels and l counts of non-survivors were lower than those of survivors. the ratio of neutrophils to lymphocytes (n/l) was significantly higher in non-survivors. in addition, no significant differences in sex, alt levels, or time from onset to admission were apparent.before the multivariate cox regression analysis, we performed k-m analysis to screen out the appropriate variables in order to make the results more accurate. categorical variables with statistically significant differences between the two groups were directly analyzed by k-m analysis, and continuous variables were converted into categorical variables according to the median number before k-m analysis. after k-m analysis, we found that age, hypertension, t2dm, n/l, crp, ast, alb, bun and d-dimer had effects on patient outcomes (table s1 in the supplementary appendix).we conducted multivariate cphm analysis to further certify whether variables affected patient outcomes. those that did so were incorporated into cphm analysis, as were sex and scr. the results demonstrated that patients with hypertension had a higher mortality risk (hazard ratio [hr] 3.317; 95% ci [1.709-6.440]; p < 0.001; fig. 1 ). in addition, elevated d-dimer levels and higher n/l might also have increased patients' risk of death in (table 2) .the basic characteristics of critically ill patients was listed (table s2 in the supplementary appendix). of these patients, 47.62% died. non-survivors were older, and more non-survivors than survivors had hypertension (45.45% vs. 74.00%; p = 0.005). n/l and d-dimer levels were significantly higher in non-survivors than in survivors. hormone use was slightly different between the two groups. all severely ill patients were treated with methylprednisolone. there was no significant difference in average daily dose of methylprednisolone between the groups. surprisingly, methylprednisolone was used for shorter durations in patients who died than in survivors. in addition, non-survivors had higher apache ii scores. we also conducted multivariate cphm analysis of critically ill patients. hypertension, increased d-dimer fig. 2 ). methylprednisolone dose and days of use had no significant effect on outcomes of covid-19 patients.the abovementioned results indicated that hypertension had a great influence on the outcomes of patients with covid-19. to decrease the effects of other confounding factors on the relationship between hypertension and outcomes, we used one-to-one psm analysis. before psm, patients with hypertension differed significantly from those without on most of the covariates ( we applied the same analysis to critically ill patients. using psm, we matched 31 patients with hypertension with 31 without. the results of prematching and postmatching were presented in the table s3 in the supplementary appendix. after cphm analysis, the results were similar to those we had obtained before matching (table 5) ; the effect of hypertension on outcomes was still significant in critically ill patients (fig.4) .this retrospective cohort study showed that hypertension, increased levels of d-dimer, and higher n/l were associated with increased mortality in patients with covid-19; high apache ii score was also correlated with death in critically ill patients. hypertension was the most prominent of the abovementioned risk factors in both cohorts. this study is the first to report risk factors for mortality in covid-19 patients using psm analysis. the results of psm were the same as those we had already obtained before psm analysis. via psm analysis, we provided robust evidence to support the association between hypertension and increased mortality. in a study involving 191 patients with covid-19, logistic-regression analysis showed that odds of inhospital death were higher in patients with hypertension [4] . in another study conducted in january 2020, 11 of 99 patients with covid-19 died, and 3 of the 11 had hypertension [7] . yang et al. performed a systematic review and meta-analysis including 46,248 covid-19 patients [5] . the results showed that the pooled odds ratio (or) of hypertension in severe patients was 2.36 (95% ci [1.46-3.83 ]) compared with non-severe patients, indicating that hypertension might be a risk factor for severely ill patients. in addition, previous studies have shown that hypertension was also a factor in the prognoses of patients infected with other viruses. hypertension was one predictor of ards in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome, per the results of a study on clinical features and outcomes of severe acute respiratory syndrome [8] . based on the six indices of multilobular infiltration, hypo-lymphocytosis, bacterial coinfection, smoking history, hyper-tension, and age, guo et al. created the mulbsta score system based on a multivariate logistic-regression model to predict mortality in patients with viral pneumonia within 90 days [9] . the or of hypertension is 2.39, and its mulbsta score is 2. a study on influenza suggested that patients with hypertension suffered a significantly higher risk of death (or 1.49; 95% ci [1.10-2.10]) than patients who had no comorbidities [10] . researchers reported the deaths of three people infected with avian-influenza h7n9 virus in shanghai in 2013; two of them had hypertension [11] .the role of hypertension in covid-19 progression remains unclear. our results showed that l count in the hypertensive group was significantly lower than in the non-hypertensive group, and the same was true in critically ill patients. we speculated that the poor outcome of the hypertension group might be associated with impairment of immune function caused by the decrease in lymphocytes. consistent with our hypothesis, a recent study involving 61 patients with hypertension showed a significant decrease in peripheral blood cd3, cd4 and cd8 t-cell in hypertensive patients versus healthy controls [12] . additionally, it has been found that some angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and angiotensin ii receptor blocker drugs could significantly increase the expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) messenger ribonucleic acid in rat hearts [13] . as ace2 is the receptor of sars-cov-2 in humans, the increase in ace2 messenger ribonucleic acid expression could aggravate the illness. further study is needed to determine whether certain antihypertensive drugs contribute to poor clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19. finally, hypertension and other chronic diseases share some common characteristics, such as a proinflammatory state and attenuation of the innate immune response. therefore, the body cannot effectively control the virus in the early stage, which leads to aggravation of illness in covid-19 patients [5, 14] . further study is needed on the role of hypertension in this disease.in addition to hypertension, we found that high ddimer levels and high n/l were associated with increased in-hospital mortality of covid-19 patients in general and of critically ill ones in particular, which was consistent with previous studies. n/l might reflect levels of both inflammation and immune response of the human body during viral infection. some studies have shown that coronaviruses consume many immune cells, leading to a great reduction in lymphocytes, which inhibits cellular immune function. damage to t cells might be an important factor leading to deterioration of patients [7, 15] . neutropenia represents the aggravation of inflammatory response and cytokine storm, while lymphocytes are the main immuneactive cells in the body, and l count is an early marker of physiological stress and systemic inflammation [3, 16, 17] . wang et al. have reported that in 33 patients with covid-19, survivors had higher n counts and lower l counts than non-survivors [16] . neutrophils are proven to be related to the development of ards and progression from ards to death in patients with covid-2019 3 . in a study by zhou et al., univariate analysis showed that decreased l count was associated with in-hospital death in such patients [1] .consistent with our results, a recent study of 191 patients with covid-19 showed that d-dimer > 1 μg/ml was associated with fatal outcomes [1] . in the other two studies including 33 and 183 patients with covid-19, d-dimer levels were significantly higher in non-survivors versus survivors [16, 18] . recently, a bivariate cox regression analysis also suggested that higher d-dimer levels were related to the development of ards and progression from ards to death in patients with covid-19 (hr 1.03; 95% ci [1.01-1.04] and hr 1.02; 95% ci [1.01-1.04], respectively) [3] . the mechanism of fatal outcome in patients with higher d-dimer could be that systemic pro-inflammatory cytokine responses induce the production of procoagulant factors and hemodynamic changes [1, 19] .in addition, our study showed that a high score on the apache ii, a tool for estimating disease severity and mortality in-hospital in critically ill patients, was associated with increased mortality in patients with severe covid-19. patients with high apache ii scores have also been found to have higher risk of death in other studies. these studies suggest that clinicians should pay more attention to patients with high apache ii scores.the following shortcomings existed in our research. first, this was a single-center study with a limited fig. 4 cox regression survival plot according to hypertension after propensity score matching (psm) in critically ill patients number of cases included. at this writing, the epidemic has spread throughout the world. a multi-center study should be carried out that includes other hospitals in wuhan, other cities in china, and other countries worldwide, as it will yield a more comprehensive understanding of the factors affecting the outcomes of covid-19 patients. second, as this study was retrospective, the indicators included in our study were finite. the findings of chest ct, viral load in the respiratory tract or circulation, angiotensin ii, and lymphocyte subsets could be potential indicators of outcomes of patients, which should be further confirmed by more studies. finally, due to failure to record the classification, stratification, and use of antihypertensive drugs in patients with hypertension, it is necessary to further explore whether these factors could influence patient outcomes.hypertension, high d-dimer levels, and a high neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio all increased mortality in patients with covid-19, with hypertension being the most prominent factors. clinicians should note these findings. multicenter, prospective studies with large samples are needed to further validate the findings.supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10. 1186/s12931-020-01435-8.additional file 1: table s1 . shown thant results of univariate kaplan-meier analysis for all participators. table s2 . listed the baseline characteristics of critically ill patients. baseline characteristics of critically ill patients with and without hypertension were presented in the table s3 . coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has spread across the globe, and has been officially confirmed by the world health organization (who) as a public health emergency. 1 covid-19 has infected more than 1.4 million people and killed more than 80,000 people globally, with the total number of cases and deaths increasing every day. most covid-19 patients present with mild or no symptoms, but a few portions of patients may develop severe pneumonia with progression to lethal complications, including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), multi-organ failure and death. determining risk factors to anticipate the severity of covid-19 are essential for efficient resource allocation 2 , especially during this pandemic season.hypertension is one of the most prevalent chronic diseases, affecting approximately 31.1% of adults (1.39 billion) worldwide in the year 2010. 3 it is postulated that hypertensive patients have increased angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) expression due to associated genetic polymorphism and use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ace-i) or angiotensin-receptor blocker (arb), which even though still controversial, may increase susceptibility and severity of this study was aimed at investigating the association between hypertension and poor outcome in patients with covid-19 pneumonia by performing a systematic review and meta-analysis.we included all research studies enrolling adult covid-19 patients with information on hypertension and the specific outcome of interests -mortality, severe covid-19, ards, intensive care unit (icu) care and disease progression. we excluded: review articles, non-research letters, communications, and commentaries; studies with samples < 20; case reports and small case series; non-english language articles; research in paediatric populations (17 years of age and younger).a comprehensive systematic literature search was performed using pubmed, scopus, europepmc, and google scholar electronic databases using the search terms: (a) 'covid-19' or 'sars-cov-2' and 'hypertension'; (b) 'covid-19' or 'sars-cov-2' and 'characteristics'. records curated from the initial search were then screened for duplicates which were then removed. two independent authors (ih and mal) screened the title and abstracts for potential articles. the full-texts of remaining articles were evaluated by applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria. the systematic literature search was finalized on 7 april 2020. the study was carried out in accordance to the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) guideline.a standardized forms containing first author, year, study design, age, gender, cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), need for icu care and severe covid-19 were used for data extraction. two authors (mal and rp) performed the data extraction independently.the outcome of interest for this meta-analysis was the composite poor outcome which comprised of mortality, severe covid-19, ards, need for icu care and disease progression. severe covid-19 was defined according to the report of the who-china joint mission on covid-19, 5 while ards was defined as per who interim guidance on severe acute respiratory infection (sari) of covid-19. 6 to perform meta-analysis, we used review manager 5.3 (cochrane collaboration) and stata version 16 softwares. to calculate dichotomous variables, we used mantel-haenszel formula to generate pooled effect estimate in form of risk ratios (rrs) along with its 95% confidence intervals (cis). random-effects model was used regardless of heterogeneity, to account for interstudy variability. all p-values in this study were two-tailed, and statistical significance was set at ⩽ 0.05. to assess the influence of covariates, restricted-maximum likelihood random effects meta-regression was performed for age, gender, cardiovascular disease, diabetes and copd. each individual components of composite poor outcome was then subanalysed. sensitivity analysis by leave-one-out method was used to single out cause of heterogeneity and test for statistical robustness. to evaluate the small-study effects, a regression-based harbord's test for binary outcome was performed. funnel-plot analysis was performed to assess the risk of publication bias qualitatively.there were 848 records after initial database searching, of which 435 records remained after the removal of duplicates. after screening the title/abstract, 389 records were excluded. the 46 residual articles were then evaluated for eligibility by assessing its full-text article. 16 full-text articles were excluded because of: (a) no hypertension variable (n = 7); (b) specific groups (i.e. myocarditis, cardiac injury) (n = 5); (c) groups not divided based on outcome (n =4). thereby, 30 studies with a total of 6560 patients were included in the final qualitative and quantitative synthesis ( figure 1 , table 1 ). this meta-analysis showed that hypertension was associated with increased composite poor outcome (rr 2.11 (1.85, 2.40), p <0.001; i 2 44%, p = 0.006) ( figure 2 ). sub-group analysis showed that hypertension was associated with increased mortality ( meta-regression analysis showed that the association between hypertension and increased composite poor outcome was influenced by gender (p = 0.013) (figure 3 (a)), but not by age (p = 0.233) (figure 3 (b)), cardiovascular diseases (p = 0.464), diabetes (p = 0.882) and copd (p=0.094).sub-group analysis for studies with a percentage of males ⩾ 55% (rr 1.79 (1.58, 2.02), p < 0.001; i 2 0%, p = 0.49) has lower rr for composite poor outcome compared to < 55% (rr 2.32 (1.93, 2.79), p < 0.001; i 2 47%, p = 0.01) (figure 3 (c)).sub-group analysis for studies with median age ⩾ 55 years old (rr 2.17 (1.78, 2.64), p < 0.001; i 2 68%, p < 0.001) has only a slightly higher rr for composite poor outcome compared to < 55 years old (rr 2.02 (1.68, 2.43), p < 0.001; i 2 0%, p = 0.77).funnel-plot analysis showed a qualitatively symmetrical funnel plot for the association between hypertension and increased composite poor outcome (figure 4(a) ). regression-based harbord's test showed no indication of small-study effects for hypertension and increased composite poor outcome (p = 0.219) (figure 4(b) ).based on our meta-analysis, hypertension was shown to be associated with increased composite poor outcome that consists of mortality, severe covid-19, ards, need for icu care and disease progression in patients with covid-19. this association was influenced by gender, but not age, cardiovascular disease, diabetes and copd. the association between hypertension and increased poor outcome was stronger in studies with lower percentage of male patients.it is still unclear whether hypertensive people are more likely to contract covid-19 infection. however, individuals with hypertension tend to more severely affected by covid-19, with ace2 becomes a likely explanation. 40 ace2, a type 1 integral membrane glycoprotein which is found in the epithelial cells of cardiac, kidney, lung and intestinal tissue, converts angiotensin ii to angiotensin 1-7. 40, 41 thus, the presence of ace2 neutralizes the inflammatory effects of angiotensin ii, reduces the levels of proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-6, enhances the anti-inflammatory and antioxidant roles of angiotensin 1-7, increases the concentration of alveolar surfactant protein d and triggers vasodilation. 42, 43 it is likely that novel coronavirus responsible for covid-19 worked through a similar pathway as the coronavirus that caused sars-cov, where they use ace2 on the surfaces of epithelial cells as a receptor to attach and enter the host pneumocytes. [40] [41] [42] viral surface spike (s) protein of covid-19 binds to ace2 receptor following the spike protein activation by transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2). 44, 45 activation of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) in various tissues is associated with conditions such as hypertension. regular use of medications, including arb and acei upregulates ace2 expression, therefore facilitating the entry of sars-cov-2 into pneumocytes which ultimately increases the severity and fatality of infection. 40, 42 overexpression of ace2, which is supposed to provide protection for the lungs, is downregulated after viral uptake as the enzyme gets diminished, resulting in reduced angiotensin-ii degradation, increased aldosterone secretion and consequently loss of potassium via urine. 42 the interplay between hypertension, gender and ras may be the explanation of our result regarding the association of hypertension and outcome in a lower percentage of male patients. in hypertensive females, there is greater activity of angiotensin ii type 2 receptor (at2r) than angiotensin ii type i (at1r) which translates into attenuation of harmful response of at1r activation. 46 more expression and activation of at1r are seen in hypertensive males and hypothesized in causing vasoconstriction, pro-inflammatory response, increasing oxidative stress, leading to ards in severe covid-19. 47, 48 this condition provides an explanation for the higher incidence of severe covid-19 in males compared to females. oestrogen is postulated in bringing the predisposition towards 'good' ras in females. 49 although we did not have data concerning the menopausal status of the women in the included studies, the majority of subjects included in the studies were in older age groups. this could explain why the association between hypertension and outcome was stronger in studies with a lower percentage of male patients. nevertheless, this result has to be interpreted cautiously due to the known limitations of meta-regression, and is only a hypothesis-generating finding. an individual patient-level sub-group analysis (preferably with adjustment to various confounders) needs to be performed to confirm or deny this preliminary finding.currently, there is no scientific evidence showing that the termination of acei and arb in patients with covid-19 infection would be beneficial and the authorities in the field still recommend those patients to continue their regular anti-hypertensives. theoretically, inhibiting the breakdown of angiotensin ii (using acei) or blocking angiotensin at1r (using arb) could decrease inflammation systematically and specifically in the lung, heart and kidney, which ultimately reduces the potential complication of covid-19, including ards, myocarditis and acute kidney injury. 50 discontinuation of acei or arb in covid-19 patients with hypertension might potentially be harmful as they continue to offer cardiovascular and renal protection. in fact, the use of arb has been studied for the treatment of covid-19 and its complications. studies have shown that covid-19 downregulates ace2 expression and hinders it's organoprotective effect. 51 it is hypothesized that unregulated angiotensin-ii activity leads to multiple organ injury. 52, 53 furthermore, ace2 has been shown to protect lungs from ards. 54 hence, drugs that may increase ace2 may offer protection rather than harm.although ace2 is singled out as the port of entry for covid-19, it plays a substantial anti-inflammatory role in renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (ras) signalling. the elderly with hypertension have lower ace2 levels and higher ras signalling, which develops to extremely low ace2 levels and markedly elevated ras signalling after covid-19 infection, resulting in a likely reduced incidence of disease, but greater severity. 55 on the contrary, younger individuals without hypertension have higher ace2 levels and lower ras signalling, which turns to modestly low ace2 levels and modestly enhanced ras signalling after they are infected with covid-19, resulting in a potentially increased incidence of disease, but lesser severity. this supports the suggestion of continuing treatment with ras antagonists such as acei/arb in order to prevent further lung injury due to covid-19, including sepsis-associated lung injury. 55 the effect estimate for subgroup analysis for age ⩾ 55 and < 55 years old differs slightly, in which ⩾ 55 years old was associated with slightly higher risk. however, because meta-regression did not demonstrate significant differences across age groups, the significance remains uncertain, and direct comparison between the older and younger patients is needed.regardless of potential benefit or harm associated with acei/arb, controlling blood pressure is important to prevent cardiovascular complications. data on hypertensive medications were lacking in the included studies, hence, we are unable to provide meta-analysis or meta-regression for acei/arb.hypertension was associated with increased poor outcome in patients with covid-19 and the association was not affected by age, gender, presence of cardiovascular disease, diabetes or copd. this designates that hypertension may act as one of the potential prognostic factors for covid-19 severity that should be sought in the triage.the label hypertension is not universal; the included studies may have different definition of hypertension. the stage of hypertension and whether they are controlled or poorly controlled were also unknown. data on chronic hypertensive medications were not adequately reported by the included studies, and so cannot be analysed. such data may provide insight on the acei/arb impact on prognosis. additionally, the included studies were subject to potential confounders that may weaken or strengthen the effect estimate. the result of the meta-regression has to be interpreted cautiously due to the known limitations of such analysis. most of the articles included in the study were published at preprints servers, and as such are not yet peer reviewed. majority of the studies originated from china, the patients perhaps overlapping across the reports. most of the studies included were retrospective in design.hypertension was associated with increased mortality, severe covid-19, ards, need for icu care and disease progression in patients with covid-19. the association was stronger in studies with a lower percentage of male patients.the author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.the author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.a new coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; sars-cov-2) infection began to spread in wuhan, china, in early december 2019 and has rapidly spread around the globe. the disease condition associated with this novel coronavirus is referred to as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , and this outbreak was declared a pandemic on march 11, 2020, by the world health organization (who) [1] . as of may 15, 2020, the outbreak had reached globally 4,580,498 confirmed cases and 305,618 deaths, and only 1,735,657 patients had recovered [2] . these numbers are much greater than those [3] , despite the fact that the co-vid-19 mortality rate, to date, is lower [2, 3] . sars-cov-2 binds mainly to angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptors in host cells which are abundant in the lungs, heart, blood vessels, and intestine and, after more than a decade of research, there are still no specific treatments or effective vaccines for coronavirus [3] [4] [5] [6] .covid-19 presents with respiratory symptoms, from mild to severe, and a significant percentage of patients develop acute respiratory disease syndrome (ards); these severe symptoms are associated with a true cytokine storm, in particular il-6, and death can be one of the outcomes [7] .old age and underlying morbidities, such as cardiovascular diseases, in particular hypertension and metabolic disorders (obesity and diabetes), have been identified as significant risk factors for covid-19 morbidity and mortality [7] [8] [9] . however, asthma and copd may not be common comorbidities [10] . moreover, the real impact of sars-cov-2 in asthma control is unclear.a systematic search was carried out in the following 4 electronic databases: embase, medline, medrxiv, and scopus to assess the relationship between asthma and covid-10 using studies in the english language up to may 14, 2020. the search terms included were: "covid-19" or "sars-cov-2" or "coronavirus" and "asthma" or "allergy" or "case series" or "comorbidi-ties" or "epidemiology" or "hospitalization" or "risk factors." additionally, the references of the initial included studies were hand searched to identify other possibly eligible studies.results from the first epidemiologic studies of the covid-19 pandemic in china apparently did not identify asthma as a risk factor of severe covid-19 [10, 11] . of 171 children treated at wuhan children's hospital (wuhan, china), 3 (1.8%) required intensive care and mechanical ventilation; all of them had underlying diseases but there was no asthma reference [12] . the same data was found in a cross-sectional multicenter study carried out in 10 hospitals across hubei province (china), including hospitalized children with covid-19 [13] (table 1) .dong et al. [14] (china), in a nationwide case series of 2,135 pediatric patients (mean age 7 years) with covid-19, observed cases at the chinese center for disease control and prevention from january 16, 2020, to february 8, 2020 (hubei province) and did not report any asthma case.in a survey of 140 adult patients admitted with covid-19 (china), the clinical characteristics and allergy status of the patients was investigated. all of the patients were community-acquired cases. hypertension (30.0%) and diabetes mellitus (12.1%) were the most common comorbidities. drug hypersensitivity (11.4%) and urticaria (1.4%) were self-reported by several patients. asthma or other allergic diseases were not reported by any of the patients and the authors concluded that allergic diseases and asthma were not risk factors for sars-cov-2 infection. an older age and a high number of comorbidities, i.e., cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, were associated with covid-19 severity [15] . the same authors studied a larger sample of 290 confirmed covid-19 adult patients who were hospitalized, and they found only 1 patient with asthma (0.3%); once again, hypertension and diabetes mellitus were the most frequently found comorbidities [16] .in another retrospective, multicenter cohort study that included 191 adult inpatients with confirmed covid-19 (wuhan, china), 48% had at least 1 comorbid disease, with hypertension being the most common, followed by diabetes and coronary heart dis- ease, with no asthma reference [17] . in a survey of 70 adult patients admitted with covid-19 in tongji hospital (wuhan, china), an asthma prevalence rate of 0.9% was found; this is markedly lower than that in the adult population in this region (6.4%) [18] . in this study, asthma was not identified as a risk factor for disease severity, in contrast with hypertension [18] . a nationwide analysis from china [19] , including 1,590 co-vid-19 cases from 575 hospitals in 31 provincial administrative regions, reported an overall rate of severe cases and mortality of 16.0 and 3.2%, respectively. the most prevalent comorbidity was hypertension (16.9%), followed by diabetes (8.2%). one hundred thirty (8.2%) patients reported having 2 or more comorbidities. none of the cases had physician-diagnosed asthma. after adjusting for age and smoking status, copd (hr = 2.681; 95% ci 1.424-5.048), diabetes (hr = 1.59; 95% ci 1.03-2.45), hypertension (hr = 1.58; 95% ci 1.07-2.32), and malignancy (hr = 3.50; 95% ci 1.60-7.64) were identified as significant severity risk factors, including for intensive care unit (icu) admission, mechanical ventilation, and death [19] .in europe, in a sample of 355 patients with covid-19 who died in italy (with a mean age of 79.5 years) it was reported that comorbidities were associated with an increased mortality risk. thirty percent of patients had ischemic heart disease, 35.5% had diabetes, 20.3% had active cancer, 24.5% had atrial fibrillation, 6.8% had dementia, and 9.6% had a history of stroke. once again, no reference to chronic respiratory diseases was made, i.e., asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) [20] .also in a retrospective case series of 1,591 consecutive patients with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 admitted to icu in 72 hospitals of the lombardy region in italy between february 20 and march 18, 2020, 68% of the patients had at least 1 comorbidity. hypertension was the most common comorbidity, affecting 49% of the 1,043 patients with available data. the second most common comorbidities were cardiovascular disease (21%) and hypercholesterolemia (18%). only 4% had a history of copd, with no reference to patients with asthma [21] .in the confidence study [22] that included 100 pediatric covid-19 cases also from italy (median age 3.3 years; 58% with mild disease and only 1% with severe disease), there was no reference to chronic respiratory diseases as was found in previous pediatric chinese surveys by lu et al. [12] and dong et al. [14] .borobia et al. [23] from la paz university hospital, madrid, spain, in a sample of 2,226 adult patients (median age 61 years) admitted to hospital who either died (20.7%) or were discharged (79.3%), identified that the most common comorbidity was hypertension (41.3%), followed by other chronic cardiovascular diseases (19.3%) and diabetes (17.1%); asthma was identified in 5.2% of covid-19 patients, with a lower prevalence rate of 3.7% in the fatal cases. copd affected 6.9% of the population, with a prevalence of 14.1% in the fatal cases. also from spain, in catalonia, prieto-alhambra et al. [24] analyzed a primary care database covering > 6 million people, including 121,263 covid-19 patients (both hospitalized and outpatients). most common comorbidities were hypertension (24.3%) and obesity (19.9%). asthma was present in 6.8% of the patients and copd was found in 3.2%; 10.7% of all patients were treated with inhalers.in 200 covid-19 patients hospitalized in the lausanne university hospital, switzerland, [25] an asthma prevalence rate of 4.0% was found; the asthma prevalence rate was 2.7% in those patients who required mechanical ventilation.in the usa, bhatraju et al. [26] (seattle, wa, usa) reported 24 patients with covid-19 admitted to the icu with a mortality rate of 50%. as coexisting disorders, 58% had diabetes, 22% were current or former tobacco smokers, 21% had chronic kidney disease, and 14% had asthma, corresponding to 3 cases with mild asthma who had been treated with systemic corticosteroids in the week before icu admission, as outpatients, for a presumed asthma exacerbation. these patients were subsequently admitted to the icu with severe respiratory failure requiring invasive mechanical ventilation [26] .arentz et al. [27] (wausa) described, in a case series, the characteristics and outcomes of 21 patients with covid-19 admitted to the icu at evergreen hospital, with a mean age of 70 years (range 43-92 years); the more common comorbidities identified were: chronic kidney disease (47.6%), congestive heart failure (42.9), diabetes (33.3%), and copd (33.3%). two patients had asthma (9.5%).data from the usa regarding 345 cases in children (< 18 years) showed that 23% had at least 1 comorbidity [28] . chronic respiratory diseases, i.e., asthma, were the most common associated diseases, although the authors did not quantify the prevalence. comorbidities were more frequently present in pediatric patients who required hospitalization compared to those who were not admitted to hospital (77 vs. 12%), but there was no reference to asthma as a significant risk factor [28] .in a sample of 377 adult covid-19 patients admitted to california (usa) hospitals, 7.4% had nondiscriminated asthma or copd [29] . a data analysis of patients hospitalized in 14 states of the usa with covid-19 during march 2020 (n = 1,482) [30] confirmed that hospitalization was much more frequent in adults (74.5% aged ≥50 years). among patients with information on underlying conditions (n = 120), 89% had 1 or more comorbidities. the most common were hypertension and other cardiovascular diseases (77.5%), followed by obesity (48.3%) and diabetes mellitus (28.3%). seventeen percent of the covid-19-positive patients had asthma and 10.7% had copd. according the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) report, in admitted patients aged 18-49 years, obesity was the most prevalent underlying condition (59.0%), followed by asthma (27.3%) [30] .a report from 8 hospitals (georgia, usa), also summarized medical data for 305 adult patients with confirmed covid-19 who were admitted during march 2020. overall, 225 (73.8%) patients had underlying conditions. hypertension (67.5%), diabetes (39.7%), other cardiovascular diseases (25.6%) were found, as was severe obesity (bmi ≥40), which was present in 12.7% of patients. asthma was identified in 10.5% of all of the patients (13.5% in patients aged 18-49 years, 13.1% in those aged 50-64 years, and 6.0% in those aged ≥65 years, with no statistically significant differences) and copd in 5.2% [31] .in the large sample of hospitalized covid patients (> 99% adults), that included 5,700 patients hospitalized with covid-19 in the new york city area (ny, usa), 14.2% were treated in the icu, 12.2% received invasive mechanical ventilation, and 21% died [32] . an asthma prevalence was found in 9.0% (with no reference to asthma severity/control) and copd was found in 5.4%; the most common comorbidities were hypertension (56.6%), obesity (41.7%), and diabetes (33.8%) [32] .in the ny mount sinai hospitals, an 8.2% prevalence of asthma was found in 2,199 of hospitalized patients; it was not significantly different in those who died (7.4%) [33] . also in ny (usa), in the first 1,000 consecutive adult patients with a positive sars-cov-2 pcr test who presented to the emergency department or were hos-asthma and the covid-19 pandemic 5 int arch allergy immunol doi: 10.1159/000509057 pitalized at new york-presbyterian/columbia university irving medical center between march 1 and april 5, 2020, an asthma prevalence of 11.3% was found; it was also not significantly different in those that were admitted to the icu (12.3%) [34] .in the isaric prospective observational cohort study [35] with near real-time analysis, with the participation of 166 uk hospitals, 16,749 covid-19 hospitalized patients were included between february 6 and april 18, 2020 (mostly adults). the commonest comorbidities were chronic cardiac disease (29%), uncomplicated diabetes (19%), non-asthmatic chronic pulmonary disease (19%), and asthma (14%); 47% had no documented reported comorbidity. increased age and comorbidities including obesity were associated with a higher probability of mortality [35] .very recent data from the opensafely collaborative study [36] identified asthma as a significant risk factor of death from co-vid-19 in england (uk). the authors conducted a cohort study that included 17,425,445 adults using national primary care electronic health record data linked to in-hospital covid-19 death data (from february 1, 2020, to april 25, 2020). an older age age was strongly associated with risk, with the age group ≥80 years having a more than 12-fold increased risk compared to those aged 50-59 years; most comorbidities were associated with a higher risk of covid-19 hospital death, including asthma (fully adjusted hr = 1.11; 95% 1.02-1.20), with a greater hr for those with recent use of an oral corticosteroid (ocs) (hr = 1.25; 95% ci 1.08-1.44) [36] .data from the uk biobank [37] , in a prospective case-control study, showed an asthma prevalence of 17.9% in 605 covid-19 hospitalized patients, most of them adults (the asthma prevalence was of 13.5% in the control population) but the disease was not identified as an independent risk factor for covid-19 hospitalization/severity, in contrast with hypertension and copd. in the oldest population (age ≥65 years) included in the uk biobank [38] , the same tendency of asthma prevalence was found between hospitalized covid-19 patients versus controls (18.2 vs. 13.0%), but again asthma was not identified as an independent risk factor for severity.in a report from the middle east (saudi arabia) [39] that included 150 hospitalized adult patients (mean age 46.1 years), it was found that 28.8 and 26.0% of the covid-19 population had hypertension and diabetes, respectively. the asthma prevalence was 2.7%, and 1 patient with asthma was admitted to the icu.in a study aiming to estimate the risk factors for hospitalization and death in a mexican population [40] infected with sars-cov-2 (n = 10,554, mean age 46.5 years; 39.4% hospitalized and 9.2% fatal cases), hypertension was the most prevalent comorbidity found (21.7%), followed by obesity (20.15%) and diabetes (17.7%). the asthma prevalence was 3.6% of this population (3.1% in the hospitalized patients and in 3.2% in the fatal cases). patients with hypertension, obesity, and diabetes were more likely to be hospitalized and die than people without these comorbidities. once again, asthma was not identified as an independent risk factor for hospitalization and/or mortality [40] .based on the available literature, there was no clear evidence that patients with asthma were at a higher risk of being infected or becoming severely ill with sars-cov-2, although recent reports from the usa and the uk suggest that asthma is much more common in children and adults with covid-19 than was previously reported in asia and in the first surveys in continental europe.nevertheless, the prevalence of several underlying conditions identified in us hospitalized patients with covid-19 was similar to those for hospitalized influenza patients during influenza seasons 2014-15 through 2018-19, i.e., regarding chronic respiratory diseases (29-31%) [41] .of particular note in the uk is the association of asthma with a higher risk of covid-19 hospital death, with the hr increasing further for those who received ocs, probably indicating a greater severity of disease. this contrasts with previous findings, in several countries, where asthma and other chronic respiratory diseases have been underrepresented in hospitalized patients [36] . also in the uk asthma was reported in 14.0 and 17.9% of hospitalized patients but with no increased risk of death [35, 37] .among school age children, viral infection reportedly accounts for up to 85% of asthma exacerbations, and viruses are more frequently isolated from symptomatic patients than from asymptomatic patients [42, 43] . even though respiratory viruses are one of the most common triggers for asthma exacerbations in all age groups, not all of these viruses affect patients equally. in particular, the human rhinovirus was identified as the main individual contributor for asthma exacerbations, with coronavirus being one of the less identified triggers of asthma exacerbations in children as well as in adults [44] . a recent literature review concerning virus detection during asthma exacerbations confirmed that exacerbations were mainly associated with rhinovirus infection in all continents [45] .in previous sars outbreaks, patients with asthma, in particular children, appeared to be less susceptible to the coronavirus, with a reported low rate of asthma exacerbations and a good prognosis on follow-up [10, 46] . in contrast, during influenza epidemics, asthma was associated with more severe disease, including the need for mechanical ventilation, not only in adults but also in children [47] . the exact reasons for this remain unknown, but it was confirmed during the current coronavirus pandemic [48] .from the recent covid-19 literature, no definite conclusions can be drawn regarding asthma control or severity. similarly, no information can be extrapolated about asthma phenotypes, i.e., regarding whether asthma is allergic or not. covid-19 outcomes vary from asymptomatic infection to death and it is possible that this clinical range reflects different airway levels of the sars-cov-2 receptor, ace2, and the spike protein activator transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2), considering that the virus cell entry also depends on s-protein priming by host cell proteases.blood eosinophil levels are a well-known predictor of airway t2 inflammation [49] , and the measurement of blood eosinophil levels can be used as an accessible (not strong), proxy for investigation of the association between airway t2 inflammation and covid-19 outcomes.in early reports from china, a detailed clinical investigation of hospitalized covid-19 cases suggested severe eosinopenia together with lymphopenia as a potential indicator of the diagnosis and to a worse prognosis, including death [15] . it was believed that low eosinophil counts in peripheral blood would be related to the sars-cov-2 infection itself. however, more recent studies from china and from italy have not reported eosinopenia in patients with severe covid-19 [26, 31, 50] .although the relationship between eosinophil counts and covid-19 is uncertain, attention is warranted to monitor eosinophil counts among patients with asthma who are using biological therapies that lead to decreased eosinophil counts and the clinical course of covid-19 in cases infected with the sars-cov-2 [51] .sajuthi et al. [52] studied in children the role of both t2 inflammation and viral infection in regulating the gene expression of ace2 and tmprss2 and they found a strong influence of t2 cytokine-driven inflammation on both ace2 (downregulation) and tmprss2 (upregulation) expression levels, which can have clinical implications for covid-19 outcomes. in contrast, the authors found an equally strong positive influence of respiratory virus infections on ace2 expression [52] . so, at least theoretically, in patients with asthma and high t2 inflammation, the consequence of an interferon-dependent inflammation requires close monitoring given the enhanced risk of complications due to sars-cov-2 infection.a recent study that included asthma patients from 3 different cohorts of children and adults found that ace2 receptor expression was lower in those patients with high allergic sensitization, but nonatopic asthma was not associated with this reduced expression [53] . these data suggest that this reduced ace2 expression may be a potential contributor, among several other factors, of reduced covid-19 severity in patients with respiratory allergies, i.e., allergic asthma [53] .additionally, there is some early evidence coming from the severe asthma research program-3 (sarp), that inhaled corticosteroid therapy is also associated with reduction on ace2 and tmprss2 gene expression from sputum [54] . these data stress the importance of maintain asthma controlled using the treatment according to the best practices, including with inhaled steroids.there is also evidence to support that taking ics may be beneficial in dealing coronavirus infections. in vitro studies have shown inhibitory actions of budesonide on coronavirus hcov-229e replication and cytokine production [55] , and preliminary not yet peer-reviewed data suggest that ciclesonide blocks sars-cov-2 ribonucleic acid replication [56] and inhibits its cytopathic activity [57] , which may have clinical implications.although gene expression for ace2 and tmprss2 did not differ in healthy and asthmatic patients, it was also found that males, african americans, and patients with diabetes have increased expression of ace2 and tmprss2 in their sputum cells, which may be associated with the poor prognosis of these patients when infected with the sars-cov-2 [54] .dong et al. [58] very elegantly described selected cases of patients with covid-19 (children and adults), demonstrating the profile complexity and different clinical presentations from mild to severe cases. patients with common allergic diseases, such as rhinitis or atopic dermatitis, did not develop distinct symptoms or had severe courses, which may suggest a positive balance of type 2 immune regulation in covid-19 pathogenesis.new data are emerging daily, rapidly updating our understanding of this novel coronavirus, but it is crucial that patients with asthma and other allergic diseases such as allergic rhinitis maintain their controller medication, from inhaled corticosteroids to biologics [51, 59, 60] , including allergen immunotherapy [61] , without making any dose adjustments on their own or stopping medication, which may lead to a higher risk of asthma exacerbations, increased ocs use, and a higher probability of the need for emergency room access and hospitalization (risk factors for coronavirus exposure and spread). likewise, it is important to maintain well-controlled rhinitis and rhinosinusitis, together with other known risk factors for asthma exacerbations [62] .the available data about ocs use in asthma exacerbations, though limited to 3 reported cases in mild asthmatics [26] , are in accordance with data from previous coronavirus outbreaks, showing that systemic corticosteroids can be associated with a higher viral load [63, 64] . the uk data suggesting an increased death risk in patients int arch allergy immunol doi: 10.1159/000509057 with asthma, especially in those who recently received systemic steroids [36] , stress that clinicians must be cautious and recognize the differences between hypoxic respiratory failure and bronchospasm to carefully balance the need for ocs prescription [51] , and bronchodilators must be delivered by metered dose inhalers with spacers in order to prevent the viral spread related with nebulizer use [65] .as was shown by kaye et al. [66] , there is evidence of increased adherence to asthma (and copd) pharmacologic treatment during the first months of covid-19, which is encouraging and hopefully will have a positive effect on improvement of the control of asthma and minimize the need for acute care for this inflammatory chronic respiratory disease.in conclusion, it is unclear whether patients with asthma are at a higher risk of developing covid-19 and/or becoming severely ill. future studies in all age groups are needed to provide a greater understanding of the impact of underlying asthma, other allergic diseases, and t2 inflammation on covid-19 susceptibility and disease out-comes. the better we understand these interactions, the better we will be able protect the most vulnerable people, including those in high-risk groups.during the past two decades, the outbreak and prevalence of severe acute respiratory infections have been seen as one of the most serious hazards to global health. both two prominent coronaviruses, 2002 sars-cov and 2012 mers-cov, have markedly affected humans, causing 8422 and 1600 infections, as well as 916 and 574 deaths, respectively [1, 2] .in early december 2019, a series of pneumonia cases with unknown reason emerged in wuhan, hubei, china. highthroughput sequencing from lower respiratory tract samples has revealed a novel coronavirus that was named 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) and also named sars-cov-2 [3] . as of february 17th, 2020, 70,636 confirmed cases and 1772 death cases have been documented in china. 2019-ncov also targets the respiratory tract and shares many similar clinical symptoms with sars-cov and mers-cov [3] . common symptoms include fever, fatigue, and dry cough, followed always by anorexia, myalgia, dyspnea, and so on bo li and jing yang contributed equally to this article.* bo li libosubmit@163.com * yunhe zhao zhaoyunhe@medmail.com.cn [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] . lymphopenia and prolonged prothrombin time are also the most common characteristics [4] [5] [6] .in addition, as cardiologists, we are also concerned about whether patients with cardiovascular disease are at greater risk for 2019-ncov, and whether new coronavirus infections have an impact on the cardiovascular system. previous studies have shown a relationship between cardiovascular metabolic diseases and sars and mers [9] [10] [11] . a systematic analysis of 637 mers-cov cases showed that diabetes and hypertension are prevalent in about 50% of the patients and cardiac diseases are present in 30% of the cases [11] . diabetes was seen as an independent predictor for mortality and morbidity in patients with sars [9] . with the spread of 2019-ncov and increase of the cases, more and more 2019-ncov infected individuals exhibit comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes and cardia-cerebrovascular disease. in chen's study of 99 cases, 40% patients had cardia-cerebrovascular disease [6] , and in huang's study of 41 cases, 20% patients had diabetes [4] . these cardiovascular metabolic comorbidities might render them more susceptible to poor prognosis. given the rapid spread of 2019-ncov, an updated meta-analysis with significantly larger sample sizes by integrating the published studies is urgently warranted. accordingly, the present analysis will not only identify the cardiovascular epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 2019-ncov infection with greater precision but also unravel the impact of the infection on the cardiac injury.preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses of individual participant data (the prisma-ipd) statement was followed for the conduct and reporting of this meta-analysis [12] .to identify all the studies illustrating the prevalence and impact of cardiovascular metabolic diseases in 2019 novel coronavirus infection in china, embase and pubmed were carefully searched from december 2019 to february 2020. the following search terms or keywords were used alone or in combination: 'novel coronavirus', 'influenza', 'pneumonia', 'cardiovascular disease', 'hypertension', 'diabetes' and 'cardiac injury'.inclusion criteria are as follows: (1) comparative studies: randomised controlled trials rcts or non-rcts published in english; (2) study population: more than ten participants were included in the study; (3) study intervention: patients in the studies should be confirmed to have been infected by 2019 novel coronavirus; (4) parameters: the comorbidities of cardiovascular metabolic diseases and the outcome of cardiac injury should be given. case reports, non-human studies, studies without adequate information, and studies written in chinese (for the fear of data duplication) were excluded in the present meta-analysis.prevalence of comorbidities including hypertension, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases and diabetes (table 1 and fig. 2 ) together with clinical outcome of cardiac injury (confirmed by elevation of troponin i/t, or the creatine kinase seen as the second choice if troponin i/t were not provided) were extracted from the identified studies (table 1 and fig. 3 ). the primary outcome measure was to compare the prevalence of comorbidities and impact on cardiac injury in icu and non-icu cases (severe and non-severe data as the second choice if icu data was not provided). cochrane collaboration's tool was followed to assess the risk of bias.all analyses were performed using openmeta analyst version 10.10 (https ://www.cebm.brown .edu/open_meta) and revman software version 5.3. forest plots were used to illustrate the prevalence of the cardiovascular metabolic diseases in 2019-ncov infection severity from the selected studies as well as the impact of the 2019-ncov infection on the cardiac injury. the results of the included studies were performed with fixed-effect models (mantel-haenszel method) [13] or random-effect models in cases of significant heterogeneity between estimates [14] . we used the i 2 statistics to assess the magnitude of heterogeneity: 25%, 50%, and 75% represented low, moderate, and high degrees of heterogeneity, respectively. the chosen of the proper effect model was based on the analysis results: the fixed effect model was used if i 2 < 50% and the random effect model was used if i 2 ≥ 50% [15] .after initially identifying 399 articles, 111 duplicate documents were identified. of the leaving trials, after review of the titles and abstracts, 277 documents of non-human researches, reviews and studies that were not clinical trials were excluded. the leaving 11 studies were carefully and detailed evaluated. at last, six studies were excluded, because the participants of the trials did not meet the criteria we have set. then one study published in medrxiv was added. finally, a total of six studies with 1527 patients were included [4-6, 8, 16, 17] (fig. 1 ). all of the selected studies were published in 2020 with different sample patient sizes that ranged from 11 to 1099 patients ( table 1 summarizes the study characteristics).systematic analysis of studies that described the epidemiological and clinical features of covid-19 cases and reported the prevalence of cardiovascular metabolic diseases as well as the impact on cardiac injury in the infectious disease, has identified six reports with 1527 patients ( table 1 ). the majority of the cases were localized in wuhan, or recent travel to wuhan, or contact people from wuhan. the median ages were, respectively, 56, 49, 47, 55.5, 34 and 57 years old according to the six studies. the infection was diagnosed throughout the whole spectrum of age covering from new born to 92 years old. in all of the studies, men were more likely to be infected than women and the overall proportion of male is 57.8%.meta-analysis for the identified studies showed that the most prevalent cardiovascular metabolic comorbidities were hypertension (17.1%, 95% ci 9.9-24.4%) and cardia-cerebrovascular disease (16.4%, 95% ci 6.6-26.1%), followed by diabetes (9.7%, 95% ci 6.9-12.5%) (fig. 2 ). there was a significant heterogeneity (cochran's q) in the estimates of comorbidities among the identified studies with an i 2 index varied from 47 to 95% (fig. 2 ). we then compared the difference of the prevalence of the three diseases between severe patients and non-severe patients (or icu patients vs non-icu patients according to the data in the studies). for hypertension and cardia-cerebrovascular disease, the heterogeneity test results were calculated as i 2 = 47% and 26%. thus, the fixed-effect model was used for further analyses. the results from the three included studies (with a total amount of 1278 patients) showed that hypertension accounted for 28.8% of icu/ severe cases, but 14.1% of non-icu/severe cases. a similar pattern was found in cardia-cerebrovascular disease statistics: it accounted for 16.7% of icu/severe cases, but 6.2% of non-icu/severe cases. the proportion hypertension and cardia-cerebrovascular disease were both statistically significant higher in icu/severe patients compared to the non-icu/severe patients [hypertension: rr = 2.03, 95% ci (1.54, 2.68), z = 5.04, p < 0.00001; cardia-cerebrovascular disease: rr = 3.30, 95% ci (2.03, 5.36), z = 4.81, p < 0.00001] (fig. 2) . for diabetes, the heterogeneity test showed that i 2 = 67%, and so the random effect model was used. diabetes accounted for 11.7% of icu/severe cases, but 4.0% of non-icu/severe cases. the result indicated a higher proportion of diabetes in icu/severe patients but without statistical significance [rr = 2.21, 95% ci (0.88, 5.57), z = 1.68, p = 0.09] (fig. 2) .at last, we focused on the impact of the covid-19 on the cardiac injury. two studies that gave clear data were statistically analyzed, and the data showed that 8.0% (95% ci 4.1-12.0%) patients might be suffered from an acute cardiac injury. another two studies only gave the data of creatine kinase, if it can be seen as a biomarker of cardiac injury, the proportion might be 11.5% (95% ci 7.8-15.2%). when we attempted to compare the differences of cardiac injury incidences between icu/severe patients and non-icu/severe patients, we just included the two studies which specifically identified myocardial injury. the data again showed a significant higher incidence of acute cardiac injury in icu/severe patients compared to the non-icu/severe patients [rr = 13.48, 95% ci (3.60, 50.47), z = 3.86, p = 0.0001] (fig. 3) . the funnel plots demonstrated symmetrical distributions of the effect size of hypertension, cardia-cerebrovascular diseases and cardiac injury on either side of the pooled estimate, but a non-symmetrical distribution of the effect size of diabetes (fig. 4 ).coronaviruses are enveloped rna viruses, which include six species that can cause diseases in humans to our knowledge [18] . four viruses among them (229e, oc43, nl63, and hku1) have been reported to cause common cold symptoms in immunocompetent individuals [18] . however, the two other strains are the infamous sars-cov and mers-cov, which have been linked to fatal illness and caused plagues and large numbers of deaths [19] . complete genome sequences of 2019-ncov showed that it is identified as a novel betacoronavirus belonging to the sarbecovirus subgenus of coronaviridae family, the same subgenus with sars-cov [3] .according to previous research on sars-cov, the presence of comorbidities increased the mortality risk, with cardiac disease and diabetes being the most important components to predict adverse outcomes [20] . cardiac disease and diabetes increase the risk of death by twice as much as other risk factors [20] . thus, it is necessary for us to evaluate the prevalence of cardiac and metabolic diseases in covid-19. the present systematic analysis summarized the data from all of the five studies of covid-19. the results demonstrated that the overall proportion of hypertension, cardia-cerebrovascular disease and diabetes were, respectively, 17.1%, 16.4% and 9.7%. according to summary of the 2018 report on cardiovascular diseases in china, the morbidities of the hypertension and diabetes were, respectively, 23.2% and 10.9%, and there were about 13 million of cerebrovascular disease patients and 11 million of cardiovascular patients [21] . therefore, comparing the data to the report, we did not find that people with hypertension and diabetes were more susceptible to 2019-ncov infection. the prevalence of hypertension and diabetes in people infected with the virus is about the same as in the general population, even slightly lower. however, comparing the general population, the incidence of cardia-cerebrovascular disease in patients with covid-19 is obviously much higher.due to the sample size and limited time so far, data collection is still incomplete, and most of the studies have not analyzed comorbidities in death cases. so the relationship between cardiovascular metabolic diseases and covid-19-induced death cannot be determined. but what is assuredly is that patients with hypertension, cardia-cerebrovascular diseases or diabetes are more likely to develop severe/icu cases after 2019-ncov infection. the overall proportion of hypertension, cardia-cerebrovascular diseases and diabetes were about twofolds, threefolds and twofolds, respectively, higher in icu/severe cases than in their non-icu/severe counterparts. although the difference of diseases in the meta-analysis is not statistical, fig. 2 meta-analysis for the proportion of hypertension, cardia-cerebrovascular disease and diabetes in covid-19 cases. weights are calculated from binary random-effects model analysis. values represent proportions of the 3 diseases in the covid-19 patients and 95% ci. heterogeneity analysis was carried out using q test, the among studies variation (i 2 index). forest plots depict the comparison of the incidences of the 3 diseases in icu/severe and non-icu/severe patients ◂ fig. 3 meta-analysis for the incidence of cardiac injury in covid-19 cases. weights are calculated from binary random-effects model analysis. values represent proportions of the cardiac injury in the covid-19 patients and 95% ci. heterogeneity analysis was carried out using q test, the among studies variation (i 2 index). forest plots depict the comparison of the incidences of cardiac injury in icu/ severe and non-icu/severe patients fig. 4 funnel plots of the comparisons of hypertension, cardia-cerebrovascular disease, diabetes and acute cardiac injury between icu/severe and non-icu/severe patients the rr value is about 2.21, and we consider this might because of the sample size of included studies and the algorithm adopts the random effect model which is a more conservative approach. so we speculate the result might reach statistical significance when more researches publish their data.another important finding is the damage the virus did to the heart. according to the present summary, at least 8.0% patients with covid-19 suffered acute cardiac injury. in chen's report, the first death was a 61-year old man with no previous chronic underlying disease. after he was admitted by icu, he had developed severe respiratory failure, heart failure, and sepsis, and then experienced a sudden cardiac arrest on the 11th day of admission and was declared dead [6] . this case reminded us that patients with a novel coronavirus might develop acute cardiac injury. and further analysis indicates us that the incidence of myocardial injury is much higher in icu/severe patients, about 13 folds more than non-icu/cardiac patients. and furthermore, the observation also reminded us that patients with covid-19 associated with unstable angina or stemi have poor cardiac reserve, lower tolerance to severe pneumonia, and are more likely to develop cardiac insufficiency, leading to deterioration. according to the information released by shanghai health commission, the first covid-19 death in shanghai was a patient 88 years old, with a serious history of hypertension, cardiac dysfunction. the analysis of death causes suggested that the patient died of heart failure and systemic multiple organ dysfunction, and in the course of its onset, the 2019 ncov infection is only the inducement.the pathogenesis of 2019 ncov infection-related acute myocardial injury is still unknown. but according to the clinical presentation and lab data of the disease, as well as the pathogenesis of sars-cov, it can be speculated that 2019-ncov infection may affect the cardiovascular system through multiple mechanisms.first, viral infection directly causes damage to cardiomyocyte. according to oudit's study, sars-cov viral rna was detected in 35% of autopsied human heart samples from sars-cov infected patients during the toronto sars outbreak [22] . and they also confirmed that pulmonary infection with the human sars-cov in mice led to an ace2dependent myocardial infection [22] . ace2 is an important target for sars-cov [23] , and molecular modelling has shown high structural similarity between the receptor-binding domains of sars-cov and 2019-ncov [24] . ace2 expression is highly tissue-specific, mainly expressed in the cardiovascular, renal and gastrointestinal systems, with a small amount expressed in lung cells. therefore, in addition to coronaviruses causing pneumonia through ace2 receptors in lung epithelial cells, we also need to pay attention to possible viral effects on myocardial tissue. second, hypoxaemia may be also an important reason of cardiac injury. in huang's study, 32% covid-19 patients had various degree of hypoxaemia and need required high-flow nasal cannula or higher-level oxygen support. in chen's study, up to 76% of patients require oxygen therapy. due to severe 2019-ncov infection, the pneumonia may cause significant gas exchange obstruction, leading to hypoxaemia, which significantly reduces the energy supply by cell metabolism, and increases anaerobic fermentation, causing intracellular acidosis and oxygen free radicals to destroy the phospholipid layer of cell membrane. meanwhile, hypoxia-induced influx of calcium ions also leads to injury and apoptosis of cardiomyocytes. third, huang's study noted that high concentration of il-1β, ifn-γ, ip-10 and mcp-1 could be detected in patients infected with 2019-ncov, which might lead to activated t-helper-1 (th1) cell responses [4] . furthermore, they also found that icu patients had much higher concentrations of inflammatory factors than those non-icu patients, suggesting that the cytokine storm was associated with disease severity [4] . in addition, repeated floods of catecholamines due to anxiety and the side effects of medication can also lead to myocardial damage.in conclusion, patients with previous cardiovascular metabolic diseases may face a greater risk of infection of 2019-ncov and it can also greatly affect the development and prognosis of pneumonia. simultaneously, we should pay close attention to viral infection-related heart damage in the course of disease treatment. dr. william h. stewart the us surgeon general during 1965-1969 is remembered primarily for his infamous statement: "it is time to close the book on infectious diseases…" five decades later, how erroneous this statement was! in 2020, humanity is facing one of the most devastating health urgencies in known modern history leading to health system collapse, economies "shutting down", unemployment surges and thousands of deaths worldwide due to covid-19 infection. 1 for the cardiovascular medical community there are important issues to be clarified and in this editorial our attempt is to provide the latest evidence-based directions for the intriguing labyrinth-like associations of hypertension, reninangiotensin system and covid-19.the hype of the hypertension link to covid-19 pandemic was fueled by the initial reports from wuhan, china, in which hypertension was present in 30% of cases and in 48% of non-survivors. 2 in 138 hospitalized patients with covid-19, hypertension was observed in 31% (58% in intensive units) 3 and the official data from the national health commission of china demonstrate that 35% of patients diagnosed with covid-19 have hypertension with the overall case fatality rate being 2.3% in the entire cohort but significantly higher (6%) in patients with hypertension. 4 the only available meta-analysis from wuhan of 46248 cases, supports that hypertension constitutes the most prevalent comorbidity in 17% of patients infected with the novel coronavirus. 5 the globality of the pandemic stresses the need for international data. in italy the most current analysis shows that of 69.1% of the deceased patients were hypertensives and 30% used angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) and 17% angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs). 6 despite the above observations, there are no robust data to suggest clearly an independent link of hypertension with increased covid-19 morbidity and mortality. 7 similarly, in other lower respiratory track infections, diabetes and heart failure are independently related to adverse outcome, while hypertension per se is not. 7 major pathophysiological pathways by which covid-19 causes cardiovascular and systemic complications is diffuse inflammatory response and ace-2 ( figure 1 ). the characteristic covid-19 "cytokine storm" is reflected by increased il-17, il-7, il-6, interferon-c, and tnfa. 7, 8 focusing on il-6 it is associated with the outcome from the viral infection and also plays a key regulator role of immuneinflammatory response in essential hypertension. 7 supportive to the latter, hypertension pathogenesis and progression of target organ damage is closely associated with low-grade inflammation 9 and this could partially explain the fact that hypertension is the most common comorbidity in covid-19 cohorts and related to worst course of the infection. 7 the confounding effect, however, of ageing and other comorbidities like diabetes and renal dysfunction in this inflammatory link should be taken in mind with future studies urgently needed in this setting.in humans, the entry of the new coronavirus into the target cells is facilitated by the spike protein that is anchored to the angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) in parallel with cellular serine protease tmprss2 actions. 7 ace-2 converts angiotensin ii to angiotensin 1-7 ( figure 1 ). 10, 11 receptors of the ace-2 are expressed in the epithelial cells of lungs, intestine, kidneys, heart and vessels and their activation causes vascular dilatation and provide renal and cardiovascular protection. 7, 10, 11 in this sense promoters of ace-2 are studied as potential antihypertensive drugs. 10, 11 the novel coronavirus sars-cov2 by using the ace-2 "consumes" the enzyme and the protective actions of the latter are significantly attenuated.the non-counterbalanced actions of angiotensin ii are partially responsible along with inflammation and thrombotic milieu to the covid-19 related severe complications. at the level of the lungs the virus reduces the activity of the ace-2 and regionally stimulates the renin-angiotensin system with leucocytes infiltration facilitation further accelerating the progression of the inflammatory response. in a relative study, covid-19 patients were characterized by higher angiotensin ii levels that were closely related to the total viral load and the degree of lung injury. 12 recombinant ace-2 administration has been proposed as a means to reduce angiotensin ii levels and lung tissue lesions. 10, 11 concerning the heart and vascular component of covid-19 infection, dysregulation of the ace-2 related pathways are linked to cardiac muscle injury and potential hemodynamic collapse. 10, 11 given consideration of the above, the "million dollars question", is about the effects of renin angiotensin blockers on ace-2 expression/action and most importantly what is the clinical relevance of this modulation in humans in the context of covid-19. there are data from animal studies for a more consistent upregulation of ace-2 with the majority of arbs, while the effect of aceis was variable. 7 this knowledge led to the opinion of potential susceptibility of patients on aceis and arbs to covid-19 infection 13 but this is currently unjustified. firstly, the data in humans are scarce and only in the small intestine enterocytes upregulation of ace-2 is reported due to acei. 14 regarding the lungs there are zero evidence for humans and even if existed cannot directly lead to the conclusion that this upregulation can indeed facilitate viral cell entry. 7 if one wants to focus on pneumonia outside the covid-19 setting, the use of aceis and arbs reduces the risk of infection 15 and related mortality. 7 in the era of covid-19 "social distancing", the "scientific approaching" by rapid and free exchange of knowledge provides the scaffold for better therapeutic answers. we should be therefore thankful to the researchers for the important emerging data. [16] [17] [18] [19] firstly, zhang p et al conducted a retrospective, multicenter study including 1128 adult patients with hypertension diagnosed with covid-19 and admitted to hospitals in the hubei province. 16 they showed that the incidence of the 28-day all-cause death among hypertensives who had inpatient treatment with aceis/arbs is significant lower compared with acei/arb non-users (3.7% vs. 9.8%; p = 0.01). 16 even after matching and adjusting variables in-hospital use of aceis/arbs still exhibits remarkable association with reduced all-cause mortality. and even more recently, three simultaneous publications shed further light into the debate of renin-angiotensin therapies in the covid-19 setting. [17] [18] [19] the work by reynolds h et al showed that among 12594 patients who were tested for covid-19 there was no association of aceis/arbs with increased likelihood of a positive test or severe infection. 17 further insight is provided by mancia g et al focusing in 6272 cases with severe covid-19. 18 after adjustment for confounders there was no independent association for the use of aceis/arbs with susceptibility for infection or worse clinical outcome in contrast to loop diuretics that were linked to enhanced risk. 18 interestingly the publication by mehra m et al, included international data from 169 hospitals (11 countries in asia, europe, and north america) for 8910 patients with covid-19 for whom discharge status was available. 19 there was no harmful association of either aceis or arbs with mortality but also it was demonstrated that the use of statins and aceis was linked to less in-hospital deaths. 19 these findings clearly support recently published recommendations by many societies regarding continuation of aceis or arbs among patients with co-existing hypertension, cardiovascular disease and covid-19. 20,21 moreover, they provide further rationale for ongoing studies with drugs targeting the renin-angiotensin system for therapy of covid-19, like losartan for hospitalized (νct04312009) and non-hospitalized patients (nct043111177). 22 there is a trending notion that there is not only a "second" wave of covid-19 pandemic linked to the infection per se to be worried about but also a "third" and maybe a more important one! this "third wave" in the upcoming months and years is related to major events that would lead to a massive burden to the health systems because of covid-19 related postponed guideline care in major disease states among them the cardiovascular ones. for hypertensive patients this is highly relevant due to the lack of regular follow-up along with destabilization of blood pressure levels due to unjustified discontinuation or modification of dosage of aceis/arbs that can lead to heightened cardiovascular risk. 23 this outsidethe-norm approach to chronic diseases might be a reaction of the public, as well as of some health providers, to the media-induced frenzy for the novel coronavirus. attention should be paid to the latter phenomenon and the cardiovascular community has already played a key role on establishing guidance for treatment and continuity of care for high risk patients. 7, 20 interplay with the organization of the health systems and governments is needed to sufficiently address the "burden" of cardiovascular emergencies and routine cases throughout the covid-19 era. the recent severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) due to coronavirus 2 (cov-2) infection pandemic and subsequent spread of the disease called covid-19 brought back to discussion a topic already highlighted during the sars-cov-1 and coronavirus-related sars known as the middle east respiratory distress syndrome (mers) of 2002 and 2013. during those outbreaks it was observed a particularly elevated incidence of cardiovascular disease among patients, who were also characterized by being elderly and, in particular during the mers, prevalently male [1, 2] .another main topic of the discussion is the role of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) 2. indeed, this carboxypeptidase has been identified as a functional receptor for the spike protein of the coronaviruses' outer membrane, including sars-cov-2 [3]. ace2 is strongly expressed in the epithelium of different organs, such as the kidney, heart, and lungs.ace2 shares a large affinity to the amino peptidase ace that is target to the ace inhibitors, a class of antihypertensive drugs. ace inhibitors represent the most used class of cardiovascular agents in the world, for the treatment of epidemic cardiovascular conditions such as hypertension and heart failure. although not directly inhibited by ace inhibitors, ace2 is affected by chronic treatment with this class of drugs, which leads to an increase in ace2 expression in several tissues [4] . interestingly, this feature is also shared by another class of drugs, the angiotensin receptor-1 blockers (arbs), whose chronic administration is as well able to increase the level of expression of ace2 and also its activity, as assessed by the circulating levels of the ace2 product, angiotensin 1-7 [5] . these findings support the concern that the treatment with renin-angiotensin system (ras) inhibitors could make covid-19 symptoms more severe due to increased expression of ace2. remarkably, both issues have been re-proposed in the occurrence of the present epidemic of covid-19. in particular, the issue of the prevalence of cardiovascular diseases among covid-19 patients is proposed by observational data obtained in chinese [6] and italian patients [7] . in this context, we still lack the analysis of the confounding effects of age on the apparent association between cardiovascular disease covid-19 infection and clinical severity. indeed, the observed prevalence of male and elderly patients, observed especially in the italian covid-19 population, is a confounding factor that needs to be corrected for before any conclusive association is drawn. this concern has been expressed by many [8] [9] [10] .similarly, the ace2 upregulation argument has never been demonstrated in humans. indeed, while there is conflicting evidence from animal studies that arbs (probably not ace inhibitors) may upregulate membrane-bound ace2 in tissue-specific manners (e.g., heart but not kidney), these data cannot be extrapolated to humans, and are not sufficient to support facilitation of sars-cov-2 entry [9] . in particular, it has never been demonstrated that the ace2 upregulation in the human lung occurs upon ras inhibition, and even less that this causes a worsening of the covid-19 disease. furthermore, it can also be speculated that ace2 upregulation is protective. indeed, it has been shown that the binding of coronavirus to ace2 leads to the downregulation of ace2 [11] , which in turn causes an ace/ace2 imbalance and to the excessive production of angiotensin ii by the related ace enzyme. this excess of angiotensin ii stimulates angiotensin ii receptor type 1 (at1r) and might cause an increase in pulmonary vascular permeability and lung damage [12] . therefore, according to this hypothesis, the upregulation of ace2, caused by the chronic intake of at1r and ace inhibitors, could be protective through two mechanisms: first, by blocking the increased production of angiotensin 1-7, which has been advocated as a possible mechanism of protection for the lung; second, by reducing the production of angiotensin ii, it removes a cause of lung damage [13] .in this context of uncertainty, there are advocates within the scientific community raising their voices for the cessation of ace inhibitors and arbs among patients taking these drugs, that is claimed for both the prevention of the infection and the attenuation of the symptoms in case of infection. these speculative claims are then taken over by the laical press, starting a word of mouth that sustains panic behaviors among the general population.the italian society of hypertension (siia) therefore takes a clear and firm position, in line with statements by other international societies (see table 1 furthermore, siia reiterates that subsequent points:a. acute suspension without medical control of cardiovascular therapy and specifically of antihypertensive treatment increases the occurrence of acute events, including hypertensive emergencies, heart failure decompensation, heart attacks, and stroke. b. the favorable effects of ace inhibitors and arbs on the control of the progression of cvds in general and in particular of hypertensive patients have been confirmed for many years and for this reason ras inhibitors represent central agents for the management of cardiovascular conditions that cannot be easily substituted [10] . c. in hypertensive patients with covid-19 or at risk of covid-19 infection, ace inhibitors and arbs treatment should be maintained according to the recommendations contained in the 2018 esc/esh guidelines [10] . d. similarly, in all patients currently on therapy with ace inhibitors, arbs and in the case of patients with heart failure, also the arnis, these drugs must not be suspended. e. in patients with covid-19 with severe symptoms or sepsis, ace inhibitors and arbs, like all other antihypertensive drugs, should be used or discontinued on a case by case basis, taking into account current guidelines.siia hopes and promotes further research that analyzes the constantly increasing data on the impact of hypertension and antihypertensive drugs, in particular ace inhibitors and arbs, on the clinical course of covid-19 infections, in order to update these positions as new evidence becomes available.in particular, to clarify which mechanism is prevalent and has a role in the clinical manifestation of covid-19, siia has launched a fact-finding investigation to verify the impact of therapy with inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system on the onset and clinical manifestation of the disease covid-19. this observational research is based on an online questionnaire made of 18 questions to collect information on medical history and the evolution of the disease in covid19 patients (id: nct04331574; clinicaltrials.gov).conflict of interest on behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution-noncommercial 4.0 international license, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by-nc/4.0/. the recent severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) due to coronavirus 2 (cov-2) infection pandemic and subsequent spread of the disease called covid-19 brought back to discussion a topic already highlighted during the sars-cov-1 and coronavirus-related sars known as the middle east respiratory distress syndrome (mers) of 2002 and 2013. during those outbreaks it was observed a particularly elevated incidence of cardiovascular disease among patients, who were also characterized by being elderly and, in particular during the mers, prevalently male [1, 2] .another main topic of the discussion is the role of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) 2. indeed, this carboxypeptidase has been identified as a functional receptor for the spike protein of the coronaviruses' outer membrane, including sars-cov-2 [3]. ace2 is strongly expressed in the epithelium of different organs, such as the kidney, heart, and lungs.ace2 shares a large affinity to the amino peptidase ace that is target to the ace inhibitors, a class of antihypertensive drugs. ace inhibitors represent the most used class of cardiovascular agents in the world, for the treatment of epidemic cardiovascular conditions such as hypertension and heart failure. although not directly inhibited by ace inhibitors, ace2 is affected by chronic treatment with this class of drugs, which leads to an increase in ace2 expression in several tissues [4] . interestingly, this feature is also shared by another class of drugs, the angiotensin receptor-1 blockers (arbs), whose chronic administration is as well able to increase the level of expression of ace2 and also its activity, as assessed by the circulating levels of the ace2 product, angiotensin 1-7 [5] . these findings support the concern that the treatment with renin-angiotensin system (ras) inhibitors could make covid-19 symptoms more severe due to increased expression of ace2. remarkably, both issues have been re-proposed in the occurrence of the present epidemic of covid-19. in particular, the issue of the prevalence of cardiovascular diseases among covid-19 patients is proposed by observational data obtained in chinese [6] and italian patients [7] . in this context, we still lack the analysis of the confounding effects of age on the apparent association between cardiovascular disease covid-19 infection and clinical severity. indeed, the observed prevalence of male and elderly patients, observed especially in the italian covid-19 population, is a confounding factor that needs to be corrected for before any conclusive association is drawn. this concern has been expressed by many [8] [9] [10] .similarly, the ace2 upregulation argument has never been demonstrated in humans. indeed, while there is conflicting evidence from animal studies that arbs (probably not ace inhibitors) may upregulate membrane-bound ace2 in tissue-specific manners (e.g., heart but not kidney), these data cannot be extrapolated to humans, and are not sufficient to support facilitation of sars-cov-2 entry [9] . in particular, it has never been demonstrated that the ace2 upregulation in the human lung occurs upon ras inhibition, and even less that this causes a worsening of the covid-19 disease. furthermore, it can also be speculated that ace2 upregulation is protective. indeed, it has been shown that the binding of coronavirus to ace2 leads to the downregulation of ace2 [11] , which in turn causes an ace/ace2 imbalance and to the excessive production of angiotensin ii by the related ace enzyme. this excess of angiotensin ii stimulates angiotensin ii receptor type 1 (at1r) and might cause an increase in pulmonary vascular permeability and lung damage [12] . therefore, according to this hypothesis, the upregulation of ace2, caused by the chronic intake of at1r and ace inhibitors, could be protective through two mechanisms: first, by blocking the increased production of angiotensin 1-7, which has been advocated as a possible mechanism of protection for the lung; second, by reducing the production of angiotensin ii, it removes a cause of lung damage [13] .in this context of uncertainty, there are advocates within the scientific community raising their voices for the cessation of ace inhibitors and arbs among patients taking these drugs, that is claimed for both the prevention of the infection and the attenuation of the symptoms in case of infection. these speculative claims are then taken over by the laical press, starting a word of mouth that sustains panic behaviors among the general population.the italian society of hypertension (siia) therefore takes a clear and firm position, in line with statements by other international societies (see table 1 furthermore, siia reiterates that subsequent points:a. acute suspension without medical control of cardiovascular therapy and specifically of antihypertensive treatment increases the occurrence of acute events, including hypertensive emergencies, heart failure decompensation, heart attacks, and stroke. b. the favorable effects of ace inhibitors and arbs on the control of the progression of cvds in general and in particular of hypertensive patients have been confirmed for many years and for this reason ras inhibitors represent central agents for the management of cardiovascular conditions that cannot be easily substituted [10] . c. in hypertensive patients with covid-19 or at risk of covid-19 infection, ace inhibitors and arbs treatment should be maintained according to the recommendations contained in the 2018 esc/esh guidelines [10] . d. similarly, in all patients currently on therapy with ace inhibitors, arbs and in the case of patients with heart failure, also the arnis, these drugs must not be suspended. e. in patients with covid-19 with severe symptoms or sepsis, ace inhibitors and arbs, like all other antihypertensive drugs, should be used or discontinued on a case by case basis, taking into account current guidelines.siia hopes and promotes further research that analyzes the constantly increasing data on the impact of hypertension and antihypertensive drugs, in particular ace inhibitors and arbs, on the clinical course of covid-19 infections, in order to update these positions as new evidence becomes available.in particular, to clarify which mechanism is prevalent and has a role in the clinical manifestation of covid-19, siia has launched a fact-finding investigation to verify the impact of therapy with inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system on the onset and clinical manifestation of the disease covid-19. this observational research is based on an online questionnaire made of 18 questions to collect information on medical history and the evolution of the disease in covid19 patients (id: nct04331574; clinicaltrials.gov).conflict of interest on behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution-noncommercial 4.0 international license, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by-nc/4.0/. after the first cases of respiratory illness were reported in december 2019, a novel coronavirus, designated as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was identified to cause the so-called coronavirus disease , which meanwhile has become a worldwide pandemic [1, 2] . in general, three distinct phases characterize progression of covid-19: an initial infection phase followed by a respiratory distress phase and finally culminating in a severe hyperinflammation state with more than 80% of sars-cov-2 infections showing only mild or even absent symptoms [3] . the characteristics from the covid-19 outbreak reported from china [3] provided important lessons with respect to cardiovascular involvements both as a primary target as well as a comorbidity. the infection phase marks virus infiltration and proliferation of the epithelium and lung parenchyma accompanied by mild symptoms and monocyte / macrophage activation as the initial immune response. the ensuing inflammatory processes like vasodilation, endothelial leakiness and leukocyte extravasation lead to pulmonary distress with pulmonary damage, fluid extravasation and hypoxemia, which in turn augments cardiovascular stress. finally, further amplification of the host inflammatory response will essentially culminate in systemic inflammation up to eliciting a cytokine storm [4] .importantly, the cardiovascular system emerges as both a primary target as well as the most important secondary comorbidity factor during all three of the covid-19 progression phases (fig. 1 ). there is accumulating evidence that the heart itself might be a direct target for viral infection with sars-cov-2 [5] . previous studies examining the cardiovascular effects of viral respiratory infections during influenza epidemics revealed a profound up to sixfold increased incidence ratio for acute myocardial infarction within 7 days of infection, in part due to the heightened prothrombotic activity leading to intracoronary thrombotic events [6] . hypotension and tachycardia will further imbalance the metabolic demand of a diseased heart. exaggerated systemic inflammation with profoundly increased circulating levels of prototypical inflammatory markers such as il-6, il-2, tnfalpha; mcp-1 or crp are well established to contribute to cardiac injury irrespective of the presence of hypoxemia. indeed, some of these biomarkers were shown to be associated with high mortality in retrospective clinical series of covid-19 patients hospitalized in china [7] , indicating potential serious bystander effects on other organs, including the heart. in support of such collateral damage to the heart, increased inflammatory markers do correlate with electrocardiographic abnormalities and biomarkers of cardiac injury [8] . finally, elevation of cardiac biomarkers documenting cardiac involvement is not only a prominent feature in covid-19, but is also associated with a profoundly worse clinical outcome [9, 10] . myocardial damage and heart failure contributed to almost 40% of deaths in a critically ill cohort hospitalized in wuhan [11] . cox regression analyses revealed that the mortality risk associated with acute cardiac damage was significantly higher than age, chronic pulmonary disease or prior history of cardiovascular disease [8, 9] . thus, both direct and indirect mechanisms of cardiovascular injury most likely play a pivotal role for the deleterious consequences of sars-cov-2 infection in addition to the severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards).last, patients with underlying cardiovascular disease are more likely to be infected with sars-cov-2, are more likely to develop severe symptoms, if infected with sars-cov-2, and may also be more vulnerable to adverse cardiotoxic effects of treatment with antiviral drugs. a most recent analysis from the leoss registry [12] displaying the prevalence of co-morbidities in covid-19 patients in germany disclosed that in all classes of disease severity more than 50% of the patients suffered from cardiovascular co-morbidity, fig. 1 summary of consequences of sars-cov2 infection on the cardiovascular system summarizing primary targets (left) and secondary comorbidities (right) which was by far the most prominent co-morbidity associated with covid-19 (fig. 2) .taken together, cardiovascular involvement is both highly prevalent and of significant prognostic importance in covid-19. therefore, it is not only important to fully involve cardiologists for managing cardiovascular complications in severe cases of covid-19, but also to pay particular attention to cardiovascular protection of patients at risk to develop covid-19. it will be essential to allocate sufficient resources for cardiovascular diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, even at times when the health care systems are globally overwhelmed and hospitals are guided by measures to contain and treat this infectious disease. we need to advice patients that cardiovascular emergencies like stemi, decompensated heart failure or life-threatening arrhythmias need immediate attention and treatment and emergency calls should not be delayed out of fear for being admitted to a hospital with the potential to acquire covid-19. we do need to set-up emergency treatment strategies for non-covid-19 patients in-hospital and assure protection of these patients from sars-cov-2-infected patients. additionally, we need to make sure to that hospital staff and health care workers in general are adequately protected and diagnostic and interventional procedures in covid-19 patients are guided by clinical necessity. fortunately, all major cardiovascular professional societies are meanwhile in the process of publishing guidance for various aspects of cardiovascular care in covid-19 patients, including how and in whom to perform diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. some of these guidance publications will be referenced to in the following chapters of this article. this will without any doubt lead to greater awareness of the immediate cardiovascular implications of this infectious disease.nevertheless, we should not stop here. hospitalization for pneumonia was previously shown to be associated with a significantly increased risk of cardiovascular disease up to 10 years of follow-up [13] . it is very likely that sars-cov-2 infections with respiratory impairment will also lead to similar long-term adverse events. we need to monitor covid-19 patients with acutely elevated markers of cardiac damage with respect to long-term consequences on cardiac function, including definite proof of sars-cov-2-induced myocarditis by myocardial biopsy. likewise, it will be important to assess potential long-term cardiotoxic effects of antiviral therapy. thus, cardiovascular care during the covid-19 pandemic should already implement strategies to capture longer-term implications by prolonged clinical follow-up. covid-19 has spread to almost all countries of the world. unexplained is the different impact of the disease in different countries. there has been a slow increase in infections in africa and south-east asia with a surprisingly low fatality rate. 14th april 2020 south africa had 2272 infections with 27 deaths despite a detailed surveillance system (www.coron aviru s.jhu.edu accessed 14th april 2020). it is currently unknown why there has been so far a slower than expected rise in cases and case mortality in low-to-middle income countries. the population demographics and underlying co-morbidities are vastly different in those countries. the mean age of many low-to-middle income countries is more than 2 decades lower than in higher income countries. for example in uganda the life expectancy at birth for males and females is 60 and 65 years (www.who.org), 48.5% of the population is in the age range of 0-14 years old with just 2% of the population being older than 60 years. this age pyramid influences the current uganda cardiovascular health challenges which does include hypertension and coronary artery disease, mainly in urban areas, but rheumatic heart disease (rhd) and heart failure due to cardiomyopathies remain enormous challenges. most of the patients do not have access to balloon valvotomy or surgery [14] . untreated symptomatic patients with rheumatic heart disease have a mortality rate of 20% per annum leaving very few patients being able to live beyond their 40 years of age [15] . however, there are other factors which might have an impact. the country-by-country difference in covid-19 morbidity and mortality could possibly be explained by national policies on bacillus calmette guerin (bcg) vaccination. bcg is a live attenuated strain derived from an isolate of myocobacterium bovis used widely across the world as a vaccine for tuberculosis, with many low-to-middle income countries but also some high-income countries such as japan having a universal bcg vaccination policy in newborns. bcg vaccinations have been shown to produce non-specific immune effects leading to an improved response against other non-myocardial pathogens. another possible protective mechanism could be the high number of people living with hiv/aids on anti-retroviral therapy. south africa has a population of 57 million with > 12% being hiv-infected. sa has the world's largest antiretroviral therapy (art) program, subsidized by the government and provided free-of-charge. only time will tell if low-to middle income countries will 'catch up' on the pandemic in 2020 and 2021 or remain relatively spared [16] .the world heart federation has published a briefing on prevention: coronavirus disease 2019 in low-income countries [17] . this includes six easy rules to reduce the risk of corona virus transmission. from staying at home and avoiding large gathering to a total shut down of a country had so far the biggest impact in a lower number of infections and early case detection.the role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system in covid-19the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) regulates blood pressure and is also involved in cardiovascular endorgan damage like myocardial hypertrophy, interstitial myocardial fibrosis, atherosclerosis and plaque rupture in acute coronary syndromes. therefore, blockers of the raas are recommended for the use in hypertension to prevent cardiovascular events and heart failure [18, 19] . the protease renin cleaves angiotensin to angiotensinogen i (ang 1-10), which then is processed to angiotensin ii (ang 1-8) by the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) [20] . angiotensin ii stimulates at1-receptors, which results in adverse cardiovascular effects like vasoconstriction, cell proliferation and hypertrophy [21] . in contrast, the at2-receptor mediates vasodilation, anti-proliferative actions and apoptosis and has been suggested to be involved in anti-proliferative effects upon binding of angiotensin ii [22] . angiotensin ii [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] is cleaved by the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) into angiotensin (1-7, 23), which exerts directly a stimulation of the so called "mas-receptor", mediating vasodilation, anti-proliferative effects and anti-inflammatory responses [24] . it is now well established that the corona virus family binds via its spike protein to ace2 [25, 26] with well characterized binding residues [27] . after proteolytic modification of ace2 [28] and the coronavirus spike protein [11, 12] by a membrane-bound proteinase (adam17), the virus is internalized by clathrin-coated pits and, after trypsin cleavage, viral rna is released into this cellular cytoplasm causing sars infection [28, 29] . ace2 is degraded and shedfrom the cell membrane into the circulation after cleavage by adam17 [28, 30] . as a result, there is a downregulation of ace2 by the corona virus itself [31] . the role of ace2 in corona virus infection is scrutinized by the fact that several animals cannot be infected by the corona virus when there is a knockout of ace2, which renders them resistant to infection [32] . the role of ace2 is not specific for the corona virus as ace2 is also used by the respiratory syncytial (rs) virus and some types of influenza viruses [33, 34] .ace2 can also be regulated in several cardio-pulmonary disease conditions like copd, pulmonary hypertension, asthma and after viral infections with influenza h1n1, h5n1, h7n9 as well as in sepsis [35] . ace2, potentially by degrading maladaptive angiotensin ii and stimulating anti-inflammatory responses through the mas receptor [24] , has been shown to improve lung injury after viral infections of clinical injuries [36] . furthermore, ards is not prominent after rs virus infections, when the ace2 is knocked out [33] . in addition, recombinant human ace2 has been tested in a pilot study in human ards and has been shown to reduce circulating interleukin-6 concentrations accompanied by increases of ang 1-7 and reductions of angiotensin ii [37] . therefore, ace2 might be crucial for the entry of corona viruses into the cells and, hence, infectivity [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] ; however, it might also mediate beneficial effects on pulmonary complications after infection [36, 37] . the fact that the major risk factor for adverse outcomes in covid-19 is age, and ace2 is downregulated in the aging population, argues in favor of its role in poor outcome of that risk group [35] . furthermore, drugs like chloroquine and indometazine [35] as well as ace inhibitors and arbs [38] [39] [40] have been shown to upregulate ace2 in the human heart and in the systemic as well as pulmonary vasculature [40] with association to outcomes in heart failure [41] , atrial fibrillation [42] and pulmonary hypertension [43] . these findings highlight the complex interaction of covid-19 and ace2 inhibition. we would thus raise the hypothesis that pathophysiological conditions or drugs enhancing ace2 expression might lead to greater infectivity, but, at the same time potentially reduce mortality due to lung complications (fig. 3 ).arterial hypertension is the most prevalent risk factor in cardiovascular disease, in particular in china [44] . in several early trials of covid-19 populations, hypertension is the most prevalent cardiovascular risk factor and comorbidity is amounting to approximately 30-40% in the overall population of diseased individuals in china [7, 45, 46] and italy [47] . in those patients, who have complications or even died, hypertension is more prevalent as was diabetes, coronary 3 hypothetical scheme for the interaction of the corona virus and angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace2). the corona virus binding with its spike protein to ace2, which is processed by the proteinase adam17 leading to the internalization of the corona virus and ace2 into the cell where the viral genome is released. the internalization as well as the shedding of ace2 from the cell surface and its release into the circulation reduces membrane-bound ace2. furthermore, ace2 is reduced by pathological conditions like pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, copd, pulmonary hypertension, smoking and old age [17] . on the contrary, membrane-bound ace2-concentrations are higher following treatment with ace-inhibitors, at1blockers and potentially ibuprofen, and ace2 is more abundantly expressed in childhood and at young age. as ace2 forms more ang 1-7 from angiotension-ii to stimulate the mas-receptor mediating anti-proliferative, anti-inflammatory action, hypothetically enhanced ace2-expression might cause more infection by acting as a receptor for viral cell entry and protect from pulmonary complications. in conditions where is downregulation of ace2, less infection might occur, but severity of covid-19-related ards can be more severe. this hypothesis fits with the higher likelihood of pulmonary complications in certain disease conditions and in aging. notably, these data are derived from experimental and observational data, but not from controlled clinical studies and need to be scrutinized in clinical conditions artery disease, chronic obstructive lung disease or malignancies [9] . as hypertension is the comorbidity with the highest prevalence in deceased patients, it has been claimed to be a risk factor for covid-19. however, this would only be the case, if there is a deviation from the overall prevalence of hypertension in the chinese population. in china, the prevalence of hypertension is high. by comparing chinese populations age-matched to those in reports on covid-19 (approximately 55-74 years), it becomes clear that the overall prevalence in hypertension is 44% with a further increase in populations at higher age [48] . therefore, the prevalence of the comorbidity hypertension in covid-19 patients is lower and does not exceed the overall prevalence in the relevant populations in china. therefore, there is no evidence that hypertension increases the likelihood to suffer from covid-19. cardiovascular risk factors and comorbidities are elevated in patients who have fatal outcomes after covid-19 [9] . therefore, all cardiovascular comorbidities in concert add to myocardial injury, which has been shown to be closely associated with death as measured from cardiac troponin levels [9] . the next question arises of whether cardiac treatments and treatments with the renin-angiotensin system inhibitors (rasi), in particular ace-inhibitors (ace-i) or angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) are associated with a differential outcome in covid-19. the guidelines for the management of hypertension of the european society of cardiology [18] , but also chinese guidelines [49] and guidelines of the american college of cardiology (acc) and american heart association (aha) [19] recommend ace and arbs for the treatment of hypertension as these drugs have been shown to be effective in secondary prevention, heart failure and protection against adverse renal outcomes. in germany, as in other countries in europe, the prescription rate of ace and arbs are higher than all prescribed daily doses of other anti-hypertensive drugs combined [50] . however, adequate blood pressure control in china in the age group, where covid-19 is most prevalent, was only 34.9-35.6% [51] according to the 2010 chinese guidelines [49] and 15,2-16,0% according to the 2017 acc/aha guidelines [19] . in particular, the frequency of ace-inhibitor treatment is particularly low in an asian population (in particular in females), because the ace-induced coughing is more prevalent than in other populations [51] . therefore, the low density of treatment with rasi does not argue in favor of a significant role of these drugs in the likelihood of covid-19. the upregulation of ace2 by rasi does not allow to argue in favor or against the use of ras-inhibitors in hypertension as recently expressed in various short communications and letters causing a lot of discussion and media attention [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] . although, a large body of evidence has been generated in cell models, animal models and observational studies, further data are necessary to scrutinize the definite role of ace2 in infection frequency and causation of pulmonary complications after corona infections. at this moment, there is thus no compelling evidentiary background to change rasi therapy for hypertension or other cardiovascular conditions.the cardiac manifestations of sars-cov-2 infection include acute myocardial injury, heart failure, myocarditis, and ventricular tachyarrhythmias [59] . along with ards, acute myocardial injury was identified as an important independent predictor of outcomes, associated with a 3.4-fold higher risk of death [9] . in a cohort of 416 hospitalized patients, the prevalence of cardiac injury-based on the presence of elevated hs-ctni values above the 99th percentile of a healthy reference population-was 19.7%, and the risk of death increased with the magnitude of myocardial injury, expressed as multiples of the reference value of hs-tni [9] . unequivocally, other cohorts investigating the prevalence and prognostic implications of myocardial injury during the covid-19 outbreak in wuhan, china, reported very similar rates of acute myocardial injury ranging between 7.2% [45] , 12% [10] , 17% [7] and 27.8% [8] at presentation based on elevations of hs-ctn above the uln. in a report on 138 patients hospitalized with covid-19 [45] , patients who received care in the intensive care unit were more likely to have cardiac injury than non-icu patients (22.2% vs 2%). ´consistently, in another study on 41 admitted hospital patients with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 [10] , the proportion of patients requiring care on the intensive care unit (icu) was significantly higher among patients with evidence of acute myocardial injury (31% vs 4%). several studies demonstrate an association between acute myocardial injury and mortality [7, 9] . in a study on 187 patients with covid-19 that evaluated the role of hs-ctnt relative to the presence of cardiovascular disease [8] , mortality rates were highest among patients with elevated hs-ctnt above uln and history of cardiovascular disease and lowest among those with normal hs-ctn, irrespective the presence or absence of cv disease [8] . in a survey on 416 hospitalized patients in wuhan [9] , only 26.2% of patients (22 of 82 patients) received an ecg, particularly during periods of elevation of cardiac biomarkers while imaging tests such as echocardiography were not reported. consistently other reports [7, 60] did not report on rates of ecg or other imaging tests, except lung ct, at all. hence, the limited diagnostic workup and selection bias precludes any speculations on the etiology of hs-ctni elevation.discordant to the recommendations of the 4th version of the universal myocardial infarction (mi) definition (udmi) [61] , the investigators of the wuhan studies used a different definition for acute myocardial injury and did not differentiate acute from chronic myocardial injury by a concentration change ("rise and/or fall") of hs-ctni. acute myocardial injury was rather defined as blood levels of high sensitivity troponin t or i above the 99th percentile upper limit of normal (upper limit of normal (uln) > 28 ng/l), or new abnormalities shown on electrocardiography and echocardiography [10] . the investigators did not report on rates and subtypes of acute myocardial infarction based on criteria of the 4th version of the udmi [61] . interestingly, hs-ctn values increased during serial monitoring in patients with a fatal outcome whereas persistently low values were observed among survivors allowing to speculate whether monitoring of hs-ctn might be useful even in the absence of a suspected acute coronary syndrome [7] .overall, the presence of myocardial injury in ed populations is not uncommon, occurring in as many as 20% of consecutive patients presenting with chest pain, dyspnea, or less specific symptoms [62] . however, only a fraction of elevations was ultimately attributed to a type 1 or type 2 mi and the majority of cases were unrelated to myocardial ischemia, often multifactorial, or the exact reason remained unsettled [61] . in stable or asymptomatic cardiovascular or ischemic heart disease, cardiac troponin elevation may be explained by the presence of underlying structural heart disease, stable cad, and chronic kidney disease [63] . accordingly, in western countries, the presence of hs-ctn above the 99th percentile uln has been reported in as many as 20% of asymptomatic patients with or without cardiovascular disease presenting for routine outpatient visits [63] , and across different sub-specialities in patients hospitalized for reasons other than an acute coronary syndrome [64, 65] . regardless the underlying reason or acuity of clinical presentation, the presence of myocardial injury as indicated by hs-ctn above the 99th percentile is uniformly associated with adverse long-term outcomes and patients with elevated hs-ctn at baseline have a higher risk to die acutely during the precipitating event due to their cardiovascular morbidity [63] . accordingly, the data from the pandemia in wuhan, confirm current knowledge but do not provide fundamental new information to our interpretation of troponin elevations.based on findings from corona and influenza infections in the past, it has been speculated that acute myocardial injury might be triggered or facilitated in covid-19 infection [59, 66] . a previous study on the incidence of myocardial infarction after the outbreak of influenza infections in ontario reported a sixfold higher incidence ratio of ami within 6 days after a positive influenza test as compared to a negative test during the same time frame [66] . it was hypothesized that an exaggerated inflammatory response mediated by viral infection with influenza a or b, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) or other virus had the potential to trigger acute plaque rupture. in addition, anecdotal evidence from sporadic case reports raised the suspicion of acute myocarditis, although a direct sars-cov-2 infiltration of the heart has not been confirmed in the absence of histological confirmation by endocardial biopsy, or by detection of viral genome in myocardial tissue, yet [67] . previously, a decline in left ventricular ejection fraction (lv-ef) and a highly prevalent reversible, subclinical diastolic left ventricular impairment that was reported in acute sars-cov-2 infection and was attributed to the cytokine storm syndrome that is characterized by an uncontrolled and dysfunctional immune response [68] . finally, cardiotoxic effects of antiviral therapies have been reported [69] .acute myocardial injury may occur independently from covid-19 and may manifest as type 1 myocardial infarction (stemi or nstemi), type 2 mi in the absence of plaque rupture or intracoronary thrombus, or as an acute myocardial injury independent of myocardial ischemia (fig. 4) . cases of acute mi on autopsy during hospitalization for covid-19 have been reported [7] but a systematic evaluation is lacking. given the paucity of data on the exact prevalence and reasons for an acute myocardial injury during covid-19, our interpretation of hs-ctn elevations has to be discussed on knowledge previously derived from other acute critical conditions, foremost severe infections causing sepsis or septic shock [70] . in an investigation on hs-ctnt in setting of severe infection, median concentrations of hs-ctnt were found to increase from 14.4 ng/l in sepsis to 52.6 ng/l in severe sepsis and 64.1 ng/l in septic shock [70] . likewise, the prevalence of hs-ctnt > uln increased from 51.6% in sepsis to 80.4% % in septic shock [70] . very similar to covid-19, mild elevations of hs-ctnt were associated with a high mortality rate at 30 days [71] . however, the risk associated with myocardial injury at baseline persisted over 5 years after the index event suggesting a major prognostic role of pre-existing structural heart disease on long-term outcomes. similar to sars-cov-2 infection, an impairment of right and left ventricular function on echocardiography was common during other severe infections and there was a clear association between myocardial injury, cardiac overload or hemodynamic stress as indicated by natriuretic peptides and inflammatory response [72] . significant elevations of hs-ctn have been demonstrated following rapid atrial pacing, irrespective the presence of inducible myocardial ischemia [73] . in an experimental human model that utilized the trans-cardiac production of lactate for objective evidence of myocardial ischemia, hs-ctnt increased in the absence of cad and lactate suggesting that tachycardia itself is capable to induce an acute myocardial injury. likewise, administration of catecholamines was found to release hs-ctnt in healthy volunteers [74] . other mechanisms that have been related to the release of ctn include respiratory failure due to severe hypoxemia, sepsis, acute kidney failure, hypertension or hypotension, bradycardia, fever, anemia and many other causes [61, 63] .acute mi with or without covid-19 represents a lifethreatening condition that requires adjunctive medical therapies such as potent antiplatelet drugs and monitoring to anticipate complications. however, the enhanced infectious potency in humans [75] mandates a fundamental risk assessment to carefully weigh the relative advantages against disadvantages of treating cardiovascular disease while preventing the risk of sars-cov-2 transmission.in patients with suspected acs without st-segment elevation, or in the absence of hemodynamic or rhythm instability and when covid-19 cannot be ruled-out due to suspicious clinical presentation, the personal recommendation of the author is to obtain nasopharyngeal swabs for real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) assay and, if available, to perform a ct lung scan while waiting for the pcr result. covid-19-associated pneumonia provides a typical picture that is characterized by bilateral lung infiltrates, glass ground opacities, consolidation, reticular pattern and the so-called crazy paving pattern [10, 60] . the sensitivity of ct is reported as high as 97-99% and is superior that of rt-pcr [76] . the ct scan could ideally be performed as a multi-detector ct angiography providing additional information on coronary anatomy and on the presence of pulmonary embolism since elevations of d-dimer are not uncommon [7, 60] and values exceeding the two-sixfold of the uln are associated with high mortality [45, 60, 76, 77] .regarding the measurement of cardiac biomarkers, the american college of cardiology (acc) has released statements against the liberal use of troponin in covid- 19 [78] . given the frequency and non-specific nature of abnormal troponin results among patients with covid-19, clinicians are advised to measure cardiac troponin only if acute myocardial infarction is suspected on clinical grounds [78] . the european society of cardiology (esc) expands these recommendations by restricting the measurement of cardiac troponin t/i concentrations to patients with suspected type 1 mi, because this infarct type is more likely to benefit from adjunctive antiplatelet therapies and early revascularization therapies (personal communication, paper under revision).moreover, in order to reduce the length of stay in an ed, and to dedicate monitoring capacities for other critically diseased patients, accelerated rapid rule-out and/or rule-in of mi seem to be particularly helpful [79] . real world evidence suggests that patient disposition may be completed within 2-3 h without an increase of adverse outcomes compared to standard protocols [80, 81] . use of echocardiography or coronary angiography should be restricted to those patients in whom these procedures would be expected to meaningfully affect outcomes [78] . timing of invasive coronary angiography depends on individual estimation of anticipated risk of death, heart failure or other infarct-related complications.factors that are supposed to favor an immediate or early coronary angiography under full protection of medical staff include stemi, high risk non-st segment elevation mi as suggested by either unstable hemodynamics, dynamic st segment changes, rhythm instability, or a very high clinical score as recommended in 2015 esc guidelines [79] .cardiac troponin values should be interpreted as continuous variables since risk of death and benefits from an early invasive strategy incline with increasing values [82, 83] . it is unclear whether the benefit of revascularization outweighs the potential disadvantages of contamination of medical staff in patients with small-to-intermediate elevations of hs-ctn, or whether a yet unsettled, more refined risk stratification is required to identify those patients who are likely to benefit most [83] . hence, patients with nstemi at lower risk should be managed according to local expertise and capability to deliver echocardiography and invasive procedures effectively to the patient without exposing the medical staff to an increased risk of contamination [84] [85] [86] [87] .is heart failure a risk factor for covid-19?it has long been known that patients with chronic heart failure (chf) are at increased risk for adverse consequences of seasonal influenza [88] and other causes of pneumonia [89] . conversely, infections and in particular pneumonia are frequent triggers of heart failure exacerbations [90] . of note, influenza vaccination decreases mortality in chf patients and the beneficial effects of repetitive influenza vaccinations may even exceed those of guideline-directed pharmacotherapy [91] . severe coronavirus infections such as with sars-cov-2 have been shown to result in a more severe course of disease in patients with preexisting cardiovascular disease, including heart failure [92] . thus it is not surprising that covid-19 is associated with higher morbidity and mortality in patients with cardiovascular comorbidities [7, 93] . yet, likely due to the lower prevalence of (known) chf in china, there is still limited specific information on patients with preexisting heart failure. nevertheless, some early reports [9] indicate that covid-19 associated myocardial injury (s. below) is more frequent in patients with heart failure and other cardiovascular comorbidities.up to 30% of hospitalized covid-19 patients [8, 9] reveal elevated troponin levels as a marker of myocardial injury. while the precise mechanisms for myocardial necrosis in the context of sars-cov-2 is unknown (s. below), troponin elevations are potent predictors of an adverse outcome. shi et al. [9] reported that increased troponin levels were associated with a higher likelihood for mechanical ventilation, development of ards and acute kidney failure. remarkably, 42 of 82 patients with myocardial injury died (51.2%), whereas only 15 of 334 troponin negative patients had a lethal outcome. similarly, guo et al. [8] showed that an elevated troponin predicted ards, ventricular arrhythmias such as vts vfib and death. interestingly, a continuous increase in nt-probnp and troponin t and was observed in those patients that ultimately died, while survivors revealed constant levels. of note, troponin elevations appear to be more predictive of prognosis than the presence of comorbidities as patients with higher troponin levels but without preexisting cardiovascular or pulmonary disease have a significantly worse prognosis than troponin negative patients with cardiovascular comorbidities (guo) . it seems likely that myocardial injury is not only a marker of an adverse outcome but also a direct cause. this notion is supported by data that show that covid-19 non-survivors frequently develop heart failure (52%) and shock (70%) [7] . similarly, ruan et al. [11] reported that in 68 patients who died of covid-19, myocardial dysfunction was the sole or a contributing factor for death in 40% of the cases.an obvious reason for an elevated troponin level could be acute coronary syndrome that obviously may also occur in covid-19 patients, and which is likely to be underdiagnosed due to reluctance for invasive management (s. above). however, the high proportion of typically rather moderately increased high sensitive troponin levels in hospitalized covid-19 patients renders other explanations more likely, including acute myocarditis due to sars-cov-2 or myocardial damage due to proinflammatory cytokines ("cytokine storm"). ace2 as a potential receptor for coronavirus infection (s. above) is highly expressed in cardiomyocytes and in vascular pericytes [94] . thus, it seems plausible that sars-cov-2 may directly cause viral myocarditis with associated cell death and subsequent myocardial injury as measured by increased troponin levels. indeed, the first still anecdotal autopsy and endomyocardial biopsy reports describe evidence for an acute lymphocytic myocarditis [95, 96] . however, the sars-cov-2 genome could not be detected in the myocardium of several of these early cases, indicating that other mechanisms of myocardial injury must be involved, at least in a subset of patients with myocardial injury.another attractive hypothesis how myocardial injury in the context of covid-19 may be explained is a hyperinflammatory state where dysregulated cytokines mediate cardiomyocyte stress and ultimately cell death. such a "cytokine storm" is a well-known [97] while underappreciated syndrome complicating sepsis in up to 4% of cases [98] . its clinical characteristics include multiorgan failure associated with persistent fever and lymphopenia as well as high levels of ferritin and several cytokines such as interleukin-6. for example, elevated interleukin-6 (il-6) levels closely correlate with mortality in sepsis and il-6 has been shown to directly impair contractile function of cardiomyocytes [99] . similarly, lymphopenia and excessively elevated ferritin and interleukin-6 levels have been demonstrated in severe cases of covid-19 which also revealed myocardial injury with increased high sensitive troponin.specific treatment of the "cytokine storm" and heart failure in covid-19?multiple clinical trials are underway which test antiviral agents potentially effective against sars-cov-2, such as remdesivir and several antivirals previously shown to be effective eg in hiv infections (reviewed in [100] . as myocardial injury is associated with a dramatically worsened outcome in covid-19, the question arises whether therapy should also be specifically aimed at the prevention of myocardial damage and/or hyperinflammation. indeed, the limited experience with inhibition of the cytokine storm by immunosuppression points towards this possibility. for example, interleukin-1 blockade by anakinra has been shown to reduce mortality in sepsis with hyperinflammation [101] . similarly, tocilizumab, an interleukin-6 receptor blocking antibody, shows early promise in covid-19: in a non-randomized trial involving 20 patients, crp levels and oxygen levels were almost normalized within a few days [102] .other promising targets include jak inhibitors such as baricitinib [103] , immunoglobulins, or fingolimod. finally, it has even been proposed that angiotensin receptors blockers eg. losartan may not only be not harmful (s. above) in covid-19, but in fact beneficial as they upregulate ace2, which could ameriolate tissue damage due to sars-cov-2[104]. data on removal of cytokines by adsorbent polymer beads ("cytosorb") are sparse.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a pandemic after an outbreak of pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus occurred in wuhan, china. meanwhile it has spread throughout the world and is associated with mortality rates between 1 to about 5%. cardiovascular disease is an important risk indicator for adverse outcomes and covid-19 might affect the cardiovascular system directly. angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) has been shown to be a coreceptor for viral entry downregulating ace2 with cardiovascular consequences. cardiovascular disease with dyspnea as a prime symptom like in heart failure, myocardial ischemia or hypertensive emergency is an important differential diagnosis, should not be ignored in covid-19 and needs to be recognized as an important indicator of poor outcome. while there is no evidence for changing cardiovascular therapy, a complete cardiovascular workup is necessary in covid-19 patients and, in particular, in patients with cardio-respiratory symptoms and even in acute respiratory distress syndrome.in turn, cardiopulmonary symptoms should not distract physicians from an unbiased work-up of cardiovascular conditions as these patients could suffer from life-threatening cardiovascular conditions in the absence of covid-19. healthcare providers in high, middle and low income countries need to be aware of the importance of cardiovascular disease in patients with sars and covid-19 infections by providing optimal cardiovascular care.the infectious disease caused by the new severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus‐2 (sars‐cov‐2), covid‐19, broke out in wuhan, china, and spread to almost every country in the world. millions of people have been infected, many have died, and everyday life has changed completely. the disease is accompanied by range of different symptoms (figure 1). rapidly accumulating data show that prognosis for patients with covid‐19 is good in those with mild disease, but severe cases show relatively asymptomatic early progression followed by rapid worsening after symptom onset, culminating in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and significant disease manifestations (figure 2). the presence of sars‐cov‐2 has been detected in multiple organs on autopsy, including the pharynx, lungs, heart, liver, brain and kidneys, highlighting the multiorgan tropism of this virus. 1  early clinical experience suggested that older age and the presence of a number of comorbidities, including hypertension, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus and chronic respiratory disease increased the risk of death in patients with covid‐19. 2 ,  3  in addition, the renin‐angiotensin aldosterone (ras) system (specifically the angiotensin‐converting enzyme 2 [ace2] protein) has been identified as playing an important role in facilitating entry of coronaviruses, including sars‐cov‐2, into target cells, especially in the lungs. 4 ,  5  therefore, it has been suggested that angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) and ace inhibitors, which affect ace2 expression, may influence the susceptibility to and severity of infection with sars‐cov‐2. 6 ,  7 ,  8 ,  9 ,  10 ,  11  hypertension is very common, affecting an estimated 1.39 billion individuals worldwide, 12  and the prevalence of hypertension increases with age (affecting approximately 70% of older adults). 13  in addition, ras inhibitors such as ace inhibitors and arbs are recommended and widely used for the treatment of hypertension. 14 ,  15 ,  16  however, hypertension is not a single clinical entity, but it instead manifests as a number of different phenotypes. in asians, the disease is characterized by salt sensitivity, high rates of masked hypertension, exaggerated morning bp surge, and nocturnal hypertension. 17  nearly half of all patients with hypertension worldwide (44%) live in south or east asia. 18  the hope asia network was established in 2016 and is a member of the world hypertension league. 19 ,  20  the mission of the hope asia network is to improve the management of hypertension and organ protection toward achieving “zero” cardiovascular events in asia. 19 ,  20  this has become even more relevant in the current pandemic, with high rates of infection in several asian countries.this guidance from the hope asia network summarizes the latest findings on covid‐19 and hypertension, including evidence‐based recommendations for the management of hypertension during the current pandemic.on march 20, 2020, the italian institute of health announced that there had been 3200 covid‐19 deaths in italy. 21  the patients who died had an average age of 78.5 years (median 80 years, range 31‐103 years) and 98.7% had at least one comorbidity. 21  hypertension was a common comorbidity in italian cases, affecting 73.8% of patients, 52% of whom were taking arbs or ace inhibitors. 21  however, there are number of factors that could potentially confound a possible relationship between hypertension and severe covid‐19 (table 1). 22 ,  23 ,  24 ,  25 ,  26 ,  27  the first is age: both severe covid‐19 and hypertension are common in the elderly. in addition, the identified risk factors (table 1) are generally associated with aging and/or vascular disorders, both of which are common in patients with hypertension. therefore, the risk of developing severe covid‐19 is more likely to be due to underlying vascular endothelial dysfunction and/or organ damage than high blood pressure (bp) per se. ace2 receptors are expressed by endothelial cells, 28  and post‐mortem examinations have detected the presence of viral infection in endothelial cells. 29  the spike protein on the surface of sars‐cov‐2 binds to the extracellular domain of transmembrane ace2, with s protein priming by transmembrane serine protease 2 (tmprss2), to gain entry to host cells (figure 3). 4 ,  5 ,  30  ace2 plays a regulatory role in the ras, converting angiotensin i (ang i) into angiotensin 1‐9 (ang 1‐9) or angiotensin ii (ang ii) into angiotensin 1‐7 (ang 1‐7). 31 ,  32  currently, available data reflect a possible role for ace2 in heart failure, myocardial infarction, hypertension, and the cardiovascular complications of diabetes mellitus, and preclinical investigations suggest that activation of ace2 might have the potential to protect against hypertension and cardiovascular disease. 31 ,  33 ,  34 ,  35  in addition, angiotensin 1‐7 appears to counteract the negative effects of ang ii, attenuating inflammation, suppressing vascular permeability and having vasorelaxant effects. 36 ,  37 ,  38  furthermore, ace2 in the lungs and the renin‐angiotensin system has been shown to play a role in the pulmonary manifestations of coronavirus infection. 39  interaction of ang ii with angiotensin type 1 receptors (at1r) activates a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (adam17) on the cell membrane via phosphorylation. 40  in turn, adam17 cleaves the precursors of tumor necrosis factor‐α (tnfα) and interleukin (il)‐6 receptor‐α (il‐6rα) in the cell membrane to release tnfα and soluble il‐6rα. 41  tnfα activates the nuclear transcription factor system nf‐κb to induce the production of various inflammatory cytokines, including il‐6 (figure 4). 42  this represents a potential mechanism for the cytokine storm seen in some patients with covid‐19 and highlights the potential for agents blocking cytokine pathways (especially the il‐6‐stat3 axis) in managing covid‐19‐related cytokine storm. 43  the fact that the sars‐cov‐2 virus uses ace2 as a mechanism to enter and infect cells meant that there was concern that cells with high ace2 expression would be most susceptible to infection with sars‐cov‐2. given that arb and ace inhibitors have been shown experimentally to increase expression of ace2 on cell membranes, 28 ,  44  there was much discussion about the potential for higher infection rates and more severe disease in patients being treated with these agents.despite the theoretical possibility that use of ras inhibitors increases the risk of infection with sars‐cov‐2 and the severity of covid‐19 illness, analyses including patients from the current pandemic indicate that this does not seem to be the case (table 2).the effect of hypertension or therapy with ace inhibitors or arbs has been evaluated in at least three published studies to date (table 2). 45 ,  46 ,  47  reynolds et al looked at history of antihypertensive usage in 12 594 patients undergoing covid‐19 testing in new york, usa. 47  they did not find any association between the use of ace inhibitors, arbs, beta‐blockers, calcium channel blockers or thiazide diuretics and the likelihood of a positive or negative result on covid‐19 testing. 47  also in the united states, mehta and colleagues failed to find any significant association between the use of ace inhibitors or arbs and covid‐19 test positivity. 46  similar findings were reported in a population case‐control study from italy. 45  data from four studies published by early may 2020 also failed to find a significant association between ras inhibitor use and worse outcomes in patients with covid‐19 (table 2). 48 ,  49 ,  50  in one retrospective case series, the proportion of patients using ace inhibitors or arbs did not differ significantly between those with severe vs non‐severe covid‐19, or between survivors and non‐survivors. 48  however, the in‐hospital covid‐19 mortality rate was higher in patients with vs without hypertension (21% vs 11%). 48  in the other studies, death rates for patients taking ace inhibitors and/or arbs were actually lower than those in patients not receiving these antihypertensive therapies. 49 ,  50  one of the studies from china reported that levels of the inflammatory markers high sensitivity c‐reactive protein and procalcitonin were significantly lower in patients with hypertension who were vs were not receiving ace inhibitors or arbs. 49  there are two possible mechanisms of cardiovascular damage in covid‐19. the first is direct viral infection of myocardial and vascular cells, and the other is a systemic inflammatory reaction (or cytokine storm) (figure 5). myocardial injury at the time of admission or due to disease progression is a strong indicator of poor prognosis in patients with covid‐19. troponin is a highly sensitive and well‐known marker of myocardial injury.a systematic review and meta‐analysis of data published between 1 december 2019 and 27 march 2020 including 4189 patients from 28 studies showed a significant trend for higher levels of cardiac biomarkers in patients with more severe covid‐19. 51  on meta‐regression analysis, the only factor significantly associated with higher levels of cardiac injury biomarkers was the presence of hypertension (p = .03). in addition, more severe covid‐19 markedly increased the risk of acute cardiac injury (risk ratio vs mild disease 5.99, 95% confidence interval [ci] 3.04‐11.80; p < .001). in turn, the risk of covid‐19‐related death was significantly increased in the presence of acute cardiac injury (risk ratio 3.85, 95% ci 2.13‐6.96). 51  another analysis also reported that patients with severe covid‐19 had significantly higher levels of troponin than those without severe disease (standardized mean difference 25.6 ng/l, 95% ci 6.8‐44.5 ng/l). 52  early data from wuhan, china, showed that 12% of patients admitted to hospital with covid‐19 had acute cardiac injury. 53  subsequent analyses investigated associations between underlying cardiovascular disease or myocardial injury and mortality in hospitalized patients with covid‐19 (n = 187). 23  patients with vs without myocardial injury (defined as elevated troponin levels) were significantly older (74 vs 60 years; p < .001) and more likely to have hypertension (59.8% vs 23.4%; p < .001). 23 ,  25  during hospitalization, those with myocardial injury had higher rates of ards (58.5% vs 14.7%; p < .001), acute renal injury (8.5% vs 0.3%; p < .001) and death (51.2% vs 4.5%; p < .001). the appearance of myocardial injury increased the risk of death by 4.26‐fold compared to patients without myocardial damage, independent of cardiac function based on ecg and echocardiography findings (figure 6). 23 ,  25  d‐dimer is a biomarker that reflects activation of coagulation and fibrinolysis. 54  d‐dimer levels of >2 µg/ml were an independent predictor of in‐hospital death in patients hospitalized with covid‐19 in wuhan, china (hazard ratio 51.5, 95% ci 12.9‐206.7; p < .001). 55  the 2 µg/ml cutoff had 92% sensitivity and 83% specificity for predicting in‐hospital mortality and therefore might be a useful biomarker for predicting outcome and informing treatment decisions in patients with covid‐19. the cumulative rate of thromboembolic events in patients admitted to hospital in milan, italy with covid‐19 (n = 388) was 21% (28% of those in intensive care and 7% for those not in intensive care) despite use of thromboprophylaxis in all patients admitted to the intensive care unit and three‐quarters of those treated on a general ward. 56  about half of all thromboembolic events occurred within 24 hours of hospitalization, and 2% of patients developed dic. 56  a consensus statement on the prevention and treatment of venous thromboembolism‐associated covid‐19 infection has been published. 57  this recommends that patients with covid‐19 undergo assessment for the risk of venous thromboembolism and bleeding and are monitored regularly to facilitate the diagnosis and treatment of venous thromboembolism, and the use of strategies (pharmacologic and/or mechanical) to prevent venous thromboembolism. 57  key points regarding the clinical management of covid‐19, particularly in patients with hypertension, based on evidence published before may 5, 2020, are shown in table 4.data that have been rapidly compiled during the pandemic to date indicate that there are a number of factors and biomarkers that can be used to identify patients with covid‐19 who are at high risk of more severe disease and adverse outcomes, including death. age seems to be the most important risk factor, especially for covid‐19‐related death, and hypertension is the most common comorbidity in covid‐19‐positive deceased patients. 21  other comorbidities such as cardiovascular diseases, smoking, chronic lung disease, chronic kidney disease, and a suppressed immune system also increase the risks associated with covid‐19 infection, especially when multiple comorbidities exist in the same patient. 21  thorough history taking and baseline assessments are therefore important. another important screening tool is oxygen saturation, which indicates severe disease if ≤94% on admission. 3 ,  58  the relevance of ability to tolerate hypoxia was highlighted in an analysis from china showing that covid‐19 patients of high‐altitude origin had a lower mortality risk than those from lower altitudes. 59  determination of relevant biomarkers, especially troponin and d‐dimer provides an indication of myocardial injury and thrombotic risk, and can help inform appropriate treatment strategies.for non‐hospitalized patients with covid‐19, ongoing management of comorbid conditions is essential to minimize risk. this includes lifestyle factors such as diet and sleep, along with maintaining regular medications (eg, antihypertensives and antidiabetics). patients with hypertension on current therapy with ace inhibitors or arbs can continue treatment without any negative effects on covid‐19 outcomes. ras inhibitors are particularly beneficial in patients who have heart failure or renal disease because they have a positive effect on prognosis. for older patients with hypertension and no other comorbidities and risk factors, calcium channel antagonists might be a good option for antihypertensive therapy. maintaining good glycaemic control is also important because this might help reduce the risk of infection with sars‐cov‐2 and the severity of covid‐19. 60  in addition, regular monitoring of home bp will help to ensure the achievement and maintenance of bp targets in patients with hypertension.lockdown requirements could impact on the ability of individuals to get regular exercise. regular exercise is important for maintaining health status 61  and to counteract the negative consequences of cardiovascular, metabolic, and respiratory diseases. 62  even if unable to get outside, continuing some form of home‐based exercise would be beneficial, especially in older adults. 63  maintaining regular exercise could help to ensure that the current viral pandemic does not contribute to the worldwide obesity epidemic, which in turn increases the rate of cardiovascular and metabolic comorbidities. 64  ensuring that the world population is not burdened by high rates of noncommunicable diseases might help lessen the impact of future pandemics given that patients with comorbidities tend to fare poorly during an infectious disease pandemic. 64  another potential benefit of physical activity is its ability to stimulate immune function, 65  something that is highly relevant during a global pandemic.health care professionals should also be aware of the potential non‐infectious impacts of covid‐19. for example, non‐infected individuals might be at risk of developing stress‐related physical health conditions (such as gastrointestinal disturbances and cardiovascular disease) and psychological disturbances (such as anxiety and depression).strict lockdown and social distancing rules are being enforced in many countries to slow the spread of the novel coronavirus. in addition, a large proportion of “elective” or “non‐essential” procedures have been postponed or canceled to allow health care systems to cope with the influx of infectious disease cases. this has created a requirement for a large proportion of health consultations to be conducted remotely. telemedicine strategies are ideally suited to facilitating patient management in the absence of face‐to‐face consultations, and the value of this approach (which has otherwise been slow to be widely used in clinical practice) has become clear. 66 ,  67  one of the hidden “blessings” of the covid‐19 pandemic may be the widespread adoption of telemedicine approaches to improve patient management.out‐of‐office bp monitoring is a recommended approach for the diagnosis and management of hypertension. 14 ,  15 ,  16 ,  68 ,  69 ,  70 ,  71 ,  72 ,  73 ,  74 ,  75  therefore, this field of medicine is better placed than many to be able to continue to effectively manage patients during a global pandemic.new information and communication technology‐based home bp monitoring devices that perform automatic, fixed‐interval bp measurement during sleep and store or transmit the data could facilitate a novel approach to patient management. 76  validated wearable technologies for evaluation of home bp 77 ,  78  might also be useful for patient monitoring and management during the covid‐19 outbreak. telemedicine‐based strategies for managing bp were implemented and used effectively during the aftermath of the great east japan earthquake and tsunami in march 2011, 79  highlighting their potential for use during the covid‐19 pandemic to ensure that patients with hypertension have well‐controlled bp. this has the potential to help mitigate the negative effects of hypertension on prognosis in patients with covid‐19.patients with hypertension are at increased risk of morbidity and mortality if they become infected with sars‐cov‐2, although this is confounded by other factors such as age and vascular disorders. however, all usual antihypertensive therapy including ras inhibitors should continue. physicians need to take a holistic approach to patient management due the wide range of possible complications, and biomarkers can provide important prognostic information. overall, multidisciplinary management of covid‐19 based on a rapidly growing body of evidence will help ensure the best possible outcomes for patients, including those with risk factors such as hypertension.all authors report no potential conflicts of interest in relation to this article.we are currently in the midst of a covid-19 pandemic caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the global shutdown, with more than a third of the world's population facing some form of lockdown or quarantine measures, is on an unprecedented scale and will no doubt be etched in history. at the time of writing, more than 2 million people have been diagnosed to have the infection, with more than 50,000 deaths worldwide. it is expected that an even larger number are asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic and undiagnosed.during this time, while the world's focus is on the novel coronavirus, there is a danger that other illnesses might be overlooked. members of the public are being urged not to attend emergency departments for non-urgent matters, with the dual intention of protecting healthcare workers whilst freeing resources to treat the covid-19 patients. indeed, hospitals have reported a decrease in the number of patients attending emergency departments with myocardial infarctions and cerebrovascular accidents [1, 2] . it is likely that patients are concerned about contracting the virus while attending the hospital and are staying away, as there are reports of delayed presentation of patients with acute myocardial infarctions [3] . it is imperative that these other life-threatening conditions are not forgotten while we deal with the coronavirus.in addition to the acute conditions, management of stable chronic illnesses such as hypertension and diabetes may also be affected. many hospitals worldwide have cancelled all in-person elective patient care, including routine outpatient clinics, and moved towards telemedicine as part of social distancing measures. doing so also preserves resources to help tackle supply chain problems and other challenges created by a surge in patients infected by the novel coronavirus. even in these circumstances, it is important that blood pressure and blood glucose levels are monitored regularly. this is particularly important as patients with diabetes and hypertension may be at higher risk for complications of covid-19 [4] .early data from china and the united states suggest that hypertension appears to be the most prevalent comorbidity among patients admitted with covid-19 being present in at least 30-49% of them [4, 5] . hypertensive patients who develop covid-19 are more likely to be admitted to hospital than normotensive individuals [6] . the presence of hypertension also seems to be associated with poorer outcomes from covid-19 [7] . it not clear whether it is hypertension per se that contributes to the increased morbidity, or whether patients with hypertension have more underlying health problems, as data have confirmed that patients with multiple comorbidities are likely to fare worse [8] . we should bear in mind though, that these are retrospective data from patients admitted with covid-19 and therefore can only suggest association and not causation. nevertheless, the interaction of sars-cov-2 virus with ace2 in the endothelial cell [9] does raise the possibility that endothelial dysfunction, which commonly occurs in hypertension [10] , may exacerbate the effect of the virus.a major problem during a pandemic with a hithertounknown organism is early conflicting data that can cause uncertainty and confusion in the management of these patients. it has been shown that sars-cov-2 binds to cells via the angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) 2 receptor [9] thereby gaining entry to the cells. concern was therefore raised at the start of the pandemic that ace inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), medications that are commonly used for hypertension and heart failure, could have a potential deleterious effect [11] , as ace2 is widely expressed in the cardiovascular system and is up regulated by these drugs in some tissues in a subset of animal models [12, 13] . these initial publications led to a considerable amount of discussion and debate with the counter argument being that ace inhibitors and arbs have been shown to protect from lung injury in experimental models of coronavirus infections [14] . these agents have also previously been demonstrated to reduce systemic inflammation and could potentially reduce the degree of multi-organ failure seen in severe covid-19 [15] . it was also considered that uncontrolled blood pressure or heart failure that could ensue as a result of discontinuation of these therapies and could contribute to morbidity in infected patients. guidance was promptly issued advising that these drugs not be discontinued [16, 17] . subsequent data have raised the possibility that patients treated with ace inhibitors or arbs do indeed have a better outcome, with the crucial caveat that the possibility of unmeasured confounding and bias precludes drawing cause-effect conclusions from the clinical studies available thus far. a recent retrospective study from china comparing outcomes on hospitalised patients with covid-19 with and without ace inhibitors or arbs for hypertension has suggested that in the former all-cause mortality was lower (adjusted hr, 0.42; 95% ci, 0.19-0.92; p = 0.03) [18] . another retrospective study from china showed that fewer patients on ace inhibitors or arbs had severe disease as compared with those who were not on these drugs (23.5% and 48%, respectively). the ace inhibitor/arb-treated group also had significantly higher cd3+ and cd8+ t cells and a trend towards lower il-6 levels [19] more recent analyses (preprints), though, have suggested that after adjustment for certain likely confounders, the signal for improved outcomes is no longer as strong as first believed [20] . in the end, the effects of treatment with ace inhibitors or arbs will only be positively identified through rcts, which are ongoing [21] .there is also mounting concern about possible thromboembolic complications of the virus and a possible procoagulable state [22] . various factors which can lead to a hypercoagulable state such as inflammation, hypoxia, immobilisation, dehydration and diffuse intravascular coagulation have been described in covid-19. in addition, hypertension has also known to be associated with a hypercoagulable state [23] and it is possible that an interaction between these two conditions might lead to a worsening thrombotic milieu.we are still learning more about this new virus and information continues to mount. in the meantime, it would be prudent to continue the guideline-based management of all chronic conditions and cardiovascular risk factors such as diabetes and hypertension. healthcare practitioners need to ensure that patients are appropriately advised and have access to their drugs. patients should be made aware that despite the lockdown, pharmacies and hospitals are still open. indeed the british heart foundation has recently issued a notice reminding the public not to ignore chest pain and seek help immediately, as they also report a 50% drop in patients presenting with a myocardial infarction since the start of the pandemic [22] . general practitioners and family physicians are still available for consultations, even if it is over the telephone. patients should also be encouraged to monitor their blood pressure at home, be adherent with treatment, and adopt healthy lifestyles. in many countries, individuals are allowed to go out to exercise, while ensuring they maintain social distancing and take all the other necessary precautions as advised by their public health authorities.this current pandemic has brought about profound changes in the social and economic lives of many. it has also changed the way healthcare is being delivered and prioritised. even when social restrictions are relaxed, it is hard to imagine that things would quickly (if ever) go back to how they were before the pandemic. whilst we get used to the new "normal" way of life, we should remember that other diseases and illness are still out there and still need our care. perhaps this is a time for much of the control of chronic illnesses to go back to the community and the patients. we have to ensure that patients with chronic illnesses are not forgotten in our fight against sars-cov-2 and do not end up as collateral damage.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.publisher's note springer nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) is a complex peptide cascade that has a prominent role in multiple important physiological processes such as vascular tone, vascular permeability, and myocardial remodeling. [1] [2] [3] the pharmacologic modulation of this system with agents such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (acei) and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) has resulted in major clinical benefits in the medical management of hypertension and heart failure. 3 furthermore, the consequences of this pharmacologic blockade of the raas in perioperative cardiothoracic and vascular practice has been well-recognized, leading to the emergence of rescue therapies for support of vascular tone. [4] [5] the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 infects human cells such as alveolar endothelium in the lung by binding to the membrane receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). [1] [2] [3] although the physiologic functions of ace2 include counteracting the effects of raas activation, it also functions as a membrane receptor for the coronavirus. [1] [2] [3] this binding results in endocytosis of the viral complex with consequent local activation of the raas, resulting in acute lung injury that may progress to adult respiratory distress syndrome. 1-2 ; 6-7 the purpose of this freestanding editorial is to highlight the considerations concerning the raas in patients presenting with severe coronavirus disease 2019 . this perspective will focus on the clinical relevance of these considerations to inform the management of these challenging patients. [8] [9] [10] [11] the references provide further detail for healthcare teams as they manage the demands of the pandemic at their respective institutions. 3 the prevalence of coexisting hypertension has been estimated to be in the (10-25)% range amongst patients presenting with covid-19. [11] [12] [13] [14] the coexisting conditions such as hypertension, older age, diabetes, cardiovascular disease have all been reported to be more common in patients with severe covid-19 requiring intensive care. [14] [15] [16] [17] the comorbidities, including hypertension, have also been significantly associated with adverse outcomes in covid-19 such as adult respiratory distress syndrome, cardiovascular compromise, and mortality. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] since the comorbidity of hypertension has been associated with severe covid-19 and its consequences, the question has emerged about the roles of raas inhibitors such as acei and arbs in the pathogenesis of severe covid-19. given that these raas inhibitors are common therapies for hypertension and that they may up-regulate the expression of ace2, the clinical concern has been formulated that therapy with these agents may increase the risk and severity of coronavirus infection. [19] [20] [21] [22] there is currently insufficient evidence to address this question in a definitive fashion. 1; 14 the published literature both in preclinical and clinical studies has conflicting results about the potential for harm with respect to the interactions between raas inhibitors and coronavirus 19. further trials will likely focus on the current evidence gaps related to this question in severe covid-19 including mechanisms, the prevalence of raas inhibitors, and careful correlation of this prevalence with clinical outcomes. 1; 18-19although hypertension and consequent exposure to acei and arbs are likely common in severe covid-19, this association does link to causality, as outlined above. [23] [24] there may also be confounding by association here in that patients with severe covid-19 are more likely to be 4 hypertensive, diabetic and older. this comorbidity burden rather than the associated drug therapy may better explain the adverse outcomes in coronavirus infection. [17] [18] [19] in contrast, animal studies have clearly documented that ace2 may have a protective role in acute lung injury related to coronavirus infection. [25] [26] functional ace2 typically converts angiotensin ii to angiotensin 1-7, thereby reducing the adverse effects of angiotensin ii via the angiotensin type i receptor in the lung that lead to acute lung injury. 1; 21 since therapy with acei and/ot arbs also reduces angiotensin ii levels, it follows that these agents may also protect against acute lung injury in the setting of covid-19. patients with severe covid-19 may also develop vasoplegic shock with or without concomitant sepsis. 30 in the initial wave of covid-19 in seattle, patients with cardiovascular compromise seldom had superinfection, suggesting that the cardiovascular instability was mostly due to the consequences of viral infection. 6 furthermore, in this patient cohort, echocardiography also rarely identified ventricular dysfunction, although myocarditis is a possibility in this disease. 30 this latest data from the pandemic in the united states suggests that vasoplegic shock from the effects of the coronavirus is a likely clinical presentation in severe covid-19. the status quo with respect to acei and arbs in covid-19 can be confusing to clinicians in the front lines of patient care during the pandemic, given the possibilities for both benefit and 6 harm. [14] [15] this priority for clinical guidance during the coronavirus virus has prompted recent statements from multiple professional societies including the canadian cardiovascular society, the european society of hypertension, the international society of hypertension, the european society of cardiology and american college of cardiology. [13] [14] in summary, the expert consensus from all these professional societies is that patients with covid-19 should continue their regular home blood antihypertensive regimen, even if it includes acei and arbs. 14 in patients with covid-19 who develop shock, the vasodilator regimen with raas inhibitors can be discontinued. 14 although not specifically addressed in these multiple professional guidelines, the roles of rescue therapy for vasoplegic shock can also be considered in refractory cases, including angiotensin ii. 2;4-5 furthermore, in treatment-resistant cases of copvid-19, the mechanisms for cardiogenic shock and the supportive roles of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation should be entertained early, as these considerations can often lead to therapeutic breakthroughs. [29] [30] [31] the spectrum of severe covid-19 includes significant disruption of the raas, with significant implications for organ dysfunction, vascular tone, as well as therapy with acei and arbs.although clinical trials are in progress to close the current evidence gaps, the current expert consensus has recommended that in most cases, existing therapy with acei and arbs be continued. in the setting of circulatory shock, these agents may be discontinued and early consideration of therapies for medical and mechanical rescue may be lifesaving. the management of patients through this pandemic must also consider infection control to prevent further viral transmission.the renin-angiotensin system (ras) plays a key role in maintaining blood pressure homeostasis, as well as fluid and salt balance. angiotensin ii, a key effector peptide of the system, causes vasoconstriction and exerts multiple biological functions. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) plays a central role in generating angiotensin ii from angiotensin i, and capillary blood vessels in the lung are one of the major sites of ace expression and angiotensin ii production in the human body. the ras has been implicated in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary fibrosis, both commonly seen in chronic lung diseases such as chronic obstructive lung disease. recent studies indicate that the ras also plays a critical role in acute lung diseases, especially acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). ace2, a close homologue of ace, functions as a negative regulator of the angiotensin system and was identified as a key receptor for sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) coronavirus infections. in the lung, ace2 protects against acute lung injury in several animal models of ards. thus, the ras appears to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of acute lung injury. indeed, increasing ace2 activity might be a novel approach for the treatment of acute lung failure in several diseases.for many decades, the roles of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) have been studied in physiology and multiple disorders, in particular cardiovascular diseases [1, 2] . angiotensin ii (ang ii), a key effector peptide of the ras, exerts multiple biological functions including the vasoconstriction and sodium balance involved in blood pressure homeostasis. angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) plays a central role in generating ang ii from angiotensin i (ang i) [3, 4] (figure 1 ), and ace inhibitors or ang ii receptor blockers exhibit beneficial effects in cardiovascular diseases. capillary blood vessels in the lung are a major site of high-level expression of ace [5] . thus, the lung is an important organ in generating circulating ang ii, acting as a classical circulation-borne endocrine system. in contrast to this endocrine ras model, numerous studies have highlighted the importance of local rass [6] . for example, an increase in endothelial ace expression in the muscularized intraacinar arteries of lungs was shown both in patients with pulmonary hypertension [7] and in rats with hypoxiainduced pulmonary hypertension [8] . in addition to ace, other components of the ras are expressed in lungs, including renin [9] , angiotensinogen [10] and ang ii receptors [11] .in 2000, ace2, a homologue of ace, was identified; its discovery instantaneously added a new complexity to the ras [12, 13] . although ace2 functions similarly to ace as a carboxypeptidase, ace2 has a different substrate specificity [12] [13] [14] , shown by in vitro analyses using recombinant ace2 protein. whereas ace removes dipeptides from the c-terminus of peptide substrates, generating the octapeptide ang ii from the decapeptide ang i [3, 15] , ace2 cleaves a single residue from ang ii, generating angiotensin-(1-9) [12, 13] , and a single residue from ang ii to generate angiotensin-(1-7) [12] . genetic inactivation of ace using homologous recombination results in a phenotype characterized by spontaneous hypotension, reduced male fertility and kidney malformation [16] . by contrast, targeted disruption of murine ace2 resulted in increased systemic ang ii levels and impaired cardiac contractility in aged mice [17] . loss of ace on an ace2 background reversed this cardiac phenotype [17] . thus, ace2 appears to be a negative regulator of the ras and counterbalances the function of ace ( figure 1 ).the importance of the ras in lung diseases has recently re-emerged since the identification of ace2 as a severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus receptor. during several months of 2003, sars -a newly identified illness -spread rapidly from china throughout the world, causing more than 800 deaths [18, 19] . a novel coronavirus was identified as the sars pathogen, which triggered atypical pneumonia characterized by high fever and severe dyspnea [18, 19] . the death rate following sars coronavirus exposure approached almost 10% of infected people owing to the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). ards is the most severe form of acute lung injury and is characterized by pulmonary oedema, accumulation of inflammatory cells and severe hypoxia [20, 21] . clinical as well as experimental animal studies have implicated ace in the pathogenesis of ards [22] [23] [24] . ace2 is expressed in the lungs of healthy and diseased humans [25] , and recent ards and sars studies have shown that ace2 protects murine lungs from severe acute injury [26 ,27 ] . importantly, these experiments also revealed that ace2 is an essential receptor for sars infections in vitro and in vivo [27 ,28] . in this review, we review the role of the ras, in particular of the sars receptor ace2, in lung diseases, focusing on pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary fibrosis and acute lung injury. the possible applications of blocking the ras and/or modulating ace2 for the treatment of lung diseases are discussed.pulmonary hypertension is characterized by elevations in pulmonary artery pressure and pulmonary vascular resistance caused by multiple etiologies, including primary pulmonary hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), high altitude or pulmonary embolism. abnormal pulmonary vasoconstriction and pulmonary vascular remodeling are major pathological features seen in most forms of pulmonary hypertension [29, 30] . although ang ii is well known as a potent vasopressor peptide, in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension ang ii seems to play a role in pulmonary vascular remodeling rather than pulmonary vasoconstriction. in in vitro cell culture models, ang ii has been shown to directly cause growth/proliferation of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells largely through ang ii type i (at 1 ), rather than through type ii (at 2 ), receptors [31] ( figure 1 ). in pulmonary hypertension in vivo, the expression of ace is increased in the endothelial layer of small, as well as elastic, pulmonary arteries [7, 32] . in addition, in hypoxic, but not monocrotaline-treated [33] , pulmonary hypertensive rats, both ang ii binding and the number of at 1 receptors are increased [34, 35] .in human patients, an association between an ace insertion/deletion polymorphism (the d allele of the human ace gene confers increased ace activity in plasma) and pulmonary hypertension has been reported; this association is, however, controversial. for instance, one study showed that the ace d/d genotype is associated with less right ventricular hypertrophy [36] , whereas another reported a correlation between the ace d/d genotype and the severity of symptoms [37] . pharmacologic treatment of animals with either an ace blocker or an ang ii receptor antagonist inhibited pulmonary vascular remodeling associated with the development of pulmonary hypertension in chronically hypoxic rats or mice [38, 39] or in monocrotaline-treated rats [40] . by contrast, tissue ace-deficient mice, which exhibit undetectable lung ace activity but retain 34% of the ace activity in plasma, show the same remodeling of pulmonary arterioles as do wild-type mice [41] . in addition, despite earlier studies of acute ace inhibition [42] [43] [44] , a recent pilot study on patients with pulmonary hypertension secondary to copd showed that treatment with the at 1 receptor blocker losartan (50 mg) showed no statistically significant beneficial effect in terms of pulmonary artery pressure, exercise capacity or breathlessness score [45] . the discrepancy between hypoxic rat studies and this human trial might be caused by differences in the pathogenesis of hypoxic rats versus patients with copd-related pulmonary hypertension. further studies are required to solve these important issues.pulmonary fibrosis is a frequent response to insults or injuries to the lung. etiologies include idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoidosis, irradiation-induced pneumonitis or ards. excess deposition of extracellular matrix proteins is a key feature of interstitial fibrosis in the lung. the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis includes endothelial and epithelial cell injury, influx of inflammatory cells and the production of chemical mediators leading to the proliferation and activation of fibroblasts [46, 47] . although there are various initiating mechanisms and etiologies, the terminal phases of fibrosis are commonly characterized by the proliferation and progressive 272 respiratory figure 1 current view of the ras in pulmonary hypertension and pulmonary fibrosis. ang i serves as a substrate for both ace and ace2. ang ii is known to act as vasoconstrictor as well as a mitogen for smooth muscle cells or fibroblasts, mainly through the at 1 receptor. the function of angiotensin-(1-9) is not well understood. both ace and ace2 are involved in the production of the vasodilator peptide angiotensin-(1-7).accumulation of connective tissue replacing normal functional parenchyma.ang ii immunoreactivity is also significantly increased within lung fibroblasts, macrophages and bronchiolar and alveolar epithelium after irradiation [48] . in addition, angiotensinogen is produced by fibroblasts from fibrotic but not normal human lung. ang ii upregulates the expression of the profibrotic cytokine transforming growth factor-b1, which is involved in both the conversion of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts and the accumulation of collagen [49] (figure 1 ). an in vivo role for ang ii in pulmonary fibrosis has been implied from animal models with bleomycin-or irradiation-mediated lung injury. in bleomycin-induced pulmonary fibrosis in rats or mice, ace inhibitors or at 1 receptor blockers can attenuate epithelial apoptosis, interstitial fibrosis and collagen deposition [50] [51] [52] . in irradiation-induced lung fibrosis, ace inhibitors attenuate endothelial dysfunction and fibrosis in rats [53] . conversely, retrospective comparison of the incidence of irradiation-induced lung injury between subjects who took ace inhibitors and those who did not, failed to reveal a protective effect [54] . however, serum concentrations of ace inhibitors used by subjects in the human study would be expected to be considerably less than those achieved in the animal models cited above. as there are no published prospective or retrospective studies regarding the use of other ace inhibitors or at 1 receptor blockers in human pulmonary fibrosis induced by factors other than irradiation, it is therefore still unclear if inhibition of the ras would indeed have beneficial effects on lung fibrosis.ards is the most severe form of acute lung injury, and affects approximately one million individuals worldwide/ year with a mortality rate of at least 30-50% [20, 21] . ards can be triggered by multiple diseases such as sepsis, aspiration, trauma, acute pancreatitis, or pneumonias following infections with sars coronavirus or avian and human influenza viruses. recent cohort studies of ards showed a significant association between an ace insertion/deletion polymorphism and the susceptibility and outcome of ards [23, 24] . the d/d genotype frequency was increased in patients with ards compared with a control cohort [23] . in addition, the ace d/d allele was significantly associated with mortality in the ards group [23] . another study showed that patients carrying the ace i/i genotype have a significantly increased survival rate [24] . thus, from the results of inhibitor experiments in rodents [22] and ace allelic correlation studies in humans [23, 24] , it has been suggested that the ras could play a role in acute lung failure.our group has investigated the role of ace2 in ards by using ace2 knockout mice. in acid-aspiration-induced ards, endotoxin-induced ards and peritoneal sepsis-induced ards, ace2 knockout mice exhibited severe disease compared with control mice that express ace2 [26 ] . loss of ace2 expression in mutant mice resulted in enhanced vascular permeability, increased lung edema, neutrophil accumulation and worsened lung function. importantly, treatment with catalytically active, but not enzymatically inactive, recombinant ace2 protein improved the symptoms of acute lung injury in wild-type mice, as well as in ace2 knockout mice [26 ] . thus, ace2 plays a protective role in acute lung injury. mechanistically, the negative regulation of ang ii levels by ace2 accounts, in part, for the protective function of ace2 in ards. for example, at 1 receptor inhibitor treatment or additional ace gene deficiency on an ace2 knockout background rescues the severe phenotype of ace2 single mutant mice in acute lung injury [26 ] . in addition, ace knockout mice and at 1a receptor knockout mice showed improved symptoms of acute lung injury [26 ] . therefore, in acute lung injury, ace, ang ii and at 1 receptors function as lung injury-promoting factors [26 ,55] , whereas ace2 protects against lung injury [26 ] (figure 2 ). these findings suggest that the beneficial effects of ace inhibitors or at 1 receptor blockers in lung injury models induced by bleomycin or irradiation, observed in the earlier studies, derive largely from their effects on the acute phase of those injuries.within a few months following the publication of the sars-cov genome [56, 57] , ace2 was identified as a potential receptor in cell line studies in vitro [28] . ace2 has been demonstrated to bind sars-cov spike and to support 'syncytia formation', the fusion of spike-proteinexpressing cells into large multinucleated cells that can also be seen in 'real' sars infections. using a mouse sars infection model with ace2 knockout mice, our group provided evidence that ace2 is indeed essential for sars infections in vivo [27 ] . when ace2 knockout mice are infected with the sars coronavirus, they become resistant to virus infection [27 ] . virus titers from the lung tissues of infected ace2 knockout mice were 10 5 -fold lower than those isolated from the lung of sars-cov-infected wild-type mice [27 ] . the lung histology from ace2 knockout mice challenged with sars coronavirus showed no signs of inflammation [27 ] , whereas some (but not all) sars-infected wild-type mice displayed mild inflammation with leukocyte infiltration [27 ,58] . thus, ace2 is an essential receptor for sars infections in vivo.despite many studies on sars-cov, the reasons why sars-cov infections trigger severe lung disease with such a high mortality, in contrast to other coronaviruses, remain a mystery. accumulating evidence indicates that severe sars infections are dependent upon the burden of viral replication as well as on the immunopathologic consequences of the host response (for review, see [59, 60] ). in addition to the aberrant activation of immune systems, our own studies have implicated the involvement of the ras in sars pathogenesis: firstly, ace2 is a critical sars receptor in vivo; and secondly, ace2 and other components of the ras play a central role in controlling the severity of acute lung failure once the disease process has been initiated [27 ] (figure 2) . intriguingly, wild-type mice infected with sars-cov showed markedly downregulated ace2 expression in lungs [27 ] . similarly, treatment with recombinant sars-spike protein, in the absence of any other virus components, downregulates ace2 expression in vitro and in vivo [27 ] . thus, sars-cov-infected or spike proteintreated wild-type mice resemble ace2 knockout mice, and, similar to ace2 mutant mice, spike-treated wild-type mice show markedly more severe pathology of acute lung injury. additionally, in spike-treated mice, ang ii peptide levels were increased and the worsened ards symptoms could be partially reversed by at 1 receptor blocker treatment [27 ] . by contrast, spike does not affect the ards symptoms in ace2 knockout mice [27 ] . thus, the downregulation of ace2 expression in sars-cov infections might play a causal role in sars pathogenesis, especially in disease progression to ards.ang ii plays roles in tissue remodeling and fibrotic changes through acting on fibroblasts or smooth muscle cells, thereby contributing to the pathogenesis or progression of pulmonary fibrosis or pulmonary hypertension. this notion is strongly supported by the successful treatment of these disease conditions using ace inhibitors or at 1 receptor blockers in animal models. however, pilot clinical trials have failed to observe significant beneficial effects of ace inhibitors on radiation-induced pulmonary fibrosis or positive effects of at 1 receptor blockers on copd-related pulmonary hypertension. recently, the critical importance of the ras in the pathogenesis of acute lung disease (i.e. ards/acute lung injury) has emerged. hypothetically, the ras appears to contribute to the initial severity of lung diseases rather than to later stages that define chronic fibrosis and tissue remodeling. in line with this notion, the d/d polymorphism of the ace gene has been associated with the incidence of pneumonias in japanese elderly patients [61] and mortality of ards patients [23, 24] . importantly, ace2 has been identified as a key sars receptor, and ace2 protects murine lungs from acute lung injury induced by acid aspiration, endotoxin shock, peritoneal sepsis or sars spike challenge. these findings might provide the opportunity to develop ace2 as a novel drug for ards that develops in emerging lung infectious diseases such as avian influenza a (h5n1) [62] or other diseases that affect lung function [63] . because ace2 is an non-specific protease, it would also be interesting to investigate the role of ace2 and its metabolites, including angiotensin-(1-7), des-arg(9)-bradykinin, apelin and dynorphin, in ards [14] . we look forward to the use of angiotensin system-modulating agents/molecules, in particular ace2, schematic diagram of the proposed role of the ras in development of severe ards. in acute lung injury such as sars-cov infections, acid aspiration, pneumonias or sepsis, the generation of ang ii from ang i is enhanced by ace. ang ii contributes to acute lung failure through stimulation of the at 1 receptor, whereas ace2 and the at 2 receptor negatively regulate this pathway and protect from acute lung failure. however, additional ace2-regulated, but ang ii-independent, pathways seem to also contribute to ards. as novel therapeutic agents to treat severe acute lung failure, a syndrome that currently affects millions of people without any effective drug treatment.the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has once again aroused people's concern about coronavirus. seven human coronaviruses (hcovs) have been discovered so far, including hcov-229e, hcov-nl63, hcov-oc43, hcov-hku115, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. existing studies show that the cardiovascular disease increased the incidence and severity of coronavirus infection. at the same time, myocardial injury caused by coronavirus infection is one of the main factors contributing to poor prognosis. in this review, the recent clinical findings about the relationship between coronaviruses and cardiovascular diseases and the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms are discussed. this review aimed to provide assistance for the prevention and treatment of covid-19.advances in the relationship between coronavirus infection and cardiovascular diseases.hcov-229e and hcov-oc43 [35] were discovered in the 1960s, and hcov-nl63 [22] and hcov-hku1 [26] were later discovered in upper respiratory tract infections, asthma, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia. there is evidence showing that infant, elderly and immunocompromised patients are more likely to be infected with high mortality rates [37, [62] [63] [64] . these infected patients are more likely develop severe disease states [65] [66] [67] [68] .varghese et al. [37] retrospectively analyzed the clinical data of 261 children with hcov infection (including 229e, hku1, nl63, oc43) andfound that approximately 16.5% of the children had cardiovascular disease. hcov-infected children with cardiovascular disease are more likely to receive respiratory support and enter a pediatric intensive care unit (picu), suggesting that the underlying cardiovascular disease increased the severity of hcov infection in the children. cabeça et al. found that children with heart disease are more likely to be infected by hcovs [69] . the presence of congenital heart disease was a significant risk factor for severe coronavirus infection in children who were less than five years old [70] ( table 1) .hypotension was found in a small number of patients with these four hcov infections [70] (table 2 ). there is no relevant evidence showing that hcov infection can cause heart injury. however, kim et al. reported that hcovs were detected in children with kawasaki disease, which is characterized by acute systemic vasculitis in childhood and may induce severe cardiovascular complications [71] . serological tests suggest that hcov-229e may be involved in the occurrence of kawasaki disease [72] . therefore, we still need to pay attention to cardiovascular complications when facing these four kinds of hcov infection.the severe acute respiratory syndrome [27] that broke out globally in 2003 is different from the human coronavirus described previously. it is a severe acute respiratory infection with clinical manifestations of fever and dry cough, with the lungs as the main locations of lesions. some patients quickly develop acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiple organ failure with high mortality [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] .there is much relevant evidence showing that pre-existing comorbid conditions are one of the major determinants of fatality [76, [78] [79] [80] [81] [82] [83] . it has been reported that the presence of cardiovascular diseases, such as hypertension and heart disease, is associated with adverse outcomes and mortality in sars patients [84] [85] [86] [87] . wong et al. reviewed the medical records of fatal cases and found that 60% of the patients who died had comorbid conditions such as hypertension and coronary artery disease [88] . chen et al. found that patients with combined hypertension and cerebrovascular diseases are more likely to develop ards [89] . another study by hu et al. showed that the incidence rates of critical conditions and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome ( mods ) among sars patients with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases were 1.8-fold and 1.9-fold higher than those of patients without underlying disease, suggesting that cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases are major risk factors for sars patients to devolve into critical conditions and mods and eventually lead to death [90] (table 1) .regarding the cardiovascular complications of sars patients, it was found that sars patients had subclinical diastolic impairment without contraction involvement, and this damage may be reversible upon clinical recovery [91] . another study by yu et al. found that cardiovascular complications, including hypotension and tachycardia, are common in sars patients but are usually self-limiting. bradycardia and cardiac hypertrophy were less common, and arrhythmias were rare [92] . acute myocardial infarction can also be seen in a few sars patients [93] . sars-cov was reported to be found in 40% (7/18 patients) of heart samples from patients who died of sars during the toronto outbreak [76] , which might explain the myocardial damage discovered in sars patients [89] . there are reports indicating that sars-cov also attacks small blood j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cardiovascular disease increased the mortality of mers [108] . banik suggested that sufficient attention should be paid to mers patients with combined underlying diseases to reduce the occurrence of serious complications and mortality [109] (table 1) .heart damage was also reported in mers patients [110] . mers-cov was found in the kidneys of deceased patients but was not detected in the heart tissue, and the heart showed no significant histological changes [111, 112] . however, an animal model study clearly stated that mers-cov rna could be seen in cardiac tissue, implying direct cardiac pathology [113] . the mechanism of heart injury in mers infection remains unclear and requires more research.covid-19, which broke out at the end of 2019, is a disease caused by infection with sars-cov-2 [1, 2, 4] . similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 is a β-cov [2] . covid-19 is similar to sars and mers and manifests as extensively pathological viral lung inflammation [1] .although similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 has its own characteristics [1, 114] . early cases suggest that covid-19 may not be as severe as sars and mers. however, the rapidly increasing number of cases and increasing evidence of human-to-human transmission suggest that sars-cov-2 is more contagious than sars-cov and mers-cov and has a lower fatality [3, 9, [115] [116] [117] . up to april 27, 2020, the overall mortality of covid-19 was 6.9% globally [5] . but the fatality rate is different in different regions and times, ranging from 0.7% to 13.5% [5, 118] .the symptoms of covid-19 infection appear after an incubation period of approximately 6.4 days [119] . fever, fatigue, and dry cough are the main manifestations of covid-19, and a few patients have symptoms such as nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat, and diarrhea [2, 9, 120, 121] . patients with severe cases often experience dyspnea and/or hypoxemia one week after onset [122] . severe cases of covid-19 progress rapidly to acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock, and metabolic acidosis, which is difficult to correct, and coagulopathy [10] .current case reports show that sars-cov-2 infection may have cardiovascular symptoms in addition to the typical respiratory symptoms. a small number of patients have atypical clinical manifestations and may start with cardiovascular symptoms such as chest tightness, palpitations and chest pain. a study by liu et al. found that 7.3% (10/137) of patients had palpitations as the first symptom [123] . it was also reported that 2% of patients experienced chest pain during hospitalization [11] . in addition, wang et al. found that 16.7% of patients with covid-19 had arrhythmias [10] .according to relevant studies [9] [10] [11] 124] , the proportion of covid-19 patients with comorbid cvds, such as hypertension, coronary artery disease and cerebrovascular disease, was larger than that of patients with other comorbidities or without comorbidities, suggesting that patients with cvd may be more susceptible to sars-cov-2 infection. moreover, the incidence of cvd in patients with severe or fatal cases with covid-19 was higher than that in patients with nonsevere cases or in those who survived [12, 13, 124] . according to the reports of the chinese center for disease control and prevention, 15.7% of the deaths were hypertension, and 9% had other cardiovascular diseases, further suggesting that underlying cardiovascular diseases may be one of the important risk factors for poor prognosis in patients with covid-19 [8] . it can be seen not only that the number of covid-19 patients with cardiovascular disease is large but also that these patients have poor tolerance to severe pneumonia and are more likely to develop severe cases (table 1) .cardiac complications such as electrocardiography abnormities, diastolic dysfunction, and acute myocardial injury were reported in patients with covid-19 [124] [125] [126] [127] . cases of severe myocarditis with reduced systolic function have been reported after covid-19 [128] [129] [130] . and sars-cov-2 infection-related myocarditis is likely associated with myocardial injury [60, 128] . according to the study by li et al., the most common organ damage outside the lungs was heart injury[13]. serum myocardial necrosis markers such as hypersensitive troponin i (hs-tni) and creatine kinase (ck) increased to varying degrees in patients with mild and severe cases of covid-19 [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [131] [132] [133] [134] . however, the risk of heart injury was higher in patients with severe cases, approximately 22.2% to 31% [9, 12, 126, 133, 134] , than in patients with mild cases, approximately 2% to 4% [9, 10] . the percentage of heart injury in covid-19 patients who died, approximately 28% to 89% [12, 13, 132] , was higher than that in those who survived. n-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (nt-probnp) levels were also reported to be increased[13, 134, 135] . increased hs-tni and probnp expression levels may be risk factors for severe illness and high mortality of covid-19 [133] [134] [135] . furthermore, it was found that high hs-tni levels were associated with increased levels of inflammation (neutrophils, il-6, crp, and pct) and decreased levels of immunity (lymphocytes, monocytes, and cd4+ and cd8+ t cells), suggesting that cardiac injury may have something to do with the cytokine storm resulting from an overaggressive host immune response [131, 132] (table 2) .two recent studies published in jama cardiology reported the cardiovascular complications of covid-19 in detail [60, 136] . shi et al. found that cardiac injury was a common condition among hospitalized patients with covid-19 in wuhan, china, and it is associated with higher risk of inhospital mortality [136] . guo et al. reported that myocardial injury was significantly associated with fatal outcome of covid-19. myocardial injury was associated with cardiac dysfunction and arrhythmias. inflammation may be a potential mechanism for myocardial injury [60] (table 2 ).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f covid-19 may induce new cardiovascular diseases and / or aggravate potential cardiovascular diseases. the short-term and long-term cardiovascular effects of covid-19 and the effects of specific treatments are unclear and need further investigation.as the epidemic spread, sars-cov-2 evolved multiple subtypes. in a recent study, researchers proposed the subdivision of the global sars-cov-2 population into sixteen well-defined subtypes by focusing on the widely shared polymorphisms in nonstructural (nsp3, nsp4, nsp6, nsp12, nsp13 and nsp14) cistrons, structural (spike and nucleocapsid) and accessory (orf8) genes [137] . six virus subtypes were predominant in the population, accounting for more than 97% of the samples isolated from around the world. and the subtypes showed some geographical structure with two clusters: a smaller one comprised of isolates mostly sampled from western hemisphere (subtypes ii, vi, ix, x and xi) and a larger one whose isolates were sampled from western and eastern hemispheres (subtypes i, iii, iv, v, vii, viii, xii, xiii, xiv, xv and xvi) [137] . the researchers believed that the genetic structure determined for the sars-cov-2 population provides substantial guidelines for maximizing the effectiveness of trials for testing the candidate vaccines or drugs [137] .in another earlier study, population genetic analyses of 103 sars-cov-2 genomes indicated that these viruses evolved into two major types (designated l and s), that are well defined by two different single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) [138] . the l type (~70%) is more prevalent than the s type (~30%), but the s type was found to be the ancestral version. the l type is more aggressive and spread more quickly. and it was more prevalent in the early stages of the outbreak in wuhan. but the frequency of the l type decreased after early january 2020 for more severe j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f selective pressure placed by human intervention on the l type [138] . contrary to the l type, the s-type, which is evolutionarily older and less aggressive, might have increased in relative frequency due to the weaker selective pressure [138] .it was also reported that among the 27 viruses isolated from wuhan, 26 (96.3%) were l type, and only 1 (3.7%) was s type [138] . however, among the other 73 viruses isolated outside wuhan, 45 (61.6%) were l type, and 28 (38.4%) were s type [138] . this comparison suggests that the l type was significantly more prevalent in wuhan than in other places. and recent studies about the clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients with covid-19 in wuhan [9] [10] [11] 139] or outside wuhan [134, 140, 141] have showed that the mortality of covid-19 patients and the proportion of patients with cardiac injury outside wuhan was lower than that in wuhan (table 3) . although there were many reasons for the different incidence of cardiac injury and outcome of covid-19 in and outside wuhan, such as the shortage of medical resources in wuhan, the role of different sars-cov-2 subtypes cannot be ignored. the relationship between sars-cov-2 subtypes and the mortality of covid-19 or the cvd complications need for further immediate, comprehensive studies that combine genomic data, epidemiological data, and records of the clinical symptoms of patients with coronavirus disease 2019.according to the references above, we can see that patients with underlying cvd may be more likely to become infected with coronavirus, and cvd may be one of the risk factors for poor prognosis and high mortality of cov infection. few studies, however, have explored the mechanisms underlying these associations. we believe that the possible mechanisms may be related to inflammation.cardiovascular diseases such as hypertension, coronary heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease are all metabolic-related diseases. it has been reported that metabolic syndrome can downregulate the key mediator of the host's innate immune response to pathogenesis, affecting the function of the innate and humoral immune systems [142] . chronic low-grade inflammatory disease has been widely recognized as a feature of coronary heart disease, and its occurrence is closely related to inflammation [143] . the occurrence of hypertension is associated with oxidative stress, inflammation and the activation of the immune system [144] . il-6, il-1 and tumor necrosis factor α (tnf-α) levels are higher in patients with hypertension than in patients with normal blood pressure [145] . this may explain why patients with underlying cardiovascular disease found in the clinic are more susceptible to infection.kulcsar et al. showed that mers-cov infection can lead to prolonged respiratory tract inflammation, immune cell dysfunction, and changes in the expression profile of inflammatory mediators [146] . lymphopenia and increased inflammatory mediators were found in sars-cov-2 infection [147] . immune disorders caused by sars-cov infection have also been reported [148] . these may lead to the exacerbation of the original cardiovascular disease, which is related to the death of some patients found in the clinic due to heart failure [88, 103, 132] . according to information released by the shanghai municipal health and family planning commission, the first covid-19 death in shanghai was in an individual who was 88 years old with a severe history of hypertension and cardiac insufficiency. an analysis of the cause of death suggested that the patient died of heart failure and systemic multiple organ dysfunction. therefore, sars-cov-2 infection was just an inducement for exacerbations [124] .overall, the heart and lungs are inseparable in the normal physiological functions of the human body. on the one hand, comorbidities and complications of the heart increase the risk of pneumonia infection and exacerbation; on the other hand, pneumonia infection may aggravate existing cardiovascular diseases, such as increased blood pressure, increased heart failure, and the recurrence of myocardial infarction.fever is a common symptom in patients with coronavirus infection [9, 27, 149] . fever promotes the immune functions of humans and some animals and decreases the pathogenicity of some microbes. antibody production, t-cell activation, neutrophil function, and macrophage oxidative metabolism have been reported to increase in the presence of fever [150] [151] [152] [153] [154] . however, to avoid excessively elevated body temperature affecting normal physiological functions, the body will activate sympathetic nerves and regulate circulatory function, which will increase the heart rate and cardiac output [155] . an increase in heart rate over a long period of time will lead to increased myocardial oxygen consumption and decreased cardiac output, which may cause ischemia or heart failure [156] . many diseases with fever symptoms may be complicated by myocarditis, such as spotted fever rickettsioses infection [157] , severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome [158] , drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms [159] , dengue [160] [161] [162] , complicated scrub typhus [163] , herpes simplex virus infection [164] , enteric fever [165] .a decrease in cardiac function may occur in febrile illnesses, but whether myocardial damage is due to fever or the underlying infection is not known [166] . weissinger et al. found that in pigs with a bacterial infection with elevated body temperature, serum ck, lactate dehydrogenase (ld), j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f and gamma-globulin (gg) levels were increased. the administration of antibiotics to these pigs and lowering their body temperature reduced ck and ld levels, but gg levels remained elevated, suggesting that the infection did not decrease. this study indicated that the levels of ck and ld were elevated due to fever caused by infection [167] . k l et al. discovered that a longer duration of fever was related to the occurrence of pericarditis after myocardial infarction [168] . therefore, heart injury in coronavirus infection may be related to fever .severe pneumonia can cause significant gas exchange disturbances and lead to hypoxemia. hypoxia reduces the energy production required for cell metabolism and increases the body's anaerobic digestion. acidosis and oxygen free radicals accumulated in the cell destroy the phospholipid layer of the cell membrane. as hypoxia continues, the intracellular calcium ion concentration increases significantly, leading to a series of cell damage processes, including apoptosis [169] . at the same time, hypoxia can also induce inflammatory reactions, such as the infiltration of inflammatory cells and the release of cytokines, leading to further tissue ischemia, and may even cause myocardial infarction[13, 170, 171] .previous lessons from coronavirus and influenza have shown that viral infections can cause acute coronary syndrome [172, 173] , arrhythmia [174] , and exacerbation of heart failure [175] , mainly due to a combination of significant systemic inflammation response and localized vascular inflammation at the arterial plaque, along with other effects [176] [177] [178] . evidence has shown that sars-cov induces the expression of proinflammatory cytokines such as monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (mcp-1), transforming growth factor-beta 1 (tgf-beta1), tnf, il-1 and il-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 6 and interferon-β (ifn-β) in sars patients and experimental animal models infected with sars-cov [179, 180] . tnf and il-1 family and il-6 family cytokines are considered proinflammatory mediators of heart failure, and they have obvious negative inotropic effects, which may explain heart failure complications in sars infection [181] . the acute heart injury might be due to the cytokine storm resulting from an overaggressive host immune response to sars infection [30] . there is evidence indicating that myocardial inflammation induced by sars-cov is mainly mediated by macrophages and the resultant production of chemokines [95, 96] . the nuclear factor-κb (nf-κb) signaling pathway associated with the induction of proinflammatory cytokines is activated in sars-cov-infected mice. treatment with drugs that inhibited nf-κb activation led to a reduction in inflammation in both sars-cov-infected cultured cells and mice and significantly increased mouse survival after sars-cov infection, indicating that the activation of the nf-κb signaling pathway represents a major contribution to the inflammation induced after sars-cov infection and that nf-κb inhibitors are promising antivirals in infections caused by sars-cov and potentially other pathogenic human coronaviruses [182] .sars-cov-2 appears to affect themyocardium and cause myocarditis [128] . myocardial injury is likely associated with infection-related myocarditis and/or ischemia [60] . increases in inflammatory factors such as crp, il-1 and il-6 were also discovered in sars-cov-2 infection [131, 132, 147] . wu et al. believed that sars-cov-2 may cause heart damage by the cytokine storm [131] . evidence has shown that sars-cov-2 may mainly affect t lymphocytes, especially cd4+ t cells, resulting in a significant decrease in lymphocyte numbers [183] . the extent of lymphopenia and an increase in inflammatory cytokines are related to the severity of the disease [147] . critically ill covid-19 patients had higher levels of il6, il10, tnfα, lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), and c-reactive protein than patients with mild covid-19 [9, 139, 184] , suggesting that inflammatory indicators are an important factor in the early diagnosis of severe covid-19.most patients with coronavirus infection are in an inflammatory state, which places the patients in a hypercoagulable state. for example, covid-19 leads to an increase in d-dimer levels in 40% of patients, a decrease in activated partial thromboplastin time (aptt) in 16% of patients, and a decrease in pt in 30% of patients, further increasing the risk of embolism [11] . hypercoagulability induced by inflammation might contribute to plaque rupture, with subsequent thrombosis and myocardial injury [185] . therefore, clinicians should pay attention to covid-19 patients with coronary heart disease to prevent myocardial injury and myocardial infarction .septic shock can be seen as a serious complication in sars, mers and covid-19[13, 76, 103] . approximately 6.2% of sars-cov-2 infections are complicated by shock [126] . it was reported that left ventricular dysfunction occurs in approximately 20% of patients within 6 hours after the onset of septic shock, and the incidence can increase to 60% by 1 to 3 days after the onset of septic shock [186] . myocardial dysfunction and cardiovascular inflammation might lead to elevated creatine kinase and troponin [187] , which might explain the high hs-tni in deceased patients .in addition to the abovementioned accompanying symptoms, anxiety and stress can also lead to adverse reactions such as accelerated heart rhythms and elevated blood pressure, especially in critically ill patients [188, 189] . health anxiety could be found in coronavirus-infected patients [190] .generally, everyone experiences health anxiety to some degree, and the associated vigilance to a potential health-related threat can be protective.however, excessive health anxiety can be detrimental [190] . the literature indicates that stress can activate the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f and sympathetic nervous system, leading to an increase in peripheral glucocorticoid and catecholamine levels [191] . high plasma catecholamine levels are associated with an increased risk of heart failure. altered autonomic activity during depression can lead to arrhythmias. the activated sns alters cardiac wall contractility and increases apoptotic pathways in cardiomyocytes, contributing to cvd development .although there is no relevant study on covid-19 patients suffering from anxiety, medical workers have been reported to be anxious after direct contact with the patients [192, 193] . a study by sun et al. showed that some chinese showed acute posttraumatic stress symptoms during the covid-19 outbreak [194] . therefore, psychological counseling should be conducted on patients in a timely manner, and anxiolytic drugs could be used when necessary .as mentioned above, sars-cov was reported to lead to myocardial infection with a marked decrease in ace2 expression, which may be responsible for myocardial dysfunction and adverse cardiac outcomes in patients with sars [99] . direct sars-cov infection of cardiomyocytes may also lead to myocarditis and impaired myocardial function. coronavirus-induced myocarditis and its subsequent progression to dilated cardiomyopathy have been described in rabbit models [195] . sars-cov was found in heart samples from patients who died of sars [76] .pathological findings showed a marked increase in macrophage infiltration in patients with sars-cov in the heart, with evidence of myocardial damage. mers-cov was not detected in the heart tissue, and the heart showed no significant histological changes in mers patients [111, 112] .however, an animal model study clearly stated that mers-cov rna could be seen in cardiac tissue, implying direct cardiac pathology [113] .although myocarditis was reported in sporadic autopsy cases [128] , there is still no clear pathological evidence supporting that sars-cov-2 can directly cause heart damage .the most frequently used drugs during hospitalization are glucocorticoids and antiviral drugs, as well as antibiotics. the secondary qt interval prolongation caused by the use of drugs during hospitalization cannot be ignored. antiviral drugs (lopinavir, ritonavir), antibiotics (azithromycin, moxifloxacin, levofloxacin), antifungal drugs, glucocorticoids and some antiarrhythmic drugs, there is a potential risk of prolonging the qtc interval [196, 197] . drug-associated qt prolongation is associated with increased arrhythmic and non-arrhythmic mortality and it therefore continues to be an important metric of drug safety [198] .a small study in france enrolling 26 treated patients and 16 non-randomized controls showed that hydroxychloroquine alone or in combination with azithromycin shortened the time to resolution of viral shedding of covid-19 [199] . based on this study, clinicians in many countries have begun using these medications in clinical practice, and multiple randomized trials are being initiated. but there were occasional case reports of hydroxychloroquine prolonging the qt interval and provoking torsade de pointes when used to treat systemic lupus erythematosus [200] [201] [202] [203] . the widely used antibiotic azithromycin was gradually recognized as a rare cause of prolonged qt, severe arrhythmia, and increased risk of sudden death [204] [205] [206] [207] . although there were no reports of arrhythmia death caused by the use of hydroxychloroquine, the use of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin should also be noted [208] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o factive support with expected management based on early prognostic indicators may improve recovery. appropriate treatment of heart failure, arrhythmia, acute coronary syndrome and thrombosis are still important. with continued global cooperation on multiple methods, specific evidence-based treatment strategies for covid-19 will emerge. in order to protect the wider population, antibody testing and effective vaccines will be needed to make a history of covid-19. and some treatment related issues need attention.firstly, the use of acei / arb drugs was controversial in the earlier phase of covid-19 epidemic. but recently published studies suggested that there is no need for patients with hypertension to stop using acei / arb or switch to other antihypertensive medicine [60, 61, 209] . some conjectures [210] based on the disease mechanism in the early stage of the outbreak that acei / arb may increase the infection of new coronavirus and the aggravation of covid-19 by increasing the expression of ace2 have been denied by more and more clinical evidence. we see that the continuous treatment of covid-19 patients with hypertension with acei / arb will not only cause the deterioration of the condition, but also continue to exert cardiovascular protection and even improve the prognosis [60, 61, 209] .secondly, we should pay attention to the application of hydroxychloroquine [200] [201] [202] [203] and azithromycin [204] [205] [206] [207] for their side effects of prolonging the qt interval. other drugs used to treat the covid-19 patients, such as antiviral drugs (lopinavir, ritonavir), antibiotics (moxifloxacin, levofloxacin), antifungal drugs, glucocorticoids and some antiarrhythmic drugs, can cause the qt interval prolongation and should attract more attention. reference by sapp et al. would help to minimize risk of drug-induced ventricular arrhythmia during treatment of covid-19 [211] .thirdly, a recent study from jama reported that the mortality rate of patients with mechanical ventilation treatment was 88.1% [212] . multiple studies around the world have shown that the mortality rate of covid-19 patients using ventilator was still high [213] [214] [215] . and it was believed that the ventilator should be used more cautiously in patients with covid-19, which can reduce the mortality of patients using the ventilator by more than 50% [216] . new guidelines should be established for when to use a ventilator for patients with covid-19. we advocate the application of staged breathing support methods to delay the use of ventilator. simple oxygen treatment like nasal oxygen supply may be safer and more effective.fourth, methylprednisolone are the classical immunosuppressive drugs, which are important to stop or delay the progress of the pneumonia, and have been proved to be effective for the treatment of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). in recent study [217] , wu at al. found that the administration of methylprednisolone appeared to reduce the risk of death in covid-19 patients with ards. however, of those who received methylprednisolone treatment, 23 of 50 patients died. this is a rather high mortality of ~50%. the indication, timing, dosage and duration, the application of methylprednisolone needs further investigation.fifth, the early report showed that remdesivir was highly effective in the control of sars-cov-2 infection in vitro [218] . but recent study published in lancet showed that remdesivir did not reduce the mortality of covid-19 patients [219] . however, another clinical trial showed that remdesivir accelerates recovery from advanced covid-19 [220] . another clinical trial showed that there was no significant difference in clinical outcome between the 5-day and 10-day course of remdesivir [221] . these data suggested remdesivir does not reduce the mortality of covid-19 patients, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f but have an effect on shortening the course of disease in mild patients. and early medication may be better. the application of remdesivir needs further researches.clinical data indicate that comorbid cardiovascular disease will aggravate the severity of coronavirus infection, leading to a poor prognosis.coronavirus may cause myocardial injury, and the prognosis of patients with complicated myocardial injury is poor. the mechanism of coronavirus causing myocardial injury and drug treatment options remain to be further studied.the authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f abbreviation: ck, creatine kinase; ldh, lactate dehydrogenase; hs-tni, hypersensitive troponin i; ckmb, creatine kinase-myocardial band isoenzyme; probnp, pro brain natriuretic peptide; crp, c-reactive protein; il, interleukin; tnt, troponin t. 6 (3.6%) 9 (6.7%) death 6 (15%) 11 (11%) 5 (7.5%) 6 (4.3%) 1 (0.3%) 2 (1.2%) 1 (0.7%)coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a newly identified strain of coronavirus that causes illness ranging from effects similar to the common cold to fatal diseases in people across the world. as of 2:00am cest, 3 . there is evidence that covid-19 can be transmitted from person to person through respiratory droplets and close contact, which poses a huge challenge to public health (1) . according to the latest research on single-cell rna-seq, researchers believe that the sars-cov-2 rna expression and replication are related to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) (2) . importantly, ace2 was confirmed as the sars-cov-2 cell entry receptor, which is the same as sars-cov(3). renin angiotensin system inhibitor (rasi) is a commonly used antihypertensive drug. however, it's not clear whether rasi can increase the expression of ace2, leading to the higher risk of sars-cov-2 infection. should patients with hypertension stop using rasi? we explored the question about the effects of administering rasi to patients with covid-19 and hypertension by analyzing the data from the shanghai public health clinical center.from january 25, 2020 to january 31, 2020, we received a total of 27 patients with hypertension combined with covid-19 at the shanghai public health clinical center. all cases were confirmed covid-19 cases with hypertension history more than 3 months. the clinical criteria for diagnosis and discharge refer to the "diagnosis and treatment of new (4) and was exempted from the need for informed consent from patients.the research team collected and analyzed 27 patients' medical records, epidemiological, clinical, and laboratory characteristics. information of treatment and outcome of the patients were obtained from the inpatient management system. blood pressure and medication were recorded during hospitalization.all patients rested in bed, and were monitored for vital signs and finger oxygen saturation, and given effective oxygen therapy in time. the basic principles of treatment are nutritional support and symptomatic treatment to maintain water and electrolyte balance and a stable internal environment. antiviral therapy was tried with interferon, lopinavir/litonavir, dnrunavir and abidol. antibiotics were used if necessary .other therapy include γ-globulin， thymosin alpha，vitamin c and traditional chinese medicine. existing antihypertensive drugs continued to be used, unless the blood pressure continued to exceed 150/100mmhg, then increased the amount or added new drugs(diuretic or ccb ).all confirmed cases were examined by peripheral white blood cell count, absolute lymphocyte value, red blood cell sedimentation rate (esr), procalcitonin (pct), c-reactive protein (crp), total triglyceride (tg), cardiac troponin i (ctni), brain natriuretic peptide continuous measurements were compared by student's t test or mann-whitney u test.normal distributions were expressed with mean ± standard deviation (sd). categorical variables (shown as percentages) were compared using fisher's exact test. statistical analysis software spss22.0 was used for all analyses in this study.as of january 31, 2020, 27 cases of covid-19 with hypertension were admitted to the shanghai public health clinical center, of which 13 (48.1%) were female and 14 (51.9%) were male. the age of the patients was 61.3 ± 13.5 years, with a range from 37 years to 80 years. the patient's clinical manifestations were fever (70.4%), cough (33.3%), and phlegm (29.6%). the specific drugs for antihypertension treatment are shown in table 1 . all patients received 1 to 3 oral antihypertensive drugs, including diuretics, calcium antagonists, βblockers, acei, and arb. most patients (85.2%) did not need to adjust antihypertensive drugs. the arterial pressure in the rasi group was 101.7 ± 9.5mmhg, which was not statistically different (p = 0.641) with that of the non-rasi group (101.1 ± 9.9mmhg).there are 14 (51.9%) cases in the rasi group including 8 males, and 13 (48.1%) cases in the non-rasi group including 6 males ( table 2 ). there was no statistically significant difference in age and sex ratio between the two groups. no difference was found in clinical and symptoms (fever, cough, phlegm), as well as in time from onset to admission, length of stay, and laboratory tests between the two groups.the classic ras regulation pathway is that renin acts on angiotensinogen to produce angiotensin (ang) i, and ang i produces ang ii, which is under the action of ace. on the other hand, the non-classical ras regulatory pathway is also known as the negative ace2angiotensin 1-7 [ang (1-7)] axis, which refers to the generation of ang (1-7) by ang ii under the action of ace2. renin-angiotensin system inhibitors (rasi), such as acei or arb drugs, may indirectly improve ace2 activity through restraining ace level.it's worth noting that sars-cov-2 invades the human body in the same way as sars-cov (2) , that is, the spike protein on the surface of the virus and the receptor ace2 on the surface of respiratory epithelial cells combine with each other, then enter the cell, causing a series of pathological changes. one of the very important changes is that the human ace2 expression is significantly down-regulated, and the classic ras regulatory pathway is activated (5) . the imbalance in the positive and negative axis of ras, relative or absolute increase in ang ii levels, overstimulation of at1, and the result is increased pulmonary capillary permeability and subsequent lung emergence edema, severe lung injury, and acute lung failure (6) . however, it is controversial whether as one of the classical antihypertensive drugs rasi may increase the risk of coronavirus infection, or be beneficial for coronavirus infection control.cough is the main adverse effect of acei, and the mechanism is the increased bradykinin.cough is also the most common symptom of coronavirus respiratory infections. patients taking acei for a long period of time usually do not need to stop acei during respiratory infections, because coronavirus infection down-regulates ace2 level, and does not affect ace (7). ace2 levels do not change bradykinin levels (8) . even if the rasi could change the level or activity of ace2 in the target tissue, clinical data are insufficient to indicate whether this in turn promotes the binding and entry of sars-cov-2 spikes (7). our data shows that there is no increase in severity of coughing in patients treated with rasi.theoretically, ace2 level is down-regulated after coronavirus binds ace2, leading to the imbalance of positive and negative regulation of ras, and abnormal increase in ang ii level and activity (9) . rasi may be a suitable antihypertensive agent in these cases. using acei or arb drugs has no effects on patients' symptoms, laboratory tests, and prognosis. both acei and arb have exact antihypertensive effects, as well as clinical effects such as protecting the cardiovascular and cerebrovascular, improving renal function, reducing left ventricular hypertrophy, preventing heart failure and preventing atrial fibrillation. existing studies suggest that aceis, such as captopril or lisinopril, do not affect the activity of ace2 (10), and there is no evidence that acei or arb may bring special effects to patients with covid-19 infection or new coronary pneumonia damage. so, we recommend that the overall control of patients with new coronary pneumonia is persistent, and most of them do not need to adjust hypertension drugs. the ongoing outbreak of the corona virus disease 2019 (covid- 19) infection has posed significant threats to international health and the economy [1] [2] [3] . on 30 january, 2020, the world health organization (who) declared it to be a public health emergency of international concern. as of 10 march, 2020, more than 105 countries, 114,253 cases of covid-19 and 4000 deaths have been reported all over the world, of which the number of confirmed patients in china has gradually decreased, but is increasing rapidly in other countries, especially in italy, south korea, and iran, and there are lots of doctors engaged in combating it [4, 5] . the sars-cov-2 was first reported in samples of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from three patients in wuhan jinyintan hospital and was confirmed as the cause of covid-19 on january 24, 2020 [6] . after deep examining the full-length genome, we found that the virus belongs to the beta-coronavirus 2b lineage in the phylogenetic tree [7] and is a new human-infecting beta-coronavirus which had previously not been detected in humans or animals. it is named covid-19 by the who and sars-cov-2 by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses as it is similar to the coronavirus responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars-cov) [8] ; it shares more than 87.99 % identity sequencing with the bat sars-like coronavirus, and it shares more than 80 % identity nucleotide with the original sars epidemic virus [9] [10] [11] . coronavirus spike (s) glycoproteins promote entry into cells. they are the main target of antibodies and bind with high affinity to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor in humans in a manner similar to sars-cov [12] [13] [14] . however, the sars-cov-2 s glycoprotein harbors a furin cleavage site at the boundary between the s1/s2 subunits, which is processed during biogenesis and sets this virus apart from sars-cov and sars-related covs [15, 16] . at present, research reports that the incubation period in most people range from 1 to 14 days with a median of 5-6 days, but the incubation period may even be as long as 24 days [17] . the reproductive number (r0) for sars-cov-2, although still preliminary, is estimated between 2 and 3, suggesting a higher pandemic potential than sars [18] . fever or cough may be the major symptom, but asymptomatic individuals have also been identified as potential sources of infection [19] . at present, we think that the new coronavirus is mainly transmitted through respiratory droplets and close contact, but transmission from an asymptomatic carrier appears to be possible [20] . a report of 9 pregnant patients suggests that perinatal transmission is unlikely but larger studies are needed to confirm this finding [21] . although viral rna is found in stool, whether it can be transmitted through the fecal-oral route still needs to be confirmed by subsequent investigations [22, 23] . recently, some patients were found to be re-positive after being treated with negative nucleic acid tests twice and symptoms disappeared. it is difficult for us to decrease the severity of covid-19 owing to the complex structure and unclear physiological mechanism. with the increasing number of confirmed cases, the clinical investigation of patients and antiviral treatment solution has been insufficient, and there is an urgent need to find alternative methods to control the spread of disease. in order to prove more accurate conclusions on the prevalence of comorbidity and relation of clinical characteristics and mortality of patients with covid-19, we searched the relevant literatures and carried out single arm meta-analysis to describe epidemiological, clinical characteristics, complications, and outcomes of patients confirmed to have 2019-ncov infection, and to compare the severity between diabetes or hypertension and non-diabetes or non-hypertension patients. our findings provide vital guidance for current clinical work on the prevention and treatment of 2019-ncov infection.ethical approval or patient consent was not required because the present study was a review of previously published articles. full-text articles were obtained for detailed evaluation, and eligible studies were included in the systematic review. the inclusion criteria were the following: randomized controlled trial, clinical trials, and series cases; patients who were of either sex and had been diagnosed with covid-19; all patients with laboratory-identified sars-cov-2 infection who had had both real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerasechain-reaction detection of sars-cov-2 nucleic acid positive in throat swabs or lower respiratory tract, and ct scanning of the lung; inclusion of the epidemiological, clinical characteristics, laboratory and radiological characteristics, and treatment and outcome; clear description of the clinical characteristics such as comorbidities including hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and malignancy and the signs and symptoms such as fever, cough, fatigue, and dyspnea; clear description of the outcomes including the major complications such as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), acute cardiac injury(aci), acute kidney injury(aki), shock, and incidence of severity and mortality.the exclusion criteria were the following: absence of clinical characteristics, treatment outcome, clinical experience, and case reports.two authors independently extracted data by reviewing all titles and abstracts of the searched papers. if any disagreement on the choice of the literature exists, a third evaluator will join in to make the decision. the following information was recorded from the included trials: first author, year of publication, number of participants, and residence of patients. basic data about gender, age, and diagnosis were extracted and analyzed. to evaluate the proportion of comorbidity such as diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and malignancy, the proportion of symptoms such as fever, cough, fatigue, and dyspnea, the proportion of clinical complications including ards, aci, aki, and shock, and the severity and mortality.two readers independently extracted and reviewed the data from the enrolled studies to ensure consistency. the quality of the included studies was assessed by the newcastle-ottawa scale. in order to objectively evaluate the publication bias of the included studies, the egger test with p < 0.05 as the existence of publication bias was performed, and those with larger values were considered as having no publication bias.the single arm meta-analysis of proportions (and 95 %ci) was calculated for the clinical symptoms, complication, outcome, and for each of the selected comorbidities using stata 15.0. the presence of heterogeneity among the identified studies (cochran's q) and the extent of heterogeneity (i 2 index) were examined, as described previously. all original data included in the literature were first transformed by double arcsine method to make them conform to normal distribution and then analyzed in stata. the initial conclusion obtained by meta-analysis was then restored using formula (p=(sin(tp/2)) 2) to reach final conclusion.we performed sensitivity analysis to assess the stability of the results and investigate the influence of each study by omitting a single study sequentially. using the egger test, we found no evidence of bias in any of the lag periods.the initial 1057 citations were identified based on a study of the subject and a summary of the literature, of which 694 articles were thereafter excluded because of duplication. after reviewing the title and abstract of the remaining 81 studies, only 34 full-text studies were evaluated for further assessment, and 13 obviously irrelevant records were excluded. eventually, 21 clinical studies [6, 17, [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] were consistent with the inclusion requirements. a detailed study flow-diagram is shown in fig. 1 . the basic characteristics and quality of the included studies were illustrated in table 1 .twenty-one studies were selected, with a total of 47,344 patients (24,419 male and 22,925 females), representing approximately 40 % of the who confirmed. one clinical trial investigated the characteristics of patients in singapore and all others came from china, mainly in wuhan. systematic analysis of the studies describing the epidemiological, demographic, and clinical features of covid-19 cases and reporting of the prevalence of a number of chronic diseases in the infectious disease was undertaken. the number of cases in the selected studies varied by approximately 3722-fold and ranged from 12 to 44,672 cases. the sex ratio (male to female) was 1.06 and the overall average age of the subjects was greater than 40 years. forty-one cases reported in jinyintan hospital are the earliest confirmed cases, patients treated in wenzhou hospital almost are mild, but xiaobo yang et al. reported 52 cases with covid-19 that were all critical patients. all studies detailed the pre-treatment biochemical characteristics and subsequent treatment.eighteen studies reported the comorbidity of diabetes, only 7 of them introduced the proportion of severity, 14 studies reported hypertension and 6 of them introduced the proportion of severity, 13 studies reported malignant, and 12 studies reported cad; with regard to symptoms, 20 studies recorded fever and cough, 12 studies reported fatigue and 15 studies reported dyspnea. seven studies recorded the complication of ards and aci, and shock was recorded in 4 and 5 studies respectively. fifteen studies showed critical patients, and 12 research reported mortality. all studies provided incidence data of at least one kind of comorbidity, symptom, or complication. sixteen forest plots were used to illustrate the prevalence of comorbidities in covid-19 from the selected studies and to inspect the heterogeneity of the individual findings. meta-analysis of the identified studies showed that the most prevalent clinical symptoms were fever 85.6 % (95ci 81.3-89.9 %) and cough 65.7 % (95ci 60.1-71.4 %), followed by fatigue 42.4 % (95ci 32.2-52.6 %) and shortness of breath 21.4 % (95ci 15.3-27.5 %) (fig. 2) . there was significant heterogeneity (cochran's q) in the estimates of clinical symptoms among the examined studies (p < 0.001) with an i 2 index varying from 87.4 % to 95.1 %. the prevalence of diabetes and hypertension comorbidities was 7.7 % (95ci 6.1-9.3 %) and 15.6 % (95ci 12.6-18.6 %), respectively. the incidence of cardiovascular disease and malignancy was 4.7 % (95ci 3.1-6.2 %) and 1.2 % (95ci 0.5-1.8 %), respectively (fig. 3) . the case complications including ards risk ranged from 5.6 to 13.2 %, with the pooled estimate at 9.4 %. acute cardiac injury 5.8 % (95ci 0.7-10.8 %), acute kidney injury 2.1 % (95ci 0.6-3.7 %), and shock 4.7 % (95ci 0.9-8.6 %) were also present (fig. 4) . the risks of severity and mortality rate ranged from 12.6 to 23.5 % and from 2.0 to 4.4 %, with pooled estimates at 18.0 and 3.2 %, respectively. the percentage of severe cases in diabetes and hypertension cases was 44.5 % (95ci 27.0-61.9 %) and (fig. 5 ).sensitivity analysis was performed to assess the stability of pooled results. among the 21 studies, the significant results were not obviously altered after sequentially omitting each study. in the pooled results, comparing the incidence of mortality after excluding the report by chaolin huang et al., the heterogeneity decreased significantly (or = 0.719, 95 % ci = 0.277-1.865, p = 0.497, i² = 28 %) and showed that there was no significant difference in preventing the ards rate between the two groups; hence, it was regarded as a result of heterogeneity. likewise, the other studies were considered as the source of heterogeneity because the heterogeneity significantly changed and showed that there was no significant difference in preventing ards between the two groups when each of these studies were excluded from the pooled results comparing the incidence of ards. a sensitivity analysis was conducted to determine whether the exclusion of this study would alter the result, and exclusion of this study from the meta-analysis did not substantially influence the results.in this part of the study, ards was used to assess publication bias. egger test results showed pr > jzj = 1.00. therefore, we believe that the risk of publication bias is low in this meta-analysis.the outbreak of covid-19 has been declared a public health emergency of international concern by who. by march 10, 2020, the epidemic had spread to 25 countries around the world. in accordance with the experience of china, surgical masks are in widespread use which is beneficial to prevent the acquisition of covid-19. in addition, italy started taking measures to block traffic and lockdown villages. with the rising incidence of covid-19 all over the world, feasible and effective messaging about the clinical characteristics of covid-19 is greatly needed. therefore, the focus of this analysis was to evaluate the prevalence of symptoms, comorbidity, complications, and different outcomes in china and singapore. the meta-analysis identified 21 published studies that assessed this proportion. there are few published rcts because of the rapid development of the epidemic and there are limited medical resources in addition to the presence of uncontrollable risk during treatment. much of the evidence of effects cannot be adequately studied in randomized trials, such as long-term and rare outcomes. therefore, we analyzed all retrospective studies in this study. for the main results, we found that the cases reported to date suggest that most are older adults, and there is no difference in susceptibility between male and female. fever is the most common symptom in patients with 2019-ncov infection. the most prevalent comorbidities are hypertension and diabetes which are associated with the rapid development of severe illness. ards and aci may be the main obstacles for patients to treatment recovery. the severity and mortality of patients with 2019-ncov infection is lower than that of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), but the prevalence of covid-19 is much higher than sars and the mers.two coronaviruses have previously caused significant outbreaks associated with more critical disease: the sars coronavirus in 2002-2003 and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus that emerged in 2012 [43] [44] [45] . a lot of studies have reported the clinical characteristics of patients with covid-19, but there is a lack of studies on the relation of severity and mortality with comorbidity. similarly, there is no meta-analysis published on complications for patients covid-19 infected. therefore, this is a novel systematic review and meta-analysis. due to the inadequate evidence, we present this metaanalysis by consolidating multiple studies to enable enhanced clinical decision making in the future. we report here a cohort of patients with laboratory-confirmed 2019-ncov infection. patients had serious, sometimes fatal, complications and were admitted to the designated hospital. clinical presentations greatly resemble sars-cov. patients with severe illness developed ards, aki, aci, or shock and required icu admission and oxygen therapy.however, despite a comprehensive analysis, there are also many limitations that should be taken into consideration in our meta-analysis. first, the studies included in the meta-analysis were not all rcts. second, in the literature-included studies, the treatment of every hospital is not completely similar. third, owing to the treatment by grading of mild, ordinary, and critical, the severity of patients in different hospitals varies greatly. in addition, as the cause and physio pathological mechanism was unknown at the onset of emerging infections, the treatment in wuhan was only based on clinical experience, leading to a higher complication and mortality. fourth, partial missing information in a few articles may lead to biased results. we have attempted to contact investigators or study sponsors to verify key study characteristics and obtain missing numerical outcome data. moreover, clinical and methodological heterogeneities were observed in several parameters in the meta-analysis given the variation in intervention techniques, patient composition, and preferences among different cities. true heterogeneity and poor methodological quality could also lead to an asymmetric plot. in the future, larger, higher quality clinical trials should be conducted, and we will conduct a more detailed subgroup analysis to explore the sources of heterogeneity to obtain a more reliable conclusion and more effort should be made to answer these questions in future studies.covid-19 is an emerging infectious disease of global public health concern. our results note the similarity of clinical symptoms and complications between covid-19 and previous beta-coronavirus infections. the incidence of severity and mortality of covid-19 is much higher than that of ordinary influenza, and the prevalence of chronic diseases including diabetes and hypertension is rising as populations age and lifestyle and dietary habits change. in addition, we found that diabetes and hypertension are closely related to severity and mortality. improving the protection against covid-19 in persons with chronic disorders is essential. last, but not least, there is a need to limit humanto-human transmission, including reducing secondary infections among close contacts and health-care workers, thus preventing transmission amplification events and preventing further international spread.the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) are rapidly increasing globally. as of april 5, 2020, more than 1.2 million cases have been confirmed and ~70,000 deaths have been reported in ~180 countries. 1 several studies have rapidly provided crucial data (e.g., incubation period) related to various aspects of the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2 : severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) infection. 2 however, risk factors for the severity and prognosis of covid-19 are poorly understood. such information is critical to identify high risk patients and to facilitate planning (e.g., forecasting the need for hospital beds and mechanical ventilators). these risk factors will also have implications for workforce allocation (e.g., assignment of healthcare providers with specific risk factors to positions with reduced risk of exposure to .to date, several studies have reported that a history of cardiovascular disease (cvd) and traditional cvd risk factors, e.g., age, male sex, current smoking, hypertension, and diabetes, are associated with severe covid-19. however, other than age, results have been inconsistent. furthermore, few studies accounted for potential confounding by age and sex when they evaluated other potential risk factors. for example, some studies reported that hypertension is a risk factor of severe covid-19, but their observations may simply reflect the fact that hypertension is more common in older adults. 3 nonetheless, despite the lack of robust evidence, this observation, together with the fact sars-cov-2 uses angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 as an entry to human body, 4 has raised a concern about continued use of reninangiotensin system increase among some clinicians and researchers. 5, 6 in this context, we conducted a systematic review of studies reporting cardiovascular risk factors and their relation to severe manifestation of covid-19 (i.e., death, acute respiratory distress syndrome [ards] , the need of mechanical ventilator support, and admission to an intensive care unit [icu]), with a particular interest on studies that adjusted for key confounders such as age and sex.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. we conducted this systematic review following the prisma statement. according to the predetermined protocol, we systematically searched pubmed and embase for eligible reports (search terms are listed in web appendix 1). we included full reports or letters with original data written in english. eligible study designs were cohort study, cross-sectional, case series, and clinical trials. we conducted the literature search on march 20, 2020 and restricted to publications after december 1, 2019.our review included studies that reported adult patients, aged 18 years or older. there was no restriction with respect to gender, race/ethnicity, and comorbidities. the primary outcome of interest was severe covid-19 defined by any of the following: all-cause mortality, icu admission, ards, or the need for mechanical ventilation. we included studies reporting at least 10 cases of severe covid-19. to obtain reliable estimates with enough number of outcomes and considering clinical cascade (e.g., death as the final outcome), when one study reported results for multiple outcomes, we prioritized any composite outcome followed by icu admission, ards, the need of mechanical ventilation, and mortality.potential risk factors of interest were pre-existing cvd (including cardiac disease and cerebrovascular disease) and its traditional risk factors recognized in major cvd clinical guidelines: age, sex, smoking, hypertension, and diabetes. we found only one study reporting severity of covid-19 by lipids (low-density lipoprotein). we categorized risk factors into sociodemographic factors (age, sex, and smoking) and clinical factors (hypertension, diabetes, and pre-existing cvd).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. the same eight reviewers collected relevant data elements from each identified publication and recorded in microsoft excel (microsoft corporation, redmond, washington, usa). overall quality was based on the newcastle ottawa quality assessment scale (nos), 7 which includes eight items about selection, comparability, and outcome (web appendix 2). the nos score for cohorts studies ranges from 0 to 9; a score greater than 6 was considered high-quality. for cross-sectional studies, we applied an adapted form of the nos. 8 the maximum score was 10, and 7 points were used to identify studies with high quality.the paired reviewers resolved conflicts related to their own data collection and quality assessment.we summarized relative risk estimates (odds ratios or hazard ratios) of the association between each risk factor and the primary outcome from the relevant studies. we pooled these estimates using random-effects meta-analysis. when studies did not report these measures of association but the prevalence of risk factors of interest by the outcome status (e.g., survivors vs. nonsurvivors), we calculated crude odds ratios and their 95% cis. in this process, when there was any cell with zero count, we added 0.5 to each cell, as appropriate. 9 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054155 doi: medrxiv preprint potential confounding by age and sex is relevant to prior cvd, hypertension, and diabetes, since these comorbidities become more prevalent with increased age. 3 because most studies did not report adjusted risk estimates for these comorbidities, we ran meta-regression with random-effects for log odds ratio or log hazard ratio for these comorbidities by the difference in mean or median age between those with vs. without primary outcome across eligible studies. to obtain reliable estimates, we conducted meta-regression for any analyses with at least five studies. we also depicted funnel plots and visually checked the possibility of publication bias. heterogeneity of study estimates was assessed by i 2 statistic, and i 2 >75% was considered high heterogeneity. 10 a p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. all analyses were conducted with stata 14 or 15 (statacorp, llc, college station, texas, usa).our systematic review identified 373 potentially eligible publications after removing duplicate publications ( figure 1 ). of these, 322 publications were excluded after screening titles and abstracts. of the remaining 51 publications reviewed with full-text screening, we excluded 36 publications that did not meet our inclusion criteria, leaving 15 publications 11-25 for our qualitative and quantitative analyses. most of these publications were considered high quality (web table   1 ). of the included studies, death was reported in 13 studies, icu admission in 9 studies, ards in 7 studies, and mechanical ventilation in 6 studies. two studies reported a composite outcome.most studies reported covid-19 patients from china (14 studies) and were small with sample size <300 (10 studies) ( table 1 ). all studies included confirmed covid-19 patients with laboratory tests. a total of 51,845 covid-19 patients were included in these studies, with 9,066 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. table 2 ).the case fatality rate in those three databases exceeded 1% around age of 50-55 years and 10% above 80-85 years (above 70 years in italy). only two studies reported the relative risk by age in both unadjusted and multivariable models; both studies observed that the effect size of age was not materially changed after adjustment for comorbidities. 12, 25 most studies showed a higher risk of severe covid-19 in men than in women, with a pooled crude relative risk estimate of severe covid-19 between men and women of 1.70 (95% ci 1.52-1.89) (figure 2a ). meta-regression demonstrated consistent results regardless of differences in mean or median age between those with vs. without severe covid-19 (web figure 1) . a funnel plot did not indicate major publication bias (web figure 2a) .only three studies reported associations of current smoking with severe covid-19, with only one study reaching statistical significance ( figure 2b ). the pooled estimate of relative risk for severe covid-19 was 2.01 (95% ci 0.83-4.86). only one study reported the association across three categories of current smoking (odds ratio 2.84 [1.57-5.14]), former smoking (6.27 [2.20-17 .90]) vs. never smoking. 15 the corresponding funnel plot is shown in web figure 2b .clinical factors: hypertension, diabetes, and prior cvd . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. for diabetes. 17 in that study, cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease had similar independent associations with severe covid-19.meta-regression analyses demonstrated that studies with greater age difference between those with vs. without severe covid-19 tended to have greater relative risk according to the presence of hypertension, diabetes, and pre-existing cvd, indicating some levels of potential confounding by age (figure 4) , although none of the analyses reached statistical significance. a similar pattern was seen for cvd and the difference in the proportion of male sex between those with vs. without severe covid-19 (web figure 3) . on the other hand, meta-. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054155 doi: medrxiv preprint regression did not indicate that a higher proportion of male sex confounded the association of hypertension and diabetes with severe covid-19.to our knowledge, this is the first systematic review and meta-analysis focusing on the relationship of severe covid-19 with cvd and its risk factors. we confirmed a robust association of age and male sex with severe covid-19. their contributions are likely to be independent of each other. a few studies demonstrated positive associations of current smoking with severe covid-19. several studies reported that pre-existing cvd, hypertension, and diabetes were also associated with severe covid-19. however, only two studies that reported estimates for these comorbidities adjusted for age and/or sex. one study found that the association between coronary heart disease and severe covid-19 was no longer statistically significant after age adjustment, 25 whereas the other showed independent associations of hypertension and diabetes with severe covid-19 in analyses that adjusted for age and a few other comorbidities. 17 although the primary estimate was not statistically significant, our metaregression analyses indicated some degree of confounding by age, but not necessarily by sex, for the associations of hypertension, diabetes, and prior cvd with severe covid-19.the positive association of sociodemographic factors (age, male sex, and smoking) with severe covid-19 is consistent with reports of other infectious diseases (e.g., influenza virus and sars in 2003). [27] [28] [29] there are several plausible mechanisms. older age is linked to reduced immune reaction, more comorbidities, and limited organ reserve. 3, 27, 30 male sex is related to higher prevalence of comorbidities, less frequency of washing hands, and immunological disadvantage given x-chromosome coding proteins in the immune system, 2,31,32 whereas smoking can damage respiratory system. 33 in our meta-analysis, we confirmed overall positive crude associations of cvd, hypertension, and diabetes with severe covid-19, with pooled relative risk estimates around 3-. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054155 doi: medrxiv preprint 3.5. an important question is whether these associations are independent of major confounders, particularly age. although we could not obtain a definite answer as very few studies ran multivariable models, our meta-regression analysis indicated some degree of confounding by age. one study by zhou et al showed substantial attenuation of the association between coronary heart disease and severe covid-19. on the other hand, liang et al showed independent associations of hypertension and diabetes with severe covid-19 in a relatively large sample size of 1,590 patients. these is also biologic plausibility. hypertension and diabetes are leading risk factors for cvd and kidney diseases, and there is evidence that covid-19 damages these organs. 34, 35 available studies provide scant evidence related to the hypothesized adverse effect of renin-angiotensin system inhibitors on severity of covid-19 infection. as noted above, there is biological plausibility for potential associations of covid-19 with hypertension and diabetes, two comorbidities associated with use of renin-angiotensin system inhibitors. only one study reported the prevalence of renin-angiotensin system inhibitors use. 13 in this study, ~30% of patients reported prevalent hypertension, but only ~5% of patients were taking renin-angiotensin system inhibitors. 13 thus, it is reasonable that many expert organizations recommend continuing this category of medications until better evidence becomes available. 4 our results can potentially be used to guide decision-making. while the lack of discrete age thresholds for severe covid-19 complicates this process, data on case fatality rates from three countries (web table 2 ) suggest that age older than 60 or 65 years confers high risk of severe covid-19 (relative risk > ~5 compared to <50 years). our results also indicate male sex is an independent risk factor with a pooled relative risk of ~1.7. although it is very likely that the pooled crude relative risk of ~3-3.5 for hypertension, diabetes, and cvd overestimate their impact beyond age and sex, all or some of them may each confer 1.5-2 times greater risk. thus, using these factors, it is possible to estimate, at least crudely, the risk of severe covid-19. for example, a man aged 60-65 years old, with either hypertension, diabetes, or prior cvd would . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054155 doi: medrxiv preprint have a risk of ~15 fold higher risk (approximation of 5 x 1.7 x 2) compared to a woman younger than 50 years without any of these clinical factors. such information could be used to inform decisions on testing for covid-19, clinical management of covid-19, and workforce planning.our study has some limitations. first, reflecting the fact that the outbreak started from china, most studies were from china. however, given similar case-fatality rates and clinical manifestations across different countries, it seems likely that these results are largely generalizable. nonetheless, we need to acknowledge regional variations of some risk factors (e.g., ~25-fold difference in the prevalence of smoking in men vs. women in china 36 ) and thus future investigations in different regions would be valuable. second, we did not include non-english publications. third, most studies reported odds ratios, which are known to overestimate risk ratio when the prevalence of exposures is relatively high. fourth, we cannot deny the possibility that some patients were included in multiple studies especially in the china cdc report 14 and other chinese studies. nonetheless, the pooled estimates were largely similar in analyses that excluded the china cdc data (data not shown). finally, the literature of covid-19 is growing rapidly, and thus there is a lag time from our literature search and publication. on the other hand, our systematic review has several strengths: in-depth review of cvd and its risk factors, a clinically relevant definitions of severe covid-19 that minimize subjective reporting, meta-regression to explore potential confounding, and relatively short elapsed time of ~2 weeks between the literature search and manuscript submission.in conclusion, our systematic review and meta-analysis found robust associations of older age and male sex as risk factors of severe covid-19. few studies reported the association between current smoking and severe covid-19. in unadjusted analyses, hypertension, diabetes, and prior cvd were significantly associated with severe covid-19.however, only two-studies conducted age-adjusted analyses, with one relatively large study showing independent contributions of hypertension and diabetes to severe covid-19. no study explicitly assessed the relationship of renin-angiotensin system inhibitors with covid-19. our . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054155 doi: medrxiv preprint results suggest that the combination of age, male sex, and cvd risk factors identify a substantial gradient in the risk of developing severe covid-19 compared to those without any of these factors.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. all studies were published in 2020.abbreviations: covid-19: coronavirus disease 2019; cvd: cardiovascular disease; htn: hypertension; nr, not reported. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 7, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.05.20054155 doi: medrxiv preprinthuman coronaviruses pose a huge threat to global public health. the outbreak has led to significant morbidity, mortality and economic damage worldwide 1 these crucial differences between sars-cov-2 and more benign coronaviruses are a function of specific adaptations that sars-cov-2 has made to the human host. for example, the immune-evasive character of sars-cov-2 enables the covid-19 pandemic to spread from asymptomatic individuals 13 , because symptoms are primarily produced by the host immune response. this spread from asymptomatic carriers is a key portion of covid-19's rapid spread. ongoing inquiry into these specific adaptations is hampered by a lack of structured integrative resources with standard data and metadata formats.deeper study of the interactions between hosts (human and others) and coronaviruses (sars-cov-2, sars-cov, mers-cov and others) would help our understanding of covid-19 mechanisms and rational design of vaccines and drugs against covid-19. however, to achieve this goal, two major bottlenecks exist. first, although intensive research has generated large amounts of data, the data are multidimensional, heterogeneous, disintegrated and non-interoperable. such data cannot be efficiently interpreted by computers, preventing computer-assisted reasoning and analysis. the second bottleneck is the lack of efficient computational algorithms and bioinformatics tools to integrate and analyze the heterogeneous data and knowledge into deep scientific understanding. this bottleneck slows the integration of host-coronavirus interaction (hci) data, discovery of hci mechanisms, and new applications. ontologies can solve these problems in analysis by integrating big data in a computer-interpretable way.in the informatics field, an ontology is a human-and computer-interpretable set of terms and relations that represent entities in a specific domain and how they relate to each other. ontology has played an important role in standard knowledge and data representation, integration, sharing, and analysis. a major field of artificial intelligence is knowledge representation and reasoning (kr², kr&r), and ontology is a foundation of the kr&r. the coronavirus infectious disease ontology (cido) is a new communitybased biomedical ontology in the domain of coronavirus diseases (https://github.com/cido-ontology/cido) 14 . to better study the hci mechanisms to explain various covid-19 phenomena, we propose to use cido as a platform for standard and computer-understandable representation of the host-coronavirus interactions and their influences on patient outcomes.in this manuscript, we introduce a set of "hpi-outcome postulates", laying out a set of basic rules for understanding host-pathogen interactions (hpis) and their roles in the disease outcomes. then, we propose a model to study the relations between hostcoronavirus interactions (hcis) and coronavirus disease outcomes. we used our ontology-based strategy to annotate and classify human coronaviruses, hosts, and experimentally verified host-coronavirus interactions (hcis) obtained from literature mining and bioinformatics studies. using these annotations, we proposed an ontological model of the interactions between sars-cov-2 and human to explain how the human-sars-cov-2 interactions would induce different disease outcomes such as hypertension and cytokine storm. furthermore, using known ppis as baits, we developed a computational method to predict new ppis and their associations with multi-organ disease phenotypes caused by sars-cov-2.interacions. from the literature, we manually annotated and identified coronavirus virulence factors and how host genes/proteins interact with coronaviruses.experimentally confirmed coronavirus virulence factors were added to the victors, a manually curated web-based database and analysis system 15 .ignet literature mining analysis. the ignet interaction network tool (http://ignet.hegroup.org/), powered by our in-house sciminer 16 literature mining tool, was used to mine gene-gene interactions in the specific domain of coronaviruses.among the host genes were collected from the string database with a medium confidence score of 0.4.host species were mapped to ncbitaxon taxonomy ontology 17 and human phenotype ontology (hpo) 18 . the disease phenotype outcomes, including different symptoms and signs, were mapped to hpo. with these mapped terms, ontofox 19 was used to generate subsets (or slimes) of the ncbitaxon or hpo ontologies.prediction of host-coronavirus ppis. we used a "domain-inferred prediction" method to infer inter-species ppis. supported by the conservation and importance of domains in proteins 20 , such domain-domain interaction (ddi) infers the potential interaction between two proteins if one domain in a pathogen protein a interacted with another domain in a host protein b.visualization of host-coronavirus ppis. cytoscape 21 was utilized for visualization of the coronavirus-human ppis.koch's postulates [22] [23] [24] have long provided criteria designed to establish a causal relationship between exposure to a microbe and emergence of a disease. the four criteria of koch's postulates are: (i) the microbe must be found in all organisms suffering from the disease, but should not be found in healthy organisms. based on the hpi-outcome postulates, we lay out the integrative host-coronavirus interaction framework as shown in figure 1 . basically, the framework includes three major processes from the viral side and three major processes from the host side. for the coronaviruses, crucial processes include: viral entry to host cell, viral replication, and viral release from the infected cell. for the host, three responses exist: the naïve response, the innate response, and the adaptive response. initially, the host response to the coronavirus entry through a receptor-ligand interaction is naïve since the host does not realize the danger and react to the virus by a routine procedure. at this naïve host response stage, neither signalling molecules nor selected immune cell populations are yet present to coordinate an immune response. as signalling molecules are produced by infected cells (e.g. cytokines, interferons), the host will show a delayed innate responses to coronavirus infection. the innate immune response may or may not become effective and strong against the viral infection. eventually, through a process of recombination followed by clonal selection in multiple immune cell subtypes, the host will mount an adaptive immune response more effective against the viral infection ( figure 1 ). each of the viral or host process includes many subprocesses and interactions. dynamic hostvirus interactions can be used to explain disease outcomes according to their impact on these many subprocesses. if the viruses "wins", the result will be the viral survival and replication. if the host "wins", the host will eventually control viral replication and kill the viruses. to model and analyze the complex adversarial interactions between host and pathogen, we propose to apply ontology as an integrative and systematic platform due to the solid semantic logic behind ontology and its computer-interpretable nature.we used ontology to represent coronavirus disease knowledge including the taxonomical structure of 9 coronaviruses in the ncbitaxon ontology, a taxonomy ontology based on the ncbi taxonomy database 17 . as shown in figure 2a , human coronaviruses infect and transmit among mammal hosts. we identified over 10 organisms that can serve as hosts or reservoirs for human coronaviruses. bats were found to be the reservoir of a wide variety of coronaviruses, including sars-cov and mers-cov viruses 27 . sars-cov was also found in masked palm civets and a raccoon dog, and antibodies against sars-cov were also found in chinese ferret badgers in a live-animal market in shenzhen, china 28 . our analysis found many other animals that might have served as reservoir hosts of sars-cov ( figure 2b ). the mers-cov virus likely transmitted from dromedary camels 29 .these host organisms can further be classified using the ncbitaxon ontology ( figure 2b ). all the host organisms belong to boreoeutheria, a clade (magnorder) of placental mammals. clades within boreoeutheria include euarchontoglires (supraprimates, including humans and rodents) and laurasiatheria. laurasiatheria includes artiodactyla (even toed ungulates, such as cattle and camels), chiroptera (bats),and ferae (carnivores such as canines, felines, and civets, and relatives including pangolins) ( figure 2b ). the taxonomy hierarchy was also extracted from the ncbitaxon ontology and become part of the cido.our ncbitaxon-based ontology analysis of all these coronavirus hosts furthershows that zoonotic human coronaviruses (including sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2) are obligate mammal parasites ( figure 2b ), suggesting that some molecular factor distinguishes mammals from other animals to host and transmit coronaviruses to humans. we hypothesize that zoonotic human coronaviruses (such as sars-cov-2) can only originate in mammals (in contrast to influenza, which can transmit to humans from avians). however, this hypothesis will need substantial additional study. a recent paper suggests snake as an intermediate host for human zoonotic coronavirus based on similarity in codon usage bias with 2019-ncov (e.g., sars-cov-2) 30 . since snakes are not mammals, this would disprove our hypothesis, but the overall pattern makes the proposed transmission via snakes an extreme claim, thus requiring extreme evidence.according to us cdc, the common symptoms of covid-19 include fever, cough, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, chills, repeated shaking with chills, muscle pain, headache, sore throat, and new loss of taste or smell. figure 3a is a hierarchical display of these 9 common symptoms and their associated hierarchical phenotype representation using the human phenotype ontology (hpo) 31 .comorbidity is the presence of additional condition(s) such as a disease or phenotype that is concurrent with the coronavirus infection. our further covid-19annotation and analysis show that the patients with many comorbid conditions (e.g., emphysema, chronic bronchitis, hypertension, coronary heart disease, and diabetes) are at heightened risk for severe symptoms and death. figure 3b shows comorbidities and the covid-19 outcome frequencies from case reports in peer-reviewed articles. to analyze the host interactions leading to these outcomes, it is very important to build data structures and data visualizations that can draw upon clinical electronic records.clinical coronavirus disease outcomes result from host-coronavirus interactions.we have collected 10, 4, and 1 virulence factors from sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2, respectively (table 1, figure 4 ). table 1 based on our hpi-outcome postulates, the model given in figure 1 , and our literature mining results, we generated an integrative framework to formally specify the interactions between host and sars-cov-2 factors with associated disease outcomes. which can be attenuated by blocking the renin-angiotensin system (ras) pathway 32 . as we know (figure 3) , patients with hypertension are more susceptible to death and severe outcomes. this phenomenon can be explained if the down-regulation of the ace2 due to the infection is associated with hypertension ( figure 5) . specifically, the downregulation of ace2 would lead to excessive production of angiotensin ii by ace, which would then bind to its receptor and induce vasocontraction and hypertension 42 .although ace and ace2 both act as key players in the ras, they serve oppositional roles to angiotensin ii. an angiotensin ii receptor blocker drug (e.g., azilsartan) would block the angiotensin ii binding to its receptor, and thus help treat hypertension. in this way, the ontological model links host-pathogen interactions to the hypertension outcome. if a patient already has hypertension, the further increased blood pressure due to the interactions would exacerbate the underlying comorbidity, which may explain the increased death rate of patients with superimposed covid and hypertension.however, other pathogen factors likely play a role in the extreme pathogenicity of sars-cov-2. this is evidenced by the fact that despite markedly weak pathogenicity, hcov-nl63 (a prevalent human coronavirus) also uses an s-ace2 interaction for cellular entry 43 . however, hcov-nl63 is considerably more benign than sars-cov-2.this may be a consequence of molecular differences in the s protein-ace2 interaction between the two strains. the ontology-driven comparative analysis of covs provides a formal representation for both similarities and differences among the s proteins from different viruses. if the s proteins do not differ significantly, we hypothesize that some other factor (e.g., a co-receptor) of sars-cov-2 contributes to viral binding and entry.our recent vaccine design study 44 predicts many sars-cov-2 nonstructural proteins as possible adhesins, some of which may serve as a possible co-receptor, which are testable predictions.a cytokine storm is an excessive immune response to external stimuli associated with high levels of cytokine production 45 . cytokine storm is a major cause of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiple-organ failure in severe covid-19patients, resulting in death within a short time 46 . il-6 is a major cytokine involved in the cytokine storm 45 . il-6 can be induced by the angiotensin ii in human cells 47 , which links the cytokine storm to the s-ace2 binding-associated interaction network ( figure 5 ).tocilizumab, a recombinant humanized anti-human il-6 receptor monoclonal antibody, can bind to the il-6 receptor with high affinity, and thus prevent il-6 from binding to its native receptor and inducing downstream immune damage. it was recently reported the tocilizumab improved the clinical outcome in severe and critical covid-19 patients and effectively reduced mortality 48 . figure 5 provides a logical and structured graphical summary of the knowledge introduced above. this representation covers knowledge learned from many studies.without such an integrative representation, it is difficult to put all the pieces together.another unique feature of the figure 5 representation is that it is ontology-oriented, so that all the terms and relations are represented using a computer-interpretable ontological format. figure 5 is a subset of the comprehensive host-coronavirus interaction network, which will be expanded as our understanding of host-interactions by the coronavirus grows.to demonstrate the ontological representation, the process 'sars-cov-2 s-ace2binding' can be defined by two logical axioms ( figure 5 ):the above ontological logical axioms define the relations where a sars-cov-2 s-ace2 binding process has two participants: a sars-cov-2 s protein that serves as a ligand role, and an ace2 protein that serves as a receptor role.in addition, we can define a logical axiom between 'sars-cov-2 s-ace2binding' and tmprss2 that defines the role of tmprss2 to activate the sars-cov-2 s-ace2 binding process:a major difference between ontology and taxonomy is that a taxonomy is built only based on the is_a relation. beside the representation of such is_a relation, ontology can also provide additional relations between entities under different hierarchies, such as the above 'activates' relation that links the tmprss2 protein in the protein hierarchy and the sars-cov-2 s-ace2 binding under the interaction process hierarchy. the excessive production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, esp. il-1b, il-8, il-6, cxcl10, and ccl2, were detected in sars patients [52] [53] [54] , indicating the initiation of a cytokine storm, which is eventually associated with the progression to ards and death. it is obvious that the timing here is critical. the early ifn response would be beneficial. however, coronaviruses, especially sars-cov-2, manipulate the immune system to delay such a response allowing widespread infection prior to an onset of symptoms. the understanding of such dynamics helps our rational design of proper treatments and the timing of the treatments.it appears that similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, sars-cov-2 also affects the ifn response 51, 55 . sars-cov-2 even displayed a higher sensitivity to ifn-i in vitro compared with sars-cov-1 in infected vero cells 56 . the difference in terms of ifn-i activation between sars-cov and sar-cov-2 is likely due to the difference in the sequences for two proteins (orf 3b and orf 6) of these two human coronaviruses 56 .considering that different human coronaviruses induce varied phenotype outcomes, it is important to include more coronaviruses in the systematic comparison and identify their differential action on ifn production and on isgs, which likely plays a critical role in the delayed host recognition and responses to the infection, supporting the survival and replication of the viruses inside the host. our proposed hpi postulates combined with our structured ontology support an systems-level investigation into these mechanisms and into potential avenues of prophylaxis or treatment.the second key component of the host response to coronavirus interaction is the activation of an adaptive host response, which is also key to long term immunity. the severe sars disease is also related to the lack of or delayed activation of adaptive immunity 42 . the sars patients with severe outcomes maintained high levels of many innate immune system-linked cytokines (e.g., cxcl10, ccl2) and isg-encoded proteins with low levels of spike-specific antibodies 57 . conversely, surviving patients had higher levels of spike-specific antibodies. these findings suggest that the prompt formation of adaptive immunity is important to reduce disease severity and improve outcomes. the adaptive immune response can be induced by effective vaccines against covid-19. both sars-cov and mers-cov s and s1 have been used as vaccine antigens/immunogens due to their ability to induce neutralizing antibodies that prevent host cell attachment and infection 44, 58 . numerous sars-cov-2 vaccine trials are underway 44 , with the hope that a safe and effective vaccine(s) will be ready in the near future to control the covid-19 pandemic.our previous victors ppi predictions are based on the analyses of protein domains and phylogeny 15 . by nature, each ppi is a domain-domain interaction. therefore, we can identify the domains of virus proteins, and based on known interactions with domains of host proteins, predict how the virus proteins interact with host proteins. using the known ppis as baits, we developed a domain-inferred ppi prediction strategy to predict more ppis, and how these ppis could possibly affect organs and tissues. our prediction found that sars-cov-2 could induce 3,111 human-virus interactions with 133 human proteins.many ppis are tissue-specific, and the tissue-specific information can be identified from the human protein atlas 59 . using our predicted ppis, sars-cov-2 was predicted to affect many tissues such as skin, liver, intestine, blood, glands and reproductive tissues ( figure 6 ).in addition to computational methods, the prediction described above also depends on prior knowledge of the pre-identified ppis and tissue-specific protein the intergrative ontological modeling can also support different applications such as rational drug repurposing design and vaccine development. as shown in figure 5 , our ontological representation provides several paths for rational drug repurposing design for covid-19 treatment. camostat mesylate (a serine protease inhibitor) is capable of inhibiting the function of tmprss2 41 , which is crucial for the effective s-ace2 binding tmprss2 41 . angiotensin ii receptor blockers can be used to block the activation of the angiotensin ii 60 , therefore blocking the vacoconstriction and following hypertension.tocilizumab is able to inhibit il-6 activity 48 so block the formation of cytokine storm.sars-cov-2 appears to use many pathways to cause different phenotypes. it is reasonable to hypothesize that the drugs blocking early stages of the disease pathways would be more effective than the later starges of the pathways. it is also important to consider drugs that block the paths leading to severe disease outcomes such as hypertension and cytokine storm. in addition, we also need to consider the side effects of the drugs being used for the treatment. the integrative ontology framework provides a foundation for these rational design. ontology-based software tools and algorithms can also be developed to support intelligence queries 61 the covid-19 outbreak caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) continues to endanger global health and to hamper the world economy. this outbreak started in december 2019 in wuhan, hubei province. unfortunately, currently, there is still no specific and effective treatment for covid-19. evidence shows that elderly people with sars-cov-2 infections and cardiovascular diseases, including hypertension, are at risk of developing severe cases [1] . a hypertension survey from 2012 to 2015 reported that 23.2% of chinese people ≥18 years of age had hypertension, whereas the prevalence of hypertension was >55% among citizens ≥65 years of age [2] . ras plays an important role in regulating electrolyte balance and blood pressure and comprises two pathways: the ace/ang ii/at1r pathway and the ace2/ang (1-7)/mas receptor pathway [3] . under normal physiological conditions, the activity of the ace/ang ii/at1r axis and the ace2/ang (1-7)/ mas receptor axis are in a dynamic equilibrium state, maintaining the normal function of the corresponding system. similar to sars, sars-cov-2 is believed to invade the host through the cell entry receptor ace2 [4] . sars-cov infections reduce ace2 expression, resulting in an imbalance between the ace/ang ii/ at1r axis and the ace2/ang (1-7)/mas receptor axis [5] . targeting the ace/ang ii/at1r axis is a novel therapeutic strategy for hypertension. aceis and aras not only inhibit the ace/ang ii/at1r pathway but also modulate the ace2/ang (1-7)/mas receptor pathway [6] . the dysfunction of the reninangiotensin system (ras) has been observed in coronavirus infection disease (covid-19) patients, but whether ras inhibitors, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) and angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blockers (arbs), are associated with clinical outcomes remains unknown. here, we aimed to evaluate the ability of ras inhibitors to protect against covid-19 in patients with hypertension.this study was approved by the shenzhen third people's hospital ethical committee. verbal informed consent was obtained from all patients or patients' family members. we performed a retrospective review of medical records from hospitalized patients with covid-19 admitted to the shenzhen third people's hospital from 11 january to 23 february 2020. the information on patients with hypertension was extracted from all enrolled covid-19 patients. we reviewed the clinical data extracted from electronic medical records, including clinical symptoms, signs and laboratory findings. a commercial real-time pcr kit (geneodx co., ltd., shanghai, china) was used to detect sars-cov-2. samples were considered positive if the cycle threshold value (ct-value) less than 37 and negative if ct-value more than 40. samples with a ct-value between 37 and 40 require confirmation by retesting. samples identified as positive by the local laboratory were further validated by the key laboratory of the shenzhen cdc. the severity of covid-19 wasidentified during the hospitalization according to the guidelines established by the national health commission of the people's republic of china. therapeutic regimens for covid-19 patients complied with guidelines established by the national health commission of the people's republic of china. hypertension was classified as grade 1, grade 2 and grade 3 according to 2018 guidelines of the european society of hypertension (esh). hypertensive patients with covid-19 were divided into two subgroups based on antihypertensive drug treatments. detailed information on the enrolled patients is shown in supplementary table s1. the spss 18.0 software package was used for statistical analysis. measurement data are expressed as the median and interquartile range (iqr), and the difference between groups was compared by an unpaired t test. count data are expressed as percentages, and the difference between groups was tested by the chi-square test. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.a total of 417 covid-19 patients were admitted to the shenzhen third people's hospital as of 23 february 2020. among these patients, 51 (12.23%) had hypertension. nine patients (17.6%) with grade 1hypertension did not take any antihypertensive drugs during hospitalization and were excluded from the subsequent analysis. the other 42 patients (82.4%) receiving antihypertensive therapy were included in further studies. the 42 analyzed patients were divided into two groups based on antihypertensive therapies: the acei/arb group (17 patients) included patients treated with acei or arb drugs, and the non-acei/arb group (25 patients) included patients treated with other antihypertensive drugs, including calcium channel blockers (ccbs), β-blockers and diuretics. eight patients (32%) in the non-acei/arb group and 5 patients (29.41%)in the acei/arb group had other comorbidities, such as type 2 diabetes (t2d) and coronary heart disease (chd). the vast majority of hypertensive patients had received the current therapeutic regimens shown in supplementary table s1 for over one year. the blood pressure of patients was well-controlled with the above therapeutic regimens during hospitalization.the comparison of baseline characteristics between the two groups is summarized in supplementary table   s2 . the median age of the analyzed subjects was 64.5 years (iqr, 55.8-69.0 years), and 57.1% of them were males. no significant differences in hypertension grades were observed between the acei/arb group and the non-acei/arb group. both groups showed similar signs and symptoms. the median number of days from the onset of symptoms to hospital admission was 2.0 in the non-acei/arb group and 3.0 in the acei/arb group. meanwhile, the median number of days from symptom onset to hospital discharge was 16.5 days in the non-acei/arb group and 20.0 days in the acei/arb group. the median heart rate and respiratory rate from the non-acei/arb group were 90.5 bpm and 20.0, respectively. in comparison, the median heart rate and respiratory rate from the non-acei/arb group were 80.0 bmp and 20.0, respectively. all baseline characteristics shown in table s2 were not significantly different between the two groups.during hospitalization, 12 patients in the non-acei/arb group (48%) were categorized into severe subgroups and one patient died. in contrast, in the acei/arb group, only 4 patients (23.5%) were categorized into severe subgroups and no patients died (figure 1(a) ). the percentage of severe cases in the acei/arb group was higher than that in the non-acei/arb group, but this difference was not significant, possibly due to the small number of clinical cases. we next examined the effects of taking acei or arb drugs on laboratory findings of covid-19 patients with hypertension. as shown in figure 1(b) , there was a trend toward lower il-6 levels in patients from the acei/arb group. no marked variation in c-reactive protein (crp) was observed between the two groups (figure 1(b) ). the absolute number of cd3+ and cd8+ t cells in the acei/arb group was significantly higher than that in the non-acei/arb group. there were no significant changes in cd4+ t cell counts between the two groups ( figure 1(c) ). in addition, although the viral load was not different between the two groups at hospital admission, the peak viral load during hospitalization in the acei/ arb group was significantly lower than that in the non-acei/arb group (figure 1(d) ). other laboratory findings, such as white blood cell counts, neutrophil counts, platelet counts, and lactate dehydrogenase, are shown in supplementary table s3 , and no significant differences were observed between the two groups.it was reported that the ras plays a critical role in regulating hypertension and acute lung injury caused by viruses, such as sars and h7n9 [5, 7] . changes in ras activity are related to the pathogenesis of hypertension and inflammatory lung disease. targeting ras is an effective antihypertension therapeutic strategy. aceis and arb, which inhibit the ace/ang ii/at1r system, are commonly used drugs for hypertensive patients. recent evidence suggests that hypertensive covid-19 patients are predisposed to develop severe cases [1] . thus, it is important to determine the effect of ras inhibitors on covid-19 patients with hypertension.studies have suggested that covid-19 patients have increased angiotensin ii compared to healthy people [8] . the abnormal increase in angiotensin ii was related to hypertension and lung failure. in addition, ras inhibitors have been shown to be associated with reduced mortality in patients with sepsis [9] . angiotensin ii positively regulates the expression of inflammatory cytokines through the activation of at1r [10] . excessively high levels of inflammatory cytokines are harmful to the outcomes of covid-19 patients. thus, it was suggested that it is beneficial for covid-19 patients to use aceis/ arbs to inhibit the ras. however, until now, no confirmed clinical evidence has been available. in this study, covid-19 patients with hypertension were enrolled, and we found that acei/arb therapy attenuated the inflammatory response, potentially through the inhibition of il-6 levels, which is consistent with the findings that acei and arb therapy alleviated lps-induced pneumonic injury [11] . for patients with chronic heart failure, it has been proven that acei therapy was associated with decreased th1/ th2 cytokine ratios and inflammatory cytokine production [12] . this study also suggests that acei/ arb therapy had a beneficial effect on the immune system by avoiding peripheral t cell depletion. furthermore, the viral load was reported to be highly correlated with severe lung injury [8] . it was also observed that acei/arb therapy decreased the viral load, but we hypothesize that ras inhibitors do not directly inhibit viral replication; rather, they play an indirect antiviral role by regulating immune function and inhibiting inflammatory responses, and the mechanism needs to be clarified through in vitro and in vivostudies in the future.taken together, this is the first clinical evidence demonstrating that ras inhibitors improve the clinical outcomes of covid-19 patients with hypertension, suggesting that these patients could benefit from the persistent or preferential usage of acei/arb for antihypertensive treatment. the data are expressed as the median and iqr. an unpaired t test was used, and p < 0.05 was considered significant.no potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s). orcid guoliang zhang http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3617-5449a novel coronavirus, named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was discovered in december 2019 in wuhan, china, and an ongoing pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has been spreading around the world as of early april 2020. the clinical spectrum of covid-19 ranges from asymptomatic upper respiratory infection to critically ill pneumonia associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [1] [2] [3] . in initial reports from china, the prevalence of older age, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cardiovascular disease (cvd) was high in covid-19 patients, and individuals with these comorbidities tended to have greater case fatality rates [3, 4] . in addition, it has been shown that angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is a functional receptor for sars-cov-2 infection [5] [6] [7] . given that experimental studies suggested that angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) and an ace inhibitor (acei) could increase ace2 expression in cardiovascular and renal systems [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] , concerns may have been raised regarding whether arbs and aceis would augment the infection of sars-cov-2 and the severity of covid-19 in hypertension and cvd patients receiving these drugs [21] . in contrast, arbs have potential benefits in the prevention and treatment of lung injury caused by covid-19 [22] . these conflicting views appear to arise based on the results of experimental studies, especially those of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), because direct clinical data on covid-19 are lacking at present. sars-cov caused the sars epidemic in china in [2002] [2003] , and its virological characteristics are closely related to those of sars-cov-2 [23, 24] . here, available investigations on the association of the renin-angiotensin system (ras), particularly ace2 and angiotensin ii, with sars-cov-induced lung injury and the latest information on covid-19 were reviewed as of early april 2020, which would provide insight into covid-19 and the direction of future research on covid-19.ace2 as a receptor for sars-cov and sars-cov-2 ace2 belongs to the membrane-bound carboxydipeptidase family and is widely distributed in the human body, including the heart, kidney, small intestine, and, to a lesser extent, the lung. lung ace2 expression is concentrated mainly in type ii alveolar cells and macrophages and modestly in bronchial and tracheal epithelial cells [25] . ace2 degrades angiotensin ii to generate angiotensin 1-7, which activates the mas oncogene receptor that negatively regulates a variety of angiotensin ii actions mediated by angiotensin ii type 1 receptor (at1r) [26] . therefore, it is thought that the ace2/angiotensin 1-7/mas receptor axis has counteracting effects against the excessively activated ace/angiotensin ii/at1r axis, as seen in hypertension, cardiac hypertrophy, heart failure, and other cvds [26] .on the other hand, human ace2 is an established functional receptor by which sars-cov enters host target cells ( fig. 1) [23, 24] . the transmembrane spike glycoprotein (s protein) of sars-cov binds to the cellular membrane ace2; sars-cov then attaches to the target cells, followed by sars-cov-s protein priming by cellular surface proteases, such as transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2), allowing the fusion of viral and cellular membranes and resulting in sars-cov entry and replication in the target cells [6] . moreover, ace2 knockout greatly reduces viral infection and replication in mice after experimental sars-cov infection [27] . thus, it is suggested that the binding of the sars-cov-s protein to ace2 is crucial for sars-cov infection.recently, it has been shown that the sars-cov-2-s protein shares nearly 80% amino acid identity with the sars-cov-s protein, and the binding affinity of the sars-cov-2-s protein to human ace2 is similar to that of the sars-cov-s protein [5] [6] [7] . anti-human ace2 antibodies or antisera can inhibit sars-cov-2-s proteinmediated entry into cultured cells in vitro [5] [6] [7] . accordingly, sars-cov-2 utilizes ace2 for target cell entry as well. however, it is still not clear whether ace2 is the sole receptor for sars-cov-2 infection because cd209l (a glycoprotein of c-type lectin also called l-sign) is identified as a possible secondary receptor for sars-cov in cultured chinese hamster ovary cells [28] .experimental sars-cov infection induces acute respiratory failure and lung parenchymal injury characterized by alveolar wall thickening, pulmonary vascular hyperpermeability, and inflammatory cell infiltration in mice [27] . after sars-cov infection in mice, lung ace2 fig. 1 possible scheme of the association of ace2, angiotensin ii, and at1r and acute lung injury of sars and covid-19. ang ii, angiotensin ii; ace, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ace2, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2; acei, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; at1r, angiotensin ii type-1 receptor; arb, angiotensin ii type-1 receptor blocker; sars-cov, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; sars-cov-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; s-protein, spike-glycoprotein protein levels are greatly reduced, while ace levels are not changed [27] . these findings are consistent with the previous observation that coronaviruses specifically downregulate ace2 expression in host cells, depending on virus replication [29] . in addition, sars-cov-induced acute lung injury is remarkably attenuated in ace2 knockout mice compared with wild-type mice [27] . lung angiotensin ii levels increase in wild-type mice after sars-cov infection [27] . acid aspiration mice, an ards model, show functional and pathological changes mimicking sars-cov-induced lung injury [30] . the lung angiotensin ii levels increase after acid aspiration, and sars-cov-s protein treatment elicits a further angiotensin ii increase [27] . interestingly, exogenous recombinant ace2 treatment rescues acid aspirationinduced acute lung injury [30] . taking this evidence together, the following hypothesis has been raised for the mechanism underlying sars-cov-induced lung injury: sars-cov infection downregulates lung ace2 and in turn, shifts the balance toward the dominance of the ace/ angiotensin ii/at1r system over the ace2/angiotensin 1-7/mas receptor system in the lung. as a result, noncompeting angiotensin ii accumulation occurs, resulting in acute lung injury through at1r activation [27] .it should be noted that a similar mechanism is proposed for the severe lung injury caused by the avian influenza a virus h5n1, which has spread worldwide in humans with a high mortality rate. after h5n1 virus infection in mice, lung ace2 expression is downregulated, and serum angiotensin ii levels increase [31] . acute lung injury is augmented by ace2 knockout in h5n1-infected mice, while the administration of recombinant human ace2 ameliorates h5n1-induced lung injury in mice [31] . moreover, in other mouse models of acute lung injury/ ards, such as acid aspiration, sepsis, and drug-induced lung fibrosis, it has been shown that ace2 expression is downregulated in response to noxious stimuli and that acute lung injury is aggravated by ace2 knockout and rescued by exogenous ace2 administration or at1r knockout [30, 32] . accordingly, it is suggested that the angiotensin ii/ at1r-induced aggravation resulting from ace2 downregulation and the protective effects of ace2 are not specific to lung injury in sars but rather may be common to acute lung injury/ards induced by various viral infections and lung diseases.several kinds of arbs (e.g., olmesartan, telmisartan, losartan, and azilsartan) have been shown to increase the mrna or protein levels of ace2 in animal models of heart diseases (hypertensive hypertrophy, autoimmune myocarditis, dilated cardiomyopathy, myocardial infarction, and diabetic cardiomyopathy) [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] and chronic kidney disease (hypertensive nephropathy and diabetic nephropathy) [15, 16] , as well as normal rat heart and renal vasculature [17, 18] and hypertensive rat aorta (but not the carotid artery) [19, 20] . acei does not inhibit ace2 as a pharmacological property. in normal rats, lisinopril has been shown to modestly increase cardiac ace2 mrna levels c effects of losartan (15 mg/kg) on lung edema (wet/dry weight ratio) in acid plus spike-fc protein-treated mice (n = 4-6 per group). p < 0.05 vs. vehicle-treated wild-type mice after acid injury. at1, angiotensin ii type-1 receptor. cited from ref. [27] while not changing cardiac ace2 activity [17] . in the myocardial infarction model, valsartan, ramipril, and their combination have no effects on cardiac ace2 expression [33] . it should be noted that the doses of arbs and aceis used in these animal studies were much greater than those in clinical practice so that the observed effects of these drugs on ace2 expression and activity could not be extrapolated to clinical situations in humans. importantly, no clinical data exist regarding the effects of arbs and aceis on human tissue ace2 expression or activity in vivo. although there are several clinical studies investigating the changes in plasma or urine levels of the soluble form of ace2 in hypertension and cvd patients receiving arbs or aceis, the soluble form of ace2 in the plasma and urine is not a reliable indicator of the activity of tissue ace2, namely, membrane-bound ace2 [22] . importantly, there are no data on the effects of arbs and aceis on lung ace2 expression either in animal models or humans. it is still unknown whether the changes in ace2 levels (for example, arb-induced upregulation) actually facilitate greater engagement and entry of sars-cov and other viruses, even in animal models.on the other hand, it has been shown that pretreatment with losartan, an arb, ameliorates acute pulmonary edema and lung injury in sars-cov-s protein-treated mice after acid aspiration (fig. 2) [27] . taken together with the lung angiotensin ii level elevation [27] , this evidence suggested that even after considering the speculation that viral load would be enhanced by ace2 upregulation, the net effects of arbs would be favorable to prevent sars-covinduced acute lung injury in this model. in addition, there is another possibility that the arb pretreatment-induced baseline ace2 increase prior to sars-cov infection would result in higher ace2 levels that remained after sars-cov-induced downregulation and consequently conferred protection against lung injury in this model [22, 34] . however, in interpreting the results of this study, it should be noted that the effects of losartan have been observed merely in mice treated with sars-cov-s protein in addition to acid aspiration but not in mice treated with sars-cov-s protein alone. additionally, data on lung ace2 levels before and after treatment with sars-cov-s protein and acid aspiration are lacking in mice pretreated with or without losartan.earlier studies reported that the case fatality rate was high in covid-19 patients with comorbidities such as older age, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cvd, chronic pulmonary disease, and malignancy [3, 4] . because patients with hypertension and cvd are likely treated with aceis or arbs, the concern is raised regarding whether the use of aceis and arbs may aggravate the morbidity and mortality of covid-19 [21] . however, it was possible that the observed phenomenon would result from reverse causality because older patients are at the highest risk for covid-19 and concurrently tend to have multiple comorbidities, including hypertension and cvd, and because adjustments for age and other possible confounding factors were not performed in such earlier studies [22, 35, 36] . indeed, in a recent retrospective, multicenter cohort study enrolling 191 confirmed covid-19 patients in wuhan, china, multivariable regression analysis revealed that independent risk factors for in-hospital death are older age, higher sequential organ failure assessment score, and higher ddimer levels at the early stage of covid-19, although hypertension, diabetes, and coronary artery disease were not included [37] .a small case study reported that plasma angiotensin ii levels were markedly elevated and linearly associated with viral load and lung injury severity in covid-19 pneumonia patients [38] . given that a remarkable elevation of circulating levels was also documented in various kinds of cytokines (il-6, il-10, tnf-alpha, etc.), it is unknown whether these findings of angiotensin ii are the cause or result of a systemic cytokine storm in covid-19 patients [39] . in the context of the effects of arbs and aecis, a retrospective, single-center analysis enrolling 112 covid-19 patients showed that the use of arbs and aceis had no effects on the morbidity and mortality of covid-19 patients with cvd [40] . currently, a case-control study is underway to clarify the effects of aceis and arbs on the severity of covid-19 in italy (nct04318418). most importantly, at present, there is no large-scale study with convincing evidence to determine whether arbs and aceis play a neutral, beneficial, or harmful role in the susceptibility to sars-cov-2 and the severity and outcomes of covid-19 patients [22, [34] [35] [36] 41] .in addition to vaccine development and antiviral agents, the modulation of the ras, especially by ace2 and angiotensin ii, is highlighted as a potential therapeutic target for covid-19. based on an animal study suggesting the beneficial net effects of arb in sars-cov-infected acute lung injury mice [27] , multicenter, double-blinded placebo-controlled, randomized trials (rcts) are currently being conducted to investigate the effects of losartan on mortality and hospital admission in covid-19 patients requiring hospital admission (nct04312009) and not requiring hospital admission (nct04311177), respectively. recombinant ace2 is another candidate to prevent covid-19 pneumonia. as described above, the efficacy of exogenous recombinant ace2 has been shown in animal models of acute lung injury/ards [30, 31] . it is also possible that the circulating soluble form of ace2 may act as a decoy receptor that binds to sars-cov-2 and competitively inhibits virus entry to host target cells mediated by membrane-bound ace2. to investigate the efficacy of human recombinant ace2 in the treatment of covid-19 patients, a randomized, controlled, pilot clinical study was planned (nct04287686). however, this study was withdrawn on march 17, 2020.tmprss2 is a membrane protease for ace2 priming, which is a crucial step for the fusion of sars-cov-2 and target cell membranes and the resultant viral entry into the cells [6] . nafamostat mesylate and camostat mesylate are tmprss2 inhibitors that have been used for the treatment of acute pancreatitis in japan. currently, a clinical trial evaluating the efficacy of nafamostat and camostat for treating covid-19 is underway in japan (https://www.utokyo.ac.jp/focus/en/articles/z0508_00083.html).the concern regarding whether arbs and aceis may have harmful effects on the morbidity and mortality of covid-19 patients is based on the speculation that these drugs would upregulate ace2, a receptor for sars-cov-2, which would increase the viral load and then augment lung injury. however, the evidence of ace2 upregulation is limited only in animal studies using the relatively high (namely, pharmacological) doses of several arbs and one acei. additionally, it remains unclear whether the arb/ ace-induced ace2 increase actually enhances the susceptibility to sars-cov-2 or sar-cov. importantly, no clinical studies exist supporting that arbs and aceis augment susceptibility to infection and worsen (or improve) all-cause and cardiovascular outcomes in not only covid-19 patients but also sars patients at present. therefore, the hypothesis underlying the concern would not be readily extrapolated to humans, particularly to covid-19 patients.in patients with heart failure, prior myocardial infarction, other cvds, and cerebrovascular disease, the benefit of arbs and aceis has been established in the improvement of quality of life and survival outcomes, while the discontinuation leads to new onset or exacerbation of heart failure, cvd, and stroke and the worsening of the prognosis [42] . thus, ras inhibitors should be continued in high-risk patients who have received guideline-directed medical therapy (gdmt). in general, switching from one to another class of antihypertensive agents does not infrequently result in destabilization of blood pressure control and requires frequent visits for drug titration to achieve appropriate and stable blood pressure control and to avoid adverse effects. blood pressure destabilization increases the incidence of heart failure, stroke, and other cvds. in addition, frequent visits to the clinic or hospital expose patients to a greater risk of infection in a covid-19 pandemic situation. accordingly, even in stably controlled hypertension patients without compelling indications, it is thought that not only simple discontinuation but also switching from arb or acei to other antihypertensive agents should be avoided unless physicians make a decision based on specific considerations.cardiovascular comorbidities are common in covid-19 patients, and such patients are at great risk for morbidity and mortality [1] [2] [3] [4] . myocardial damage ranging from silent troponin t elevation to fulminant myocarditis has been documented in covid-19 patients [35] . in confirmed or suspected covid-19 patients, acei and arb medications are recommended for the treatment of heart failure and other cvd according to gdmt based on the available evidence at this time [35] .in conclusion, at present, the use of arbs and aecis should not be withheld in established standard therapy for not only high-risk patients such as those with heart failure, prior myocardial infarction, other cvd, and cerebrovascular disease but also patients with hypertension in stable condition according to the recent statements released by the european society of hypertension, the european society of cardiology, and the american heart association/ heart failure society of america/american college of cardiology [43] [44] [45] . the evidence on covid-19 is being accumulated each day. large-scale clinical studies with convincing evidence, not only rcts but also real-world big data analyses as well as experimental studies, are awaited to solve the question of whether arbs and aceis have neutral, favorable, or harmful effects on the susceptibility to sars-cov-2 and the severity and outcomes of covid-19.finally, we should learn from the lessons of covid-19 without being bound by common sense in the ante-covid-19 era. in addition, we should reconstruct a novel strategy for the treatment of hypertension and cvd in the post-covid-19 era.funding this work was supported in part by a jsps kakenhi grant (19k08503).conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.publisher's note springer nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.in december 2019, a group case of unexplained pneumonia occurred in wuhan, hubei province, china. 1 with the spread of the epidemic, cases have consecutively appeared in other parts of china and abroad. on april 10, 2020, the number of countries involved has tripled with 1,521,252 cases worldwide and 85,054 deaths. 2 the epidemic has resulted in serious negative effects on health and socioeconomic development. on march 11, 2020, who declared covid-19 as a pandemic. 3 the agent of the disease is a novel coronavirus. on february 11, 2020, the international committee on virus classification officially termed the virus "sars-cov-2". it was formerly temporarily named 2019-ncov, and the disease caused by novel coronavirus was termed corona virus disease 2019 . pneumonia caused by novel coronavirus was uniformly named "novel coronavirus pneumonia" by the national health commission of the people's republic of china. the virus is the seventh member of envelope rna coronavirus (sarbecovirus subgenus, coronavirus subfamily). novel coronavirus belongs to novel coronavirus of β genus, with enveloped, round, or oval particles, often pleomorphic and 60-140 nm in diameter. 4 novel coronavirus is most similar to bat sars-like coronavirus from the chinese chrysanthemum-headed bat, with nucleotide homology of 84%, 78%, and 50% with bat sars-like coronavirus, human sars virus, and mers virus, respectively. 5 the most primitive host of novel coronavirus is the chinese chrysanthemum-headed bat. 6 diseases are caused by spread from pangolin hosts to humans. of the first 41 confirmed cases, 27 reported contact with the south china seafood market. 1 therefore, at present, it is believed that the original source of novel coronavirus was the south china seafood market in wuhan, and the source of infection was patients infected by novel coronavirus. further, asymptomatic infections and incubation periods are considered potential sources of infection. 7 the route of transmission is droplet, contact, aerosol, fecal-oral, and/or mother-to -child transmission. [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] the average incubation period was 5.2 days, and the basic regeneration number (r0) in the early stage of the epidemic was 2.2. 13 clinical symptoms include fever, cough, myalgia, or fatigue; atypical symptoms include expectoration, headache, hemoptysis, and diarrhea, approximately half of patients have dyspnea; complications include acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute heart injury, and secondary infection. 1 chest ct revealed that the most common radiological manifestations on admission were ground glass shadow and bilateral patchy shadow. 14 novel coronavirus cases are often complicated with high risk of cerebrovascular diseases, such as cardio-cerebrovascular disease, hypertension, and diabetes, 15 or death, occurring mainly in elderly and chronically ill patients. 16 according to the influence of novel coronavirus on cerebrovascular disease and the clinical manifestations of covid-19 patients, this paper expounds on the pathophysiological hypothesis of covid-19 's effect on cerebrovascular disease.based on the current epidemiological data, people of all ages are generally susceptible to novel coronavirus. the latest findings published in the chinese journal of epidemiology are based on the findings of 72,314 cases of covid-19. 17 the majority of confirmed cases are between the ages of 30 to 79 years (86.6%), mainly middle-aged and elderly individuals. the proportion of patients with hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease is 12.8%, 5.3%, and 4.2%, respectively, indicating that middle-aged and elderly individuals with chronic diseases may be more likely to be infected. compared with healthy individuals, stroke patients are mainly middle-aged and elderly individuals, with a higher proportion of diseases such as hypertension and diabetes. thus, the elderly, individuals with chronic diseases, and individuals with poor resistance may be more susceptible to infection. a recent study on the clinical characteristics of 138 patients with novel coronavirus infection in wuhan 15 revealed that the median age was 56 years old, with a higher proportion of middle-aged and elderly people. of cases, 64 were complicated with underlying diseases, including 14 cases of diabetes, 43 cases of hypertension, 27 cases of cardio-cerebrovascular diseases, and 10 cases of cancer. this study demonstrated that elderly patients with cerebrovascular diseases and risk factors such as hypertension and diabetes may be at the highest risk of infection. zhong nanshan's team reported that the median age of critical recombination was 52 years old, and that of the non-critical group was 45 years old. males accounted for 58.10%, females accounted for 41.90%, and patients under 15 years old accounted for 0.9%, suggesting that the rate of infection is higher in males than in females, and infection in children is rare. approximately a quarter of patients have hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, and other diseases. further, the proportion of patients with smoking history is less than 15%. 18 collectively, these data suggest that the elderly with cerebrovascular diseases may be more infectious than other groups. when these patients were admitted to the hospital, only 43.1% of the patients had a fever, and more patients presented with a fever while in hospital. conversely, almost all patients with sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), both caused by coronavirus, had symptoms of fever at the time of diagnosis, and only 12% of the patients had no fever. the case fatality rate of covid-19 is lower than that of sars and mers. covid-19 is associated with a mortality rate of approximately 2.1%. 1 the case fatality rates of sars and mers were 9.6% and 34%, respectively. 19, 20 the study reported that elderly patients with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, diabetes, and hypertension had a higher case fatality rate than other populations. blackburn et al 21 reported that respiratory virus infection is associated with an increased risk of stroke in hospitalized stroke patients. the existing studies suggest that novel coronavirus is not conducive to the prognosis of patients with cerebrovascular diseases, and special attention should be paid to changes in their clinical condition. lymphocyte counts are low, prothrombin time is prolonged, and lactate dehydrogenase levels are significantly increased in all covid-19 patients. white blood cell and neutrophil counts in severely infected patients are significantly increased, further, d-dimer, creatinine, and creatine kinase levels are also increased. 15 more patients require oxygen therapy and may even require extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) to provide respiratory support. it is suggested that the patient's body is in a state of hypoxia, inflammation, and hypercoagulability. these pathophysiological changes may underpin the development of stroke.hematological reports of covid-19 patients often include counts of white blood cells and neutrophils, and high c-reactive protein. common complications include the presence of inflammatory reactions. covid-19 patients with cerebrovascular diseases often present with complications such as hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and other stroke risk factors. these risk factors are associated with pro-inflammatory changes, including leukocyte activation and cerebrovascular thrombosis under inflammatory stimulation. inflammatory cells begin to accumulate in the vascular wall in the early stage of atherosclerosis, increase blood-brain barrier permeability, destroy brain cells, and activate the formation of atherosclerosis in the anterior and internal cerebral arteries. endothelial dysfunction affects the automatic regulation of cerebral circulation. these processes may lead to plaque rupture and thrombosis, increasing the risk of stroke. inflammatory markers such as leukocytes, fibrinogen, and c-reactive protein are independent predictors of ischemic stroke. 22 long-term chronic infection can increase the risk of stroke. in a case-control study, 23 acute infection in the previous week was reported to be a trigger for ischemic stroke. acute and aggravated chronic infections may play a role by activating blood clotting and chronic infection and may lead to atherosclerosis. inflammatory reactions in patients with covid-19 may be a critical common determinant of atherosclerosis and stroke risk.when an individual is infected with novel coronavirus, individuals with immune function may experience excessive systemic immune responses and even die of acute respiratory distress syndrome and septic shock. 24 this mechanism is termed immunopathogenicity, in which the virus stimulates immunity and causes the immune system to attack itself. currently, it is critical to avoid excessive immune responses in the whole body as well as improve the immune function of individuals with weak immunity. cytokine storm is an over-activation of the immune system caused by infection, which leads to massive accumulation and exudation of inflammatory substances, leading to multiple organ failure and acute respiratory distress. this may be an important cause of death in severe and critical patients with covid-19. 25 accumulating evidence suggests that severe covid-19 patients might present with cytokine storm syndrome. 26 although the symptoms of most patients with coronavirus infection are mild at present, some patients present with milder symptoms in the early stage which rapidly worsen in the later stage; these patients eventually die of multiple organ failure, which is mainly due to the "cytokine storm". cytokines include interferon (ifn), interleukin (il), chemokine (chemokines), colony stimulating factor (csf), and tumor necrosis factor (tnf) which are secreted by immune cells. cytokines can have either pro-inflammatory or antiinflammatory effects. when sars swept through china in 2003, the cytokine storm was also a direct cause of death in many patients. 27 in 2009, excessive inflammation was observed in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome caused by h1n1a infection. 28 the toxicity of the virus depends on the severity of the induced immune response. however, different viruses trigger cytokine storms via various mechanisms. as such, they cause different cytokine changes. for example, sars-related cytokine storms are mainly related to interleukin (il)-1β, il6, il12, interferon (ifn)-γ, inducible protein (ip)-10, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp-1). 29 in contrast, cytokine storms caused by mers coronavirus are mainly associated with ifn γ, tumour necrosis factor (tnf)-α, il15, and il17. 30 in the above-mentioned study, doctors at wuhan zhongnan hospital observed that the blood levels of il2, il7, il10, granulocyte colony stimulating factor (gscf), mcp1, macrophage inflammatory protein (mip)-1α, and tnf-α in critically ill patients were significantly increased, suggesting that the cytokine storm was associated with disease severity. 1 low levels of cd4+t and cd8+t and higher levels of il-6 and il-10 were observed in severe patients. in this regard, t cell subsets and cytokines are positively correlated with the severity of covid-2019 symptoms. 31 on january 25, the lancet published an online paper on novel coronavirus. 32 coronavirus shows neuroinvasive characteristics secondary to peripheral organ replication in humans and animals. the invasion of the blood-brain barrier by coronavirus is related to the destruction of tight junctions of brain microvascular endothelial cells induced by coronavirus, which leads to blood-brain barrier dysfunction and enhanced blood-brain barrier permeability. 33 researchers detected sars-cov nucleic acid in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with sars. 34 after invading brain tissue, sars virus attracts cd68+ monocytes/macrophages and cd3+t lymphocytes to infected tissues through mixed cells to participate in the immune process. however, a large number of cytokines/ chemokines are released after a viral infection, which induces an inflammatory cascade reaction and promotes atherosclerosis, plaque rupture, and thrombosis. 35 toll-like receptor (tlr) is activated after coronavirus infection, which plays an important role in the mechanism of innate immunity and can promote atherosclerosis and accelerate the occurrence of ischemic stroke. 9,36 cytokine cascade aggravates ischemic brain damage and increases the risk of intracerebral hemorrhage after tissue plasminogen activator treatment. 37 il-6 can contribute to increased probability of a thrombotic event, induction of platelet production, and promotion of plaque disruption. 38 angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is the cellular receptor for sars-cov and sars-cov-2, the spike protein s1 interacts with the host ace2 receptor for adherence of viral particles to the cell membrane. [39] [40] [41] in sars, ace2 signaling plays an important role in the pathogenesis of severe lung failure after viral infection. 42 ace2 is highly expressed in vascular endothelial cells, heart, kidney, liver, digestive tract, and other organs. 43 tissues and organs expressing ace2 may be sites of interaction between novel coronavirus and immune cells. ace2 is a negative regulator of renin-angiotensin system (ras), which can balance many functions of ace. by targeting angiotensin ii (ang ii), ace2 shows protective effects in the cardiovascular system and many other organs. 44 ace2 deficiency impaired endothelial function in cerebral arteries in adult mice and augmented endothelial dysfunction during aging, 45 indicating that ace2 provides endothelial protection. ace2 inactivates ang ii while generating angiotensin (ang) 1-7 and exerts potent vasodilator effects via activation of the mas receptor. 46 ace2 is an important metabolic enzyme in ras, which plays a central role in maintaining heart and brain homeostasis. 46 sars-cov infections and spike protein of sars-cov reduce ace2 expression. 47 a decrease in ace2 is associated with a decrease in ang 1-7 which has vasoprotective effects. the balance between the classical ras ace-ang ii-angiotensin 1 receptor (at1r) regulatory axis and the ace2-ang 1-7-masr counterregulatory axis in the ras system is disturbed, leading to higher ang ii levels in the blood. angii levels in covid-19 patients are markedly elevated and linearly associated with viral load and lung injury. 48 ang ii stimulates nuclear factor-κb (nf-κb) activation in human monocytes. nf-κb participates in most signaling pathways involved in inflammation of atherosclerosis, which may contribute to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. 49 angiotensin 1/7 stimulates mas receptors to promote angiogenesis in brain tissue, inhibit oxidative stress, resist neuroinflammation, improve cerebral blood flow, and resist apoptosis. 50 therefore, ace2 as a target receptor can inhibit the beneficial effects of the ras system in the brain. due to ace2 involvement in blood pressure regulation, a subset of hypertensive patients with covid-19 may present with an abnormal increase in blood pressure and increased risk of cerebral hemorrhage. in addition, critically ill patients with covid-19 are often associated with severe thrombocytopenia, which may be risk factors for acute cerebrovascular events in these patients. therefore, we assume that angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (acei) and at1r inhibitors may be used to reduce pulmonary inflammation and mortality in patients with covid-19 pneumonia under conditions of controlled blood pressure 51,52 however, experiments in animals revealed that acei and angiotensin receptor blockers increase the number of ace2 receptors in the cardiopulmonary circulation, which increases the risk of severe disease outcomes. 53 clinical studies have demonstrated that blood of covid-19 patients contained higher levels of d-dimer and prolonged prothrombin time, 15 reflecting a hypercoagulable state of blood. pulmonary infection is related to platelet aggregation and activation of the coagulation system. 54 significantly increased levels of d-dimer in severe covid-19 patients were observed, 55 with superior prognosis in severe covid-19 patients with markedly elevated d-dimer levels. 57 decreased blood oxygen saturation leads to the release of inflammatory factors. 58 one possible explanation for the increase in blood coagulability is that a decrease in blood oxygen triggers inflammatory factors, catecholamine, increased plasma levels of tissue factors, and platelet aggregation, which alter capillary blood flow due to increased sympathetic activity and more widespread micro-endothelial damage, resulting in blood coagulability. 59 if covid-19 patients remain in a prolonged state of hypoxia, production of erythropoietin may increase, causing secondary polycythemia, increased hematocrit levels, increased blood viscosity, and slowing of blood flow. 60 more of these patients are concurrently complicated with risk factors of cerebrovascular disease, 15,32 making them more prone to embolic vascular events and increasing the probability of acute ischemic stroke.covid-19 patients often present with hypoxemia due to respiratory dysfunction, 15,61 the features of sever patients is acute respiratory distress syndrome. 62 when bodily oxygen content changes, the brain is the first organ to be affected, 63 resulting in a series of pathophysiological changes. hypoxia can dilate intracranial blood vessels and increase intracranial blood flow, cerebral capillary pressure, tissue fluid production, brain free radicals, membrane lipid peroxidation, and endogenous inhibitors; these effects may impact cell energy metabolism. 64, 65 anaerobic glycolysis in the brain produces increased lactic acid and oxygen free radicals and lipid peroxides, weakened antioxidant system, and blood-brain barrier dysfunction. 66 metabolic acidosis caused by hypoxia increases cerebral vasospasm and permeability, leading to interstitial brain edema, intracranial hypertension, 67 and decreased atp production caused by hypoxia. this initiates an injury cascade encompassing intracellular ca 2+ overload, glutamate excitotoxicity, and oxido-nitrosative stress, culminating in neuronal and astroglial necrosis, apoptosis, and neurocognitive deficits. 68the diagnosis of the confirmed case should be based on suspected cases and provide any one of the following pathogenic or serological evidence: (1) real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) for sars-cov-2 (2) genome sequencing of the coronavirus showed highly homogeneity with the sars-cov-2. (3) positive for the specific igm antibody and igg antibody to sars-cov-2 in serum test; or sars-cov-2 specific igg antibody changes from negative to positive, or titer rising ≥4 times in the recovery phase above that in the acute phase. 69 prevention at present, there is a lack of effective treatments for covid-19 virus infection. clinical research is underway for an effective therapeutic, but the most effective immediate action involves scientific prevention and isolation. people of all ages are not resistant to novel coronavirus and may be infected if transmission conditions are satisfied. however, the elderly and individuals with cerebrovascular diseases are at risk; therefore, prevention and control in these populations are particularly important. presently, the most effective way to treat the disease is to control the source of infection, use personal protective measures to reduce the risk of transmission, and protect vulnerable groups. it is suggested that the elderly and individuals with cerebrovascular diseases should reduce their outdoor activities, ensure good personal protection and hygiene, maintain good living habits, take the initiative to monitor the health of individuals and family members, ventilate and disinfect their rooms frequently, take medicine regularly, eat healthily, and maintain a positive mindset. if symptoms such as fever, cough, sore throat, chest tightness, and muscle soreness are present, individuals should undergo timely diagnosis, isolation, and treatment. when treating and nursing patients, medical staff have closer contact with patients and hence a higher risk of infection. among the 138 consecutive patients admitted to zhongnan hospital of wuhan university from january 1 to 28, the proportion of medical staff was as high as 29%. 15 a retrospective analysis of 1,099 patients diagnosed with covid-19 from 552 hospitals in 31 provinces revealed that the proportion of medical staff was 2.09%. 18 when providing medical services for diagnosed patients or individuals suspected of infection, medical staff should wear goggles, protective clothing, and other additional protective measures to strengthen their own protection and prevent crossinfection. 70, 71 treatment there is currently a lack of specific antiviral drugs for novel coronavirus. clinically, most patients are mainly treated with empirical antiviral, anti-infective, glucocorticoid drugs, and/or supportive care for the most critically ill patients. 16, 72 nevert heless, none of these approaches have resulted in curative effects. therefore, for covid-19 patients with cerebrovascular diseases, personalized medication should be used according to the individual factors of the patients. in addition to covid-19 symptoms, it is necessary to concurrently strengthen treatments for basic cerebrovascular diseases to effectively reduce covid-19-associated mortality and improve prognosis.the main treatment principle of cerebrovascular disease is to treat reversible etiology, control risk factors, and reduce complications. general treatment includes bed rest, monitoring vital signs, finger oxygen saturation, symptomatic support treatment, and maintaining water, electrolytes, acid-base balance, and stability of the internal environment. the negative psychological impact of quarantine is evident, 73 and psychological support may be conducive to symptom improvement of this disease. antiviral therapies 74 such as interferon-alpha (5 million u per dose or equivalent for adults, 2 ml of sterilized water for injection, twice a day nebulized inhalation), lopinavir/ritonavir (two tablets per administration, twice a day for no more than 10 days), ribavirin (recommended in combination with interferon or lopinavir/ritonavir, 500 mg for adults, two to three times a day, intravenous infusion, course of treatment no more than 10 days), chloroquine phosphate (500 mg, twice a day for adults, no more than 10 days), and abidol (200 mg, three times a day for adults, no more than 10 days) have been indicated. nevertheless, it is not recommended to use three or more antiviral drugs concurrently, and the use of related drugs should be stopped if intolerable side effects are experienced. convalescent plasma therapy is suitable for patients with rapid progression, severe, and critical illness. shufeng jiedu capsule (sfjdc, a traditional chinese medicine) may also improve the condition 74, 75 recently, a retrospective study of influenza, sars, and mers published in the lancet reported that the use of glucocorticoids in patients with sars and mers viral infection did not improve prognosis but caused problems such as delayed cure, secondary infections, and osteoporosis. therefore, it is recommended that glucocorticoids should not be used in the treatment of new coronary pneumonia. 76 redaciclovir holds the most potential for the treatment of 2019-ncov at present. 77 the results of animal experiments have demonstrated that compared with the control treatment, redaciclovir effectively reduced viral titer in lung tissue of mers-cov-infected mice and improved lung tissue injury. further, its curative effects were superior to those of lopinavir/ritonavir combined with interferon-β treatment. after the first case of novel coronavirus was diagnosed in the united states, after entering a critical state, the symptoms of dyspnea were significantly improved after the use of redcevir, and oxygen therapy was no longer required. however, research and development companies and physicians state that the effectiveness and safety of the drug have not been proven, and further clinical research is needed. the drug is currently in clinical trials 78 in china. anticoagulant therapy is recommended for secondary prevention of stroke in patients with acute cerebrovascular disease with an abnormal increase in d-dimer. after treatment, patients are admitted to the isolation ward of the infection department, and concurrent rounds by neurologists in the isolation ward should occur daily to assist doctors with patient management.covid-19 may cause respiratory diseases as well as other primary and secondary nervous system diseases. at present, neurological symptoms have been reported in covid-19 patients: acute cerebrovascular symptoms such as sudden speech confusion and limb paralysis; symptoms of intracranial infection such as headache, epilepsy, and disturbance of consciousness; symptoms of muscle damage such as soreness and weakness of limbs; and occasionally symptoms such as neuralgia, abnormal sensation. in this period of high incidence of covid-19, neurologists need to pay attention to this patient population, especially patients with nervous system symptoms. indeed, differential diagnosis of covid-19 and early detection, diagnosis, treatment, prevention, and countermeasures are warranted.t he spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) has already taken on pandemic proportions, having infected >100 000 people in 100 countries. 1 although the major current focus of public health authorities is to develop a coordinated global response to prepare health systems to meet this unprecedented challenge, a corollary concern has been identified that is of particular interest to clinicians and investigators with a major interest in hypertension. hypertension, coronary heart disease, and diabetes mellitus, particularly in elderly people, increase susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection. [1] [2] [3] given that ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) is the receptor that allows coronavirus entry into cells, the idea has come up that preexisting use of renin-angiotensin system (ras) blockers might increase the risk of developing a severe and fatal sars-cov-2 infection. 2 this commentary discusses this concern and concludes that based on current evidence, there is no reason to abandon ras blockers in patients receiving this important class of antihypertensive agents because of concerns of either increased risk of contracting sars-cov-2 or worsening its course.in 2003, li et al 4 demonstrated that ace2 is the receptor responsible for sars coronavirus entry. binding to the ace2 receptor requires the surface unit of a viral spike protein (s1; figure) . 5, 6 subsequent cell entry relies on priming by the serine protease tmprss2 (transmembrane protease, serine 2). 5 two recent reports confirmed that sars-cov-2 also enters the cell via this route. 7, 8 importantly, sars-cov-2 entry into the cell could be blocked both by s-protein neutralizing antibodies and tmprss2 inhibitors (camostat mesylate). 7 in the lung, ace2 expression occurs in type 2 pneumocytes and macrophages. generally, however, pulmonary ace2 expression is review low when compared with other organs like the intestine, testis, heart, and kidney. [9] [10] [11] ace2 and the ras ace2 displays considerable homology with ace (angiotensin-converting enzyme; 40% identity and 61% similarity) and on this basis received its name in 2000. 12 as a mono-carboxypeptidase, it hydrolyzes multiple peptides, including apelin, opioids, kinins, and angiotensins. much of the work on ace2 has centered on the biologic effects related to the formation of angiotensin-(1-7) from angiotensin ii. 13, 14 unlike ace, ace2 does not convert angiotensin i to angiotensin ii, nor do ace inhibitors block its activity. this is not surprising because the homology does not concern the active site. ace2 is the most potent of the 3 enzymes known to convert the vasoconstrictor angiotensin ii to angiotensin-(1-7). 9,15 angiotensin-(1-7) is increasingly recognized to have organ-protective properties that oppose and counterbalance those of angiotensin ii. within the ras, the other known target peptide for ace2 cleavage is angiotensin i, with the subsequent formation of angiotensin-(1-9) (figure) .ace2 is a membrane-bound enzyme, and its (soluble) levels in blood are very low. 9, 15 cleavage of its membrane-anchor (shedding) by adam17 (a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17) ( figure) underlies its occurrence in body fluids. angiotensin ii, via its at 1 (angiotensin ii type 1) receptor, upregulates adam17, thus increasing soluble ace2 levels. 16 in urine, soluble ace2 levels can be significant and likely originate from shedding from the proximal tubular membrane. in pathological states, shedding of ace2 is often increased, resulting in elevated soluble ace2 levels in blood, urine, and other body fluids. 17, 18 indeed, a doubling of soluble ace2 has been reported in cerebrospinal fluid of hypertensive patients. 16 however, given that by far the majority of ace2 is membrane-bound, even a doubling is unlikely to significantly alter the amount of membrane-bound ace2. for instance, if 2% of ace2 occurs in a soluble form, doubling would increase this to 4%, while still 96% of ace2 is membrane-bound. theoretically, ras blockade might (partly) reverse this, thus returning the percent of membrane-bound ace2 to 97-98. this is unlikely to seriously affect sars-cov-2 entry, which depends on membrane-bound (full-length) ace2.this is really at the crux of the question and the prevailing confusion and panic that we are witnessing in the medical community after the word came out that ace2 is the receptor for sars-cov-2. part of the confusion in social media and the public in general stands because, at times, ace inhibitors are confused with ace2 inhibitors. those are 2 different enzymes with 2 different active sites and any effect of ace inhibitors on ace2 activity must therefore be an indirect one, via their respective substrates. this is unlikely to have any relationship with sars-cov-2 binding. there are, however, limited reports that ace inhibitors affect the expression of ace2 in the heart and the kidney. 19 at 1 receptor blockers (arbs) alter ace2 expression more consistently in several studies, both at the mrna and protein level. [19] [20] [21] upregulation has been best documented in cardiac tissue and in the renal vasculature. yet, even here, results are diverse, required high doses, and often differed per arb and per organ. given the relationship with adam17, a clear distinction should be made between membrane-bound and soluble ace2 because an overview of the connections between renin-angiotensin system blockers, ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) and the coronavirus. the carboxypeptidase ace2 converts ang ii (angiotensin ii) to ang-(1-7) and ang i to ang-(1-9) (a), yet is not blocked by ace (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors, which prevent the conversion of ang i to ang ii. ace2 also binds and internalizes sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2; b), after priming by the serine protease tmprss2 (transmembrane protease, serine 2). shedding of membrane-bound ace2 by a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17 (adam17) results in the occurrence of soluble (s) ace2, which can no longer mediate sars-cov-2 entry and which might even prevent such entry by keeping the virus in solution. at 1 r (ang ii, via its type 1 receptor) upregulates adam17, and at 1 r blockers (arbs) would prevent this.increase in soluble ace2, if anything, might imply a decrease in membrane-bound ace2. because measuring membranebound ace2 in vivo is technically challenging, most publications from humans have reported levels of ace2 activity in blood that reflect the soluble ace2 protein circulating at very low levels. 22 if arbs as a drug class would truly upregulate membrane-bound ace2, it is reasonable to first assume that this is because of at 1 receptor blockade. in agreement with this assumption, angiotensin ii acutely induced ace2 internalization via its at 1 receptor in ace2-transfected neuroblastoma cells. 23 ace inhibitors should then have the same directional effect as arbs, although for these drugs there is very limited data showing upregulation of ace2. esler and esler 24 suggested that the difference is due to the increased levels of angiotensin ii occurring after arb treatment (but not ace inhibition): high angiotensin ii levels would impose an increased substrate load on the enzyme, thus requiring its upregulation. here it should be stressed that the carboxypeptidase ace2 has multiple substrates and that an alteration in the level of one of these substrates (angiotensin ii, occurring at fmol/ml levels, ie, many orders of magnitude below the actual ace2 concentration!) cannot possibly make a meaningful difference in its substrate load. taken together, there is evidence from animal studies that arbs may upregulate membrane-bound ace2, whereas ace inhibitors may not. the current data, however, are often conflicting and vary between arbs and tissue (eg, heart versus kidney). even if the reported upregulation of tissue ace2 by arbs in animal studies and generally with high doses could be extrapolated to humans, this would not establish that it is sufficient to facilitate sars-cov-2 entry.we like to point out that a potentially beneficial pulmonary effect of arbs needs to be considered as well. during acute lung injury, alveolar ace2 appears to be downregulated. 25, 26 this would decrease angiotensin ii metabolism, thus resulting in higher local levels of this peptide, which increases alveolar permeability and fosters lung injury. in this context, one can speculate that having increased ace2 expression by preexisting arbs treatment may actually be protective in the course of sars-cov-2 infection.it is not clear how hypertension was coded in the recent sars-cov-2 report 1 -we can only speculate that it might be based on the use of hypertension medication rather than actual blood pressure measurement. to truly address whether patients with hypertension are more likely to get serious and fatal sars-cov-2 infections, a prospective cohort study with incidence rates of sars-cov-2 infection in a cohort of patients with hypertension and patients without hypertension is required, with similar exposure history. instead, what has been reported is history of hypertension versus not, in sars-cov-2 patients, without any adjustment (eg, for age). the use of ras blockers as a causal link is an assumption that lacks evidence, as discussed here. we therefore strongly recommend that patients who are taking ace inhibitors or arbs for high blood pressure, heart failure, or other medical indications should not withdraw their current treatment regimens unless they are specifically advised to do so by their physician or healthcare provider. there is an additional caveat. any resulting destabilizing of blood pressure control in hypertension, which might possibly occur with medication changes, would carry unacceptable risks of precipitating strokes and heart attacks, risks which clearly are not just hypothetical. simply discontinuing antihypertensive agents is strongly discouraged and should not be an option, considering the widespread use of ras blockers throughout the world. in particular, asian people seem to be more prone to cough, and therefore, arbs may be preferable. 27the available clinical database from the pandemic to date is insufficient to provide sufficient detail on the variables of interest: hypertension diagnosis and the antihypertensive drugs prescribed to test the hypotheses proposed and provide certitude. hence such information is desperately needed. although no therapy is currently established for sars-cov-2 patients, the field is moving rapidly with potential approaches being considered. those include broad spectrum antivirals such as favipiravir and remdesivir, 28 tmprss2 inhibition with camostat mesylate, 7 and adam17 upregulation. a more specific approach might be using soluble recombinant ace2 protein to intercept the virus from binding to the fulllength ace2 anchored in the cell plasma membrane. 6 these approaches make the most sense for the treatment of patients with high risk for acute respiratory distress syndrome. for preventive purposes, the goal, of course, is the development of a sars-cov-2 vaccine.in closing, we see no reason to abandon or discontinue temporarily the use of ras blockers preventatively in sars-cov-2 patients. 29 there are some concerns that these agents, particularly arbs, can affect the expression of ace2 based on animal models that, however, have not been challenged with coronavirus infection to evaluate the impact of ras blocker therapy. since this information is lacking, we see no rationale to panic and to alter the prescription of this critically important class of antihypertensives. their therapeutic benefit, in our opinion, outweighs any potential risk of them predisposing to corona infection. moreover, it is unknown whether alternative antihypertensives do not carry the same risk. another question is what to do in infected individuals with risk to progress to end-stage renal disease. here the decision should be based on clinical judgment and considering the pros and cons of ras blockade in the acutely ill, such as the presence or absence of hypotension and kidney function.• ace2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) is the receptor that allows coronavirus entry into cells. • ace2 in its full-length form is a membrane-bound enzyme, whereas its shorter (soluble) form circulates in blood at very low levels. • ace inhibitors do not inhibit ace2 because ace and ace2 are different enzymes. • although angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blockers have been suggested to upregulate ace2, the evidence is not fully consistent and differs per angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blocker and per organ.• there are no data supporting that ace inhibitors or angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blockers facilitate coronavirus entry by increasing ace2 expression. • animal data support a potential protective pulmonary and cardiovascular effects of elevated ace2 expression. • treatment with ras blockers should not be discontinued because of concerns with coronavirus infection based on the currently available evidence.ruan, q. (2020) china [55] overlapping publication du, r. (2020) china [56] overlapping publication chen, t. (2020) china [57] overlapping publication impact of cardiovascular disease and cardiac injury on in-hospital mortality in patients with covid-19: a systematic review and meta-analysisin the past two decades, the pandemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2002 and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in 2012 have taken severe death tolls worldwide, with 916 and 800 deaths, respectively. 1 in late 2019, another virus with lethal respiratory infection potential identified as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov2) emerged and heralded another global pandemic. 2 since the outbreak in wuhan, more than 200 countries and regions have reported confirmed cases. the who coined covid-19 to describe 'coronavirus disease 2019' and declared this outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern. 3 as of 24 april 2020, there have been nearly 2 750 000 infections and over 192 000 deaths worldwide.within less than 6 months, covid-19 has registered a mortality record that is higher than that of sars and mers combined. 4 5 because of the overwhelming fatality cases caused by covid-19, much concern has been raised to determine the risk factors for poor prognosis, such as advanced age and male sex. 3 6 previous research has reported that patients with underlying cardiovascular disease (cvd) were prone to viral infection and also had a greater risk of developing severe cases and being admitted to intensive care unit. 7 8 sars-cov-2 can attack the respiratory system by targeting ace2. however, with the high tissue-specificity of ace2 expression in the cardiovascular system, cardiomyocytes may be particularly prone to damage. 9 several studies have reported a high incidence of elevated cardiac troponin in hospitalised patients, especially in those in critical conditions. 10 11 thus, patients with cvd complications may have poor prognosis when infected with sars-cov-2. therefore, here we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis on the available evidence to evaluate the association between underlying cvd and incident cardiac injury with in-hospital mortality risk in patients with covid-19.this meta-analysis was conducted in accordance with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses statement 12 and the meta analysis of observational studies in epidemiology statement. 13a comprehensive search was performed in pubmed, embase and web of science databases from 1 january 2020 to 14 april 2020. the following search terms were included: 'coronavirus', 'covid-19', '2019-ncov', 'sars-cov-2', 'cardiovascular disease', 'coronary heart disease', 'hypertension', 'cardiac injury', 'myocardia injury', 'mortality', 'death' and 'fatality'. in addition, the reference lists of relevant articles were reviewed for potential studies.studies were included for the meta-analysis if they met the following criteria: (1) exposure factor: cvd (coronary heart disease, cardiac disease and healthcare delivery, economics and global health figure 1 preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses flow diagram of study selection. chronic cardiac disease), hypertension or acute cardiac injury;(2) outcome interest: in-hospital mortality; and (3) study population: adult patients with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection. to avoid duplication, we contacted the authors whose studies were conducted in the same hospital. if the same batch of patients were enrolled or no specific information identifying the patients could be provided, study with the largest sample size was included.two researchers (xl and bg) independently screened the search results by titles and abstracts. any potentially relevant studies were retrieved with full texts for further evaluation. two authors (xl and bg) independently identified the eligible studies based on inclusion criteria. any disagreements were resolved through discussion with another researcher (ts).two researchers (xl and bg) independently extracted data from the enrolled studies via a preset standardised form. the following information was extracted: first author, publication year, study design, location, patients enrolled period, age, sex, prevalence of comorbidities, exposure factors and level of adjustment. newcastle-ottawa scale terms, 14 with total score of nine stars, were applied to evaluate the quality of case series studies or cohort studies separately. the studies with 7 points or more were considered of high quality.all analyses were performed using stata v.12.0 software. the unadjusted ors with 95% cis were calculated as the common risk estimates and then were pooled due to the limited data on multivariable adjusted outcomes. the heterogeneity among studies was evaluated by cochran's q-statistic and i 2 test. if i 2 ≤50%, a fixed effects model was adopted; otherwise, a random effects model was applied to meta-analysis. meta-regression analysis was performed to test the potential sources of heterogeneity among studies. sensitivity analyses were also performed by omitting one study at a time to evaluate the influence of individual study on the pooled results. publication bias was evaluated by visual inspection of asymmetry in funnel plots.patients or the public were not involved in the design, conduct, reporting, dissemination plans of our research. the initial database search yielded 1524 studies (figure 1). after removing duplicate publications, 825 studies were left and screened by title and abstract, and we identified 67 articles for full-text review. of these, 57 studies were excluded due to no relevant outcome, no exposure of interest, duplicated publication, not a primary study or medical intervention study (online supplementary file 1). no additional studies met the inclusion criteria from screening reference lists. when several studies were published by the same institution, the authors were contacted to ensure that no overlapping cohorts were analysed as separate studies. altogether, 10 studies comprising 3118 patients were included in this meta-analysis. [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] the main characteristics of the included studies are summarised in table 1. of all 10 studies, two were case series design 15 16 and the remaining eight were cohort studies. [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] all studies were conducted in wuhan, china, except for one study that enrolled patients nationwide. 17 the patients were all accrued from the end of december 2019 to february 2020. the mean age ranged from 49 years old 17 to 68 19 years old and the proportion of male patients ranged from 45% 22 to 67%. 21 the prevalence of cvd and hypertension ranged from 4% 17 to 15% 18 and from 17% 17 to 44%, 19 respectively, and from 15% 24 to 44% 15 of patients experienced cardiac injury during hospitalisation (table 2) . eight studies 15-17 19 21-24 reported the relationship between underlying cvd and in-hospital mortality risk (2515 patients and 127 deaths) in unadjusted model. five studies 15-17 23 24 consistently revealed a significantly higher death risk in the cvd group and the remaining three studies 19 21 22 reported no significant relationship between cvd and in-hospital mortality ( figure 2) . overall, the summary estimate demonstrated that patients with cvd had an approximately fivefold higher risk of mortality compared with non-cvd patients (unadjusted or 4.85, p<0.001; 95% ci 3.06 to 7.70). the heterogeneity across the studies was non-significant (i 2 =29.3%, p=0.194). seven studies 15-17 22-24 (2463 patients and 535 deaths) were included for the pre-existing hypertension and in-hospital mortality analysis with unadjusted ors. six studies 15-17 22-24 reported a significantly higher mortality risk in patients with previous hypertension, and the remaining study 19 showed no significant association (figure 3). the pooled unadjusted effect of hypertension on mortality risk was 3.67 (95% ci 2.31 to 5.83, p<0.001) with moderate heterogeneity (i 2 =57.4%, p=0.029).for cardiac injury, all eight studies 15 16 18-21 23 24 (1429 patients and 374 deaths) except one 21 reported that acute cardiac injury was significantly associated with a high mortality risk in unadjusted model ( figure 4) . the pooled effect of these studies (unadjusted or 21.15, 95% ci 10.19 to 43.94, p<0.001; heterogeneity: i 2 =70.5%, p=0.001) showed that patients with elevated troponin levels had a significant higher mortality risk than those with normal troponin levels.visual inspection of the funnel plots did not show significant asymmetry (online supplementary file 2). sensitivity analyses were conducted by systematically excluding one study at a time, and the results remained consistent with the primary analyses (online supplementary file 3). to explore potential sources of heterogeneity, meta-regression was applied to test the influence of study design, sample size, mean age and male proportion. none of these factors contributed significantly to the observed heterogeneity (online supplementary file 4).our study evaluated the impact of underlying cvd, hypertension and acute cardiac injury on in-hospital mortality in patients with covid-19. our results showed a positive association between previous cvd and hypertension with fatal outcomes, with unadjusted ors and 95% cis of 4.85 (3.06 to 7.70) and 3.67 (2.31 to 5.83) and a significant relationship between acute cardiac injury and in-hospital mortality (unadjusted or 21.15, 95% ci 10.19 to 43.94).the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) is a single-strand rna virus that shares several similarities with sars-cov and mers-cov in genetic sequencing and clinical presentation but is equipped with a more robust capacity for human-to-human transmission. 25 26 from the outset, the capacity of 2019-ncov to spread and infect people in wuhan, china, was alarming, and the infection has rippled throughout the rest of the world, causing severe morbidity and mortality. 27 therefore, there is a pressing need to identify risk factors for poor prognosis among patients with covid-19.patients with cardiovascular comorbidities were found to be more vulnerable to coronavirus infection and may have poor prognoses. 4 previous meta-analyses systematically tested the relationship between cvd and severity of the disease but with nonuniform definitions of clinical outcome. 28 29 the meta-analysis by zuin et al 30 included three studies and reported a positive association between hypertension and mortality risk in patients with covid-19. our study reinforced their conclusion and found that patients with cvd history also had an almost fivefold higher risk of mortality comparing with non-cvd patients. however, since our results were obtained using unadjusted ors, the exact role of cvd in the risk stratification of patients withwhat is already known on this subject? ► previous studies showed that covid-19 patients with preexisting cardiovascular disease (cvd) were more likely to be admitted to intensive care unit, and in-hospital cardiac injury was commonly seen in critically ill patients. however, the relationship between cvd and cardiac injury with fatal outcomes has not been fully elucidated.what might this study add? ► in this systematic review and meta-analysis, we found that in-hospital morality risk was significantly higher in covid-19 patients with underlying cvd or hypertension, and patients with acute cardiac injury had a worse prognosis.how might this impact on clinical practice? ► among patients with covid-19, those with established cardiovascular comorbidities and acute myocardial injury should be recognised earlier, and more aggressive treatment may be warranted. elevated troponin may be considered as an important predictor for mortality risk.covid-19 is still undetermined. there may be several mechanisms that account for the high mortality risk of covid-19 patients with cvd history. first, patients with underlying cvd are more likely to decline into an unstable haemodynamic status when infected with 2019-ncov. 31 severe pneumonia places a considerable workload on cardiac ventricles, which may exacerbate pre-existing left ventricular dysfunction, even causing cardiogenic shock. 4 second, inflammatory reactions caused by 2019-ncov infection might convert chronic coronary artery disease into acute coronary syndrome. 32 33 a profound systemic inflammation wave along with local inflammatory infiltration may lead to a hypercoagulative state and atherosclerotic plaque rupture, which may culminate in thrombotic events. 23 third, the priority of treatments, in favour of limiting nosocomial viral transmission while neglecting other medical issues, might predispose cvd patients to unfavourable clinical outcomes. the current interim guidelines suggest that patients with st-segment elevation myocardial infarction should consider thrombolysis first in the covid-19 era. 34 severe adverse effects such as cerebral haemorrhage and insufficient and undesignated coronary revascularisation caused by thrombolysis can increase the risk of death. acute cardiac injury is commonly recorded in patients with covid-19. 35 the incidence of cardiac injury among our enrolled studies ranged from 15% to 44%, which was higher than the prevalence of cvd (5%-15%). this suggested that 2019-ncov might attack cardiomyocytes through different pathways, other than exacerbating the already compromised cardiovascular system. 2019-ncov infection may lead to cardiac injury secondary to conditions causing oxygen supplement insufficiency, such as severe pneumonia, anaemia, hypotension and bradycardia. furthermore, by attacking myocardium via the highly expressed ace2 directly, 2019-ncov precipitated the release of cytokine and chemokine waves and caused myocardial inflammation, even leading to fulminant myocarditis in severe cases. 31 36 meanwhile, our results complied with guo et al, 18 who reported that the death risk of cardiac injury was much higher than that of pre-existing cvd. their study revealed that patients with copresence of cvd and cardiac injury registered the highest mortality rate of 69.4%, while those with only underlying cvd had a relatively favourable prognosis (mortality rate of 13.3%). furthermore, elevated troponin was reported to be associated with a high risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome, hepatic dysfunction and acute renal injury in patients with covid-19. 18 37 the study by shi et al 20 demonstrated that elevated troponin was an independent risk factor for death after adjusting other confounders. 20 thus, this index may be considered as a biomarker to predict the mortality risk of patients with covid-19. more studies are warranted to confirm this finding and provide probable suggestions on the risk stratification of patients with covid-19.to the best of our knowledge, our study is the first systematic review and meta-analysis to investigate the association of underlying cvd and acute cardiac injury with mortality risk in patients with covid-19. this meta-analysis may provide insights into the prognosis stratification of patients with covid-19. however, there are some important limitations that should be mentioned. first, our meta-analysis was conducted on unadjusted ors due to the limited data on multivariableadjusted outcomes. the observed association of cvd and cardiac injury with mortality might be confounded by other risk factors, such as advanced age, and cofounder adjustment may distort our meta-analysis results towards a less significant risk. thus, large cohort studies with multivariate analysis are needed to provide more evidence on this issue. second, our study could not determine the causal effects of cardiovascular comorbidities on mortality due to the inherent limitations of observational studies. future studies aiming to investigate this causal association are warranted. third, the heterogeneity among studies for cardiac injury was significantly high, which may be caused by the study design and patient inclusion criteria. however, the metaregression exploring the potential sources did not find significant results, and the results remained consistent in sensitivity analyses. finally, most of the studies enrolled were conducted in wuhan, china. therefore, these results should be treated with caution when extrapolated to other populations. since wuhan was the initial epicentre of the outbreak, these early evidence may provide clinical implications and insights for researchers and clinicians in other parts of the world.covid-19 patients with underlying cardiovascular comorbidities, including cvd and hypertension, may face a greater risk of fatal outcomes. acute cardiac injury may act as a marker of in-hospital mortality risk. given the unadjusted results of our meta-analysis, future well-designed studies with multivariate analysis are warranted to confirm these findings.dear sir,as of today’s reports, the global number of confirmed cases of covid-19 has surpassed 150,000. the number of known cases is increasing by several thousand every day. on march 11, 2020, who publicly characterized covid-19 as a pandemic. the issue is of serious concern and deserves momentous attention.coronaviruses are a family of viruses that cause respiratory illnesses. most of them cause illness in animals, but seven known types of coronaviruses cause illness in humans. the coronavirus sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2) is one of those viruses – it causes the illness currently known as coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19).though we are still learning what exactly puts someone at greater risk of developing a severe illness with covid-19, early information indicates older patients and those with chronic medical conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and cardio-cerebrovascular diseases may be at higher risk (1, 2, 3). infection caused by covid-19 is likely to disturb metabolic regulation. diabetic patients with covid-19 may face an altered immune response on the background of an already compromised health status owing to the diabetes-related complications and/or aging.the most important findings in patients with hyperglycemia and a viral infection were significant worsening of symptoms, which implies greater morbidity in these patients when compared to those without diabetes (3). however, the pathophysiology of this association remains uncertain. it is not known whether hyperglycemia changes the virulence of the infection, or if the virus modifies the glycemic metabolism. what we know is that diabetic patients are more susceptible to infection, and this can impact on glucose metabolism (4). dm is not just a disorder of glucose metabolism, but a chronic inflammatory condition characterized by multiple changes in lipid, carbohydrate and protein profiles (5). such inflammatory processes are due to hyperglycemia which leads to increased synthesis of glycosylation end products (ages), activates macrophages and other cells of the immune system, increase oxidative stress and promote the synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines, besides stimulating the synthesis of adhesion molecules that facilitate inflammation in the tissues (5). the inflammatory process and its complications might provide a higher propensity to infections or a greater severity of these conditions. another important issue is how this inflammatory and immune response occur in diabetic patients who acquire a viral infection, as well as whether the virus itself interferes with insulin secretion or the glycemic control.at this stage, the biological mechanism of the relationship between covid-19 and diabetes is not known, but the association for the severity of cases and death is pronounced. we need to develop a hypothesis to explain the causal path underlying the more severe clinical presentation of covid-19 infection and subsequent death in diabetic patients. biochemical tests are also essential to clarify the molecular pathophysiology involved.the association of covid-19 and dm is of substantial public health importance and deserves proper attention, since a large and diverse population is being affected globally. nowadays this comorbidity poses a relevant threat to human health, and prospective well-designed studies to elucidate the biological mechanism and the best clinical management of this association are urgently needed.homephilipphilip.home@newcastle.ac.uktranslational and clinical research institute, the medical school, framlington place, newcastle upon tyne, ne20 9hu, ukdear sirit was very useful to see the review published in the journal on diabetes and covid 19 infection [6]. in it you highlight that people with diabetes have a death rate perhaps around four times that of the background population, and i note that it has been suggested over 20-40 % of deaths in china/wuhan were in people with diabetes [7,8], clearly it is important to understand why.there will be some confounders here in the form of associations with other risk factors for dying with a covid-19 infection, notably age and cardiovascular disease, but these cannot explain all the excess. we need to understand this better to mitigate the risk.it is reported that most of the deaths are occurring in the context of pneumonitis [7,8], and in particularly onset of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards), a condition in which excess fluid in the alveoli blocks gas exchange between air and blood.people with diabetes, and many with cardiovascular disease (cvd) without diabetes, have a very permeable vasculature, identified since the 1980s as albumin lead through the kidneys (micro- and macro-albuminuria), but even prior to that as a late blush over the retina with intravenous fluorescence marker injection [9]. this leaky vasculature is associated with vascular inflammation, metabolic syndrome, and steatohepatitis, as well as cvd per se.it would seem not too far a stretch, in the absence of further research as yet, to assume that prior enhancement of vascular permeability could account for the increased rate of ards and death in people with diabetes, particularly type 2 diabetes, and also some with cvd.aside from further research i would suggest that those already with albuminuria (a routine yearly test for people with diabetes), those with higher liver enzyme markers (alt), and perhaps those with diabetes associated dyslipidaemia (low hdl cholesterol) should take particular steps to self-isolate.it is unclear to me how fast vascular inflammation can be ameliorated by improved blood glucose control (nearly all glucose-lowering medications reduce microalbuminuria in time), but tight glucose control in infected persons with insulin would meanwhile seem sensible. very poor glucose control is further known to interfere with leukocyte/lymphocyte function [10].yours sincerely.philip home.translational and clinical research institute, newcastle university, uk.references6guptar.ghosha.singha.k.misraa.clinical considerations for patients with diabetes in times of covid-19diabetes metabolic syndr clin res rev142020211e2127joint commission. report of the who-china joint mission on coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). 16-24 february 2020. available at https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf (accessed 13 march 2020)8the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team. the epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus diseases (covid-19) — china 2020. china cdc weekly 2020; 2(x): 1-10. available from https://github.com/cmrivers/ncov/blob/master/covid-19.pdf for china cvd weekly (accessed 13 march 2020)9rask-madsenc.kingg.l.vascular complications of diabetes: mechanisms of injury and protective factorscell metab17201320332331228110pozzilli p, signore e, leslie rdg. infections, immunity and diabetes. in, alberti kgmm, zimmet p, defronzo ra (ed) international textbook of diabetes, second edition. chichester: john wiley, 1997, 1231-1241. guptariteshfortis cdoc hospital, chirag enclaverenin angiotensin system blockade and covid-19 diseasedear editor,we recently published an article highlighting the special concerns while managing patients with diabetes in the times of covid-19 pandemic11. there have been some concerns about the use of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), which were not clarified in our publication12. we are summarising the current evidence in this regard and will try to arrive at a reasonable conclusion.in the absence of a vaccine and an antiviral drug for the covid-19 infection, several therapeutic approaches are being studied. one such approach is the use of inhibitors of the renin angiotensin system, namely ace inhibitors and arbs. on the other hand, some concern has been raised about the fact that patients on these agents might be at an increased risk of infection by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars cov-2).angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) is the receptor for sars cov-2 as well as other coronaviruses and is expressed in type 2 alveolar epithelial cells and endothelium. the s-glycoprotein on the surface of coronavirus binds to ace2. this leads to a conformational change in the s-glycoprotein and allows proteolytic digestion by host cell proteases (tmprss2) ultimately leading to internalization of the virion13. viral s-glycoprotein, tmprss2 and ace-2 inhibition are potential targets of therapy and possibly vaccine development.as ace-2 is essential to coronavirus infection, its blockade is thought to be beneficial in preventing/treating this infection. a retrospective analysis found reduced rates of death and endotracheal intubation in patients with viral pneumonia who were continued on ace inhibitors14. mice with coronavirus induced lung injury showed improvement when treated with losartan15. as far as cvid-19 infection is concerned, the data on ras activation or the effect of its blockade is limited at present. hypokalaemia could be a marker of ras activation and high incidence of hypokalaemia has been reported in patients with covid-19 infection16.despite these small studies suggesting the benefit of drugs acting on ras, there is some data, albeit scarce, from animal models and human studies that treatment with ace inhibitors and arb could cause up regulation of ace217. ibuprofen and thiazolidinediones have also been shown to do the same18 , 19. increased expression of ace2 could theoretically increase the risk of infection with sars cov-2. this could be a concern in people with diabetes who are at already elevated risk of infections because of many other factors. however, currently, there is no evidence to support this hypothesis. in view of lack of robust evidence for either benefit or harm, it is reasonable for patients to continue using ace inhibitors and arb, as recommended by european society of cardiology council on hypertension and european society of hypertension.20 , 21.references11guptar.ghosha.singha.k.misraa.clinical considerations for patients with diabetes in times of covid-19 epidemicdiabetes metab syndr1432020 mar 102112123217217512fangl.karakiulakisg.rothm.are patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus at increased risk for covid-19 infection?lancet respir med2020 mar 11s2213-2600(20)30116-3011813hoffmannm.kleine-weberh.krügern.müllerm.drostenc.pöhlmanns.the novel coronavirus 2019 (2019-ncov) uses the sars-coronavirus receptor ace2 and the cellular protease tmprss2 for e ntry into target cellsbiorxiv20202020.01.31.92904214henryc.zaizafounm.stocke.ghamandes.arroligaa.c.whiteh.d.impact of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and statins on viral pneumoniaproc (bayl univ med cent).31420184194233094897015yangp.guh.zhaoz.wangw.caob.laic.yangx.zhangl.duany.zhangs.chenw.zhenw.caim.penningerj.m.jiangc.wangx.angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) mediates influenza h7n9 virus-induced acute lung injurysci rep4201470272539176716chen d, li x, song q, hu c, su f, daij, ye y, huangj, zhang x. hypokalemia and clinical implications in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). medrxiv preprint doi: 10.1101/2020.02.27.2002853017lix.c.zhangj.zhuoj.l.the vasoprotective axes of the renin-angiotensin system: physiological relevance and therapeutic implications in cardiovascular, hypertensive and kidney diseasespharmacol res125201721382861936718qiaow.wangc.chenb.zhangf.liuy.luq.guoh.yanc.sunh.hug.yinx.ibuprofen attenuates cardiac fibrosis in streptozotocin-induced diabetic ratscardiology13122015971062589680519zhangw.xuy.z.liub.wur.yangy.y.xiaox.q.zhangx.pioglitazone upregulates angiotensin converting enzyme 2 expression in insulin-sensitive tissues in rats with high-fat diet-induced nonalcoholic steatohepatitisscientific world journal201420146034092455831720position statement of the esc council on hypertension on ace-inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers. mar 11 2020. https://www.escardio.org/councils/council-on-hypertension-(cht)/news/position-statement-of-the-esc-council-on-hypertension-on-ace-inhibitors-and-ang21esh statement on covid-19. march 12, 2020. https://www.eshonline.org/spotlights/esh-statement-on-covid-19/(accessed 17 march 2020) clinical considerations for patients with diabetes in times of covid-19 pandemic dear sir, as of today's reports, the global number of confirmed cases of covid-19 has surpassed 150,000. the number of known cases is increasing by several thousand every day. on march 11, 2020, who publicly characterized covid-19 as a pandemic. the issue is of serious concern and deserves momentous attention.coronaviruses are a family of viruses that cause respiratory illnesses. most of them cause illness in animals, but seven known types of coronaviruses cause illness in humans. the coronavirus sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2) is one of those viruses e it causes the illness currently known as coronavirus disease-2019 (covid- 19) .though we are still learning what exactly puts someone at greater risk of developing a severe illness with covid-19, early information indicates older patients and those with chronic medical conditions such as hypertension, diabetes and cardiocerebrovascular diseases may be at higher risk [1e3] . infection caused by covid-19 is likely to disturb metabolic regulation. diabetic patients with covid-19 may face an altered immune response on the background of an already compromised health status owing to the diabetes-related complications and/or aging.the most important findings in patients with hyperglycemia and a viral infection were significant worsening of symptoms, which implies greater morbidity in these patients when compared to those without diabetes [3] . however, the pathophysiology of this association remains uncertain. it is not known whether hyperglycemia changes the virulence of the infection, or if the virus modifies the glycemic metabolism. what we know is that diabetic patients are more susceptible to infection, and this can impact on glucose metabolism [4] . dm is not just a disorder of glucose metabolism, but a chronic inflammatory condition characterized by multiple changes in lipid, carbohydrate and protein profiles [5] . such inflammatory processes are due to hyperglycemia which leads to increased synthesis of glycosylation end products (ages), activates macrophages and other cells of the immune system, increase oxidative stress and promote the synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines, besides stimulating the synthesis of adhesion molecules that facilitate inflammation in the tissues [5] . the inflammatory process and its complications might provide a higher propensity to infections or a greater severity of these conditions. another important issue is how this inflammatory and immune response occur in diabetic patients who acquire a viral infection, as well as whether the virus itself interferes with insulin secretion or the glycemic control.at this stage, the biological mechanism of the relationship between covid-19 and diabetes is not known, but the association for the severity of cases and death is pronounced. we need to develop a hypothesis to explain the causal path underlying the more severe clinical presentation of covid-19 infection and subsequent death in diabetic patients. biochemical tests are also essential to clarify the molecular pathophysiology involved. the association of covid-19 and dm is of substantial public health importance and deserves proper attention, since a large and diverse population is being affected globally. nowadays this comorbidity poses a relevant threat to human health, and prospective well-designed studies to elucidate the biological mechanism and the best clinical management of this association are urgently needed.it was very useful to see the review published in the journal on diabetes and covid 19 infection [6]. in it you highlight that people with diabetes have a death rate perhaps around four times that of the background population, and i note that it has been suggested over 20e40% of deaths in china/wuhan were in people with diabetes [7,8], clearly it is important to understand why.there will be some confounders here in the form of associations with other risk factors for dying with a covid-19 infection, notably age and cardiovascular disease, but these cannot explain all the excess. we need to understand this better to mitigate the risk.it is reported that most of the deaths are occurring in the context of pneumonitis [7, 8] , and in particularly onset of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards), a condition in which excess fluid in the alveoli blocks gas exchange between air and blood.people with diabetes, and many with cardiovascular disease (cvd) without diabetes, have a very permeable vasculature, identified since the 1980s as albumin lead through the kidneys (microand macro-albuminuria), but even prior to that as a late blush over the retina with intravenous fluorescence marker injection [9] . this leaky vasculature is associated with vascular inflammation, metabolic syndrome, and steatohepatitis, as well as cvd per se.it would seem not too far a stretch, in the absence of further research as yet, to assume that prior enhancement of vascular permeability could account for the increased rate of ards and death in people with diabetes, particularly type 2 diabetes, and also some with cvd.aside from further research i would suggest that those already with albuminuria (a routine yearly test for people with diabetes), those with higher liver enzyme markers (alt), and perhaps those with diabetes associated dyslipidaemia (low hdl cholesterol) should take particular steps to self-isolate.it is unclear to me how fast vascular inflammation can be ameliorated by improved blood glucose control (nearly all glucose-lowering medications reduce microalbuminuria in time), but tight glucose control in infected persons with insulin would meanwhile seem sensible. very poor glucose control is further known to interfere with leukocyte/lymphocyte function [10]. dear editor,we recently published an article highlighting the special concerns while managing patients with diabetes in the times of covid-19 pandemic [11] . there have been some concerns about the use of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), which were not clarified in our publication [12] . we are summarising the current evidence in this regard and will try to arrive at a reasonable conclusion.in the absence of a vaccine and an antiviral drug for the covid-19 infection, several therapeutic approaches are being studied. one such approach is the use of inhibitors of the renin angiotensin system, namely ace inhibitors and arbs. on the other hand, some concern has been raised about the fact that patients on these agents might be at an increased risk of infection by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars cov-2).angiotensin converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) is the receptor for sars cov-2 as well as other coronaviruses and is expressed in type 2 alveolar epithelial cells and endothelium. the s-glycoprotein on the surface of coronavirus binds to ace2. this leads to a conformational change in the s-glycoprotein and allows proteolytic digestion by host cell proteases (tmprss2) ultimately leading to internalization of the virion [13] . viral s-glycoprotein, tmprss2 and ace-2 inhibition are potential targets of therapy and possibly vaccine development.as ace-2 is essential to coronavirus infection, its blockade is thought to be beneficial in preventing/treating this infection. a retrospective analysis found reduced rates of death and endotracheal intubation in patients with viral pneumonia who were continued on ace inhibitors [14] . mice with coronavirus induced lung injury showed improvement when treated with losartan [15] . as far as cvid-19 infection is concerned, the data on ras activation or the effect of its blockade is limited at present. hypokalaemia could be a marker of ras activation and high incidence of hypokalaemia has been reported in patients with covid-19 infection [16] .despite these small studies suggesting the benefit of drugs acting on ras, there is some data, albeit scarce, from animal models and human studies that treatment with ace inhibitors and arb could cause up regulation of ace2 [17] . ibuprofen and thiazolidinediones have also been shown to do the same [18, 19] . increased expression of ace2 could theoretically increase the risk of infection with sars cov-2. this could be a concern in people with diabetes who are at already elevated risk of infections because of many other factors. however, currently, there is no evidence to support this hypothesis. in view of lack of robust evidence for either benefit or harm, it is reasonable for patients to continue using ace inhibitors and arb, as recommended by european society of cardiology council on hypertension and european society of hypertension [20, 21] .this article explains how the renin-angiotensin system (ras) interacts with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and also with the novel coronavirus, sars-cov-2, which causes infection and subsequent acute lung and probably heart injury [covid-19 (1-3)]. as well as identifying potential therapeutic strategies for treating acute lung injury and myocarditis in covid-19 [see also (4) (5) (6) ], this article provides a background to the management of patients with essential hypertension in accordance with recommendations made in the joint statement issued by the heart failure society of america, the american college of cardiology and the american heart association (7) that patients who are using drugs that block the ras should continue to use them during this pandemic. it also describes why the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) is associated with less severe covid-19 infections (8, 9) .there are two major arms of the ras, one arm, the angiotensin ii (ang ii)-ang ii type 1 receptor (at 1 r) pathway is pro-inflammatory and can cause acute lung injury (10, 11) . the other arm, the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2)-ang-(1-7)-mas receptor (masr) pathway is anti-inflammatory because ace2 metabolizes ang ii, thus reducing its levels and converting it to the anti-inflammatory peptide, ang-(1-7) [ figure 1a , (2, 12) ].ace2 is the receptor for coronaviruses, including sars-cov-2 (4) . as a result of sars-cov-2 binding to ace2, the enzyme is no longer functional (13) . thus, the pro-inflammatory ang ii-at 1 r is no longer blocked by the ace2-ang-(1-7)-masr pathway and it is this imbalance that causes acute lung injury (13) . a multi-centered double blind clinical trial has recently been established to test the efficacy of treating patients suffering from covid-19 with an arb (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ ct2/show/nct04312009). a second is investigating the outcomes of treatment of covid-19 patients with aceis or arbs (https:// clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct04331574).coronaviruses are a group of viruses that have in recent years caused epidemics of acute respiratory syndromes. the first major epidemic was sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome)-cov in 2003 which was responsible for 8,000 deaths; the second was mers (middle east respiratory syndrome), which occurred in 2012. the most recent is sars-cov-2 which causes covid-19. it was first recognized in china in december 2019 and is now sweeping the world. sars-cov-2 is already responsible for more cases of infection and also more deaths than the two previous coronavirus epidemics. there are also a number of other coronaviruses that cause upper respiratory tract infections, in particular hcov-nl63.sars-cov and sars-cov-2 both enter the cell by binding to ace2 (13, 14) , as does hcov-nl63 (15) . hcov-nl63, like sars-cov-2, can cause mild respiratory infections, but most commonly affects the young (16) . it has, however, been associated with bronchiolitis and croup but does not cause the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) characteristic of sars-cov-2 infection. the differences in the severity of illness caused by these two viruses could be related to a differing affinity of the viruses to ace2 (17) or the fact that entry of hcov-nl63 into cells requires intracellular acidification while sars-cov entry can occur independent of intracellular acidification (18) . mers-cov binds to a different receptor, dipeptidyldipeptidase4 (dpp4) (19) , and another human coronavirus, hcov-229e, uses aminopeptidase n (apn) as its receptor (20) . these receptors are membrane-bound proteases, and all can affect the production or metabolism of angiotensin peptides (21, 22) .zhang et al. in a clinical study of 140 patients found that hypertension and diabetes were the two most common comorbidities in patients with covid-19 (23) . the increase in the prevalence of these two comorbidities in patients with severe disease was not significant when compared with those with infections that were not severe (23) . in a study by guan et al. 261 patients (23.7%) had a coexisting disorder and 21.5% of them reached the composite end-point (admission to icu, use of mechanical ventilation or death) (24) . of the 15% that had hypertension, and 7.4% that had diabetes, 13.1 and 6.1% (respectively), of these patients reached the composite end-point. it should be noted that hypertension and diabetes are very common comorbidities, no other co-existing disorders were as prevalent in this cohort.there has been considerable debate about the use of drugs that block the ras in the treatment of hypertensive patients who have covid-19 (25) . this debate has not adequately considered the roles of local pulmonary and circulating rass in the pathogenesis of covid-19. put simply, ace2, the receptor for entry of sars-cov and sars-cov-2, also activates a ras pathway that prevents acute lung injury (1, 2) . these 'ying' and 'yang' actions of ace2 have caused an apparent dilemma concerning the use of ras blocking drugs in the treatment of hypertension and diabetes. this is because while they upregulate the sars-cov-2 receptor (ace2) (a means for viral entry into cells), they also protect tissues from the pro-inflammatory actions of ang ii and could be an effective therapeutic strategy to manage covid-19 induced lung injury [see also (4, 5) ]. this seems to be the case in the light of recent clinical studies (8, 9) . figure 1a shows the major arms of the ras that are involved in the pathogenesis of coronavirus-induced acute lung injury. we have avoided including a number of other ras pathways involved in the metabolism of ang ii for simplicity. a more thorough description of these pathways can be obtained elsewhere (12) . as seen in figure 1b , there are two major pathways involved in the pathogenesis of coronavirus-induced infections. both pathways involve the formation of ang ii from ang i, a peptide produced by the action of renin on angiotensinogen. the octapeptide, ang ii, is formed by the action of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace) on ang i. ang ii can bind to two receptors, the at 1 r and the at 2 r, or it can be broken down by number of proteases to smaller peptides that have a variety of biological actions.the most important pathway for ang ii break down is via the removal of one amino acid from its c-terminus by a zincdependent carboxy peptidase, ace2, to generate the peptide, ang-(1-7), which acts on another receptor known as the masr. there are other pathways that can also generate ang-(1-7) (12). these two ras pathways (ang ii-at 1 r) and ace2-ang-(1-7)-masr have opposing actions. in addition, ang ii can act via the at 2 r to produce effects similar to those generated by the ace2-ang (1-7)-masr pathway (12) .the ang ii-at 1 r axis is well-known because it is responsible for hypertension; it raises blood pressure both through actions in the brain on the sympathetic nervous system, and in peripheral blood vessels causing vasoconstriction. this axis also controls sodium reabsorption partly through its own actions in the kidney but also because it stimulates the release of the sodium retaining hormone, aldosterone, from the adrenal gland.there are other actions of this pathway that are proinflammatory, and which stimulate fibrosis. the ace2-ang-(1-7)-masr pathway on the other hand lowers blood pressure, possibly through production of nitric oxide. furthermore, the ace2-ang-(1-7)-masr pathway is anti-inflammatory. thus,the effects of angiotensin peptides on proliferation, angiogenesis, vasoconstriction, inflammation and fibrosis. note the effects of angiotensin ii via the angiotensin ii type i receptor (at 1 r) are blocked by its interaction with the angiotensin ii type ii receptor (at 2 r) and by its metabolism to ang-(1-7) acting via the mas receptor (masr). (b) sars-cov-2, by inhibiting ace2, blocks the metabolism of angiotensin ii to ang-(1-7) so blocking the anti-inflammatory pathway and causing high levels of angiotensin ii. angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) prevent the formation of angiotensin ii and angiotensin receptor blocking drugs (arbs) prevent angiotensin ii from causing inflammation and fibrosis.ace2 not only breaks down ang ii but also produces a vasodilator anti-inflammatory molecule, ang-(1-7) (26).the circulating ras is an endocrine system capable of reaching the brain, the heart and the lungs but there are also local tissue rass, in many organs, such as the heart, the kidney, the female reproductive tract, and the brain. there is also a local lung ras (27) that has been implicated in the etiology of pulmonary fibrosis (11, 28) .through a combination of circulating and tissue systems, the ras can have powerful effects in the lungs. renin is released from the kidneys into venous blood and renal lymphatics. it produces ang i from angiotensinogen, which is produced by the liver. ang i in the venous blood returning to the heart and lungs is converted in the lung by ace to ang ii. thus, the lung is exposed to high levels of ang ii.the gene for ace2 is located on xp22 and contains 18 exons, many of which are similar to the ace gene. it is a zn carboxypeptidase with only one catalytic site, and it has 40% homology with ace. it is an ectoenzyme with its n-terminus and catalytic site facing the extracellular space so it can metabolize circulating peptides (29) . ace inhibitors (aceis) do not affect its activity.the spike (s) protein on the surface of the sars-cov-2 (covid-19) mediates receptor recognition and membrane fusion. the spike protein is trimeric and, on fusion, separates into s1 and s2 subunits. s1 contains the receptor binding domain that directly binds to the catalytic site of ace2. when this occurs a cleavage site on the s2 protein develops which is acted on by host proteases resulting in membrane fusion (14) . the s protein of sars-cov-2 binds to the catalytic site of ace2 more efficiently than does the sars-cov (30); unfortunately antibodies that recognize the sars-cov receptor binding domain (rbd) do not recognize the sars-cov-2 rbd (30). however, sera from convalescent sars patients cross neutralized the sars-spike protein (s)-driven entry into cells (31) and polyclonal murine antibodies directed against the sars-cov spike protein (s) potently inhibit sars-cov-2 s cell entry (32) .there is a widespread distribution of ace2 throughout the body (33), including the lungs (11), heart (34, 35) , and kidney (36) .coronaviruses gain access to the body via the respiratory tract and it has recently been shown that nasal goblet cells, type ii pneumocytes and ileal enterocytes all possess the necessary combination of ace2 and tmprss2 for viral entry to be successful (31, 37) . hcov-nl63 binds to human airway epithelial cells in vitro (38) . in the lung, ace2 is widely distributed throughout the bronchial and pulmonary epithelium and the pulmonary capillaries (39) . ace2 protects the lung from the pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic actions of circulating ang ii by metabolizing ang ii to ang-(1-7), which, acting via the masr, inhibits ang ii-at 1 r pro-inflammatory pathways [ figure 1a , (4) ].ace2 levels vary with age, being highest in young animals and lowest in older animals, levels in older males and females being 78 and 67% lower, respectively (40) . this suggests that young people are more likely to get the sars coronavirus infection than older people, as appears to be the case. on the other hand, decreased production of ace2 in the elderly could be one reason why coronaviruses cause more serious complications in older persons. it has to be said however, that there has not been a systematic study of the relationships between age and ace2 expression in human tissues and, as explained below, there may be species specific differences. in the lungs (1, 2), the heart (35, 41) , and the kidney, ace2 (36) protects against the pro-inflammatory actions of ang ii acting via the at 1 r. figure 1b shows two sites of action of drugs that block the activity of the ras mediated by the interaction of ang ii with the at 1 r. one of the two classes of drugs commonly used in clinical practice, blocks the activity of the ras by blocking the formation of ang ii; it inhibits the activity of ace. ace is a zn containing carboxypeptidase that removes a dipeptide from the c-terminal end of the decapeptide, ang i, thus generating the active peptide responsible for most actions of the ras, ang ii. drugs that block this enzyme are known as ace inhibitors (aceis). they have no direct effect on the activity of ace2, except by limiting the amount of ang ii that is produced.the second group of drugs are known as angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs); they block the interaction of ang ii with the at 1 r. arbs do not reduce ang ii levels.the use of these drugs could result in two significant consequences:ii results from blocking ang ii's effects on blood pressure and sodium and water balance and indirectly causing positive feedback on renin release. high levels of ang ii will result in increased conversion of ang ii to ang-(1-7) by ace2 and increased interaction of ang ii with the at 2 r. this means that not only are the pro-inflammatory effects of ang ii-at 1 r prevented but the anti-inflammatory effects mediated by the ace2-ang-(1-7)-masr axis are enhanced and ang ii-at 2 r's anti-inflammatory effects are also sustained. as well, it has been shown in the heart that arbs cause upregulation of ace2 because they prevent ang ii-at 1 r mediated reductions in ace2 activity (42) . it is not known however, if this upregulation of ace2 occurs in the lungs. 2. aceis block the formation of ang ii, so there is no associated enhancement of any anti-inflammatory effects mediated by the ace2-ang-(1-7)-masr axis and the at 2 r nor would there be up-regulation of ace2. there is only withdrawal of ang ii-at 1 r's pro-inflammatory actions.lung ace2 is the receptor for both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (13, 31) . the spike (s) protein binds to ace2 and enters the cell where it is modified by a serine protease (tmprss2). this protease is essential for cell entry of the virus (31) . the binding of coronaviruses to ace2 and the modification of its spike protein by tmprss2 are essential for infection. binding of the sars-cov spike protein to ace2 results in reduced ace2 protein levels (13) . kuba et al. (13) showed that ace2 -/-knockout mice did not get infected with sars-cov and did not get acute lung inflammation (13) . thus, it would appear that low levels of pulmonary ace2 protect against coronavirus infection. there is however a sinister side effect to the loss of pulmonary ace2 because it plays a critical role in preventing acute lung injury.xie et al. suggest that there is a greater prevalence of sars-cov in young people because they have higher ace2 levels (40) . yet there is a paradox, because if young people, like other mammals, have high levels of pulmonary ace2, they should be more susceptible to symptomatic infection with coronaviruses. the prevalence of infection is however based on the appearance of symptoms and in the young, the disease is usually so mild that infection rates appear to be low. in fact, the milder nature of the disease in the young compared to the old could be a consequence of the age-dependent nature of ace2 expression in the lung (see above). on the other hand it is possible that the animal data on ace2 expression and age is misleading as some human studies have shown that the older the patient the higher the level of circulating ace2 (43, 44) . as stated above, there is no systematic study exploring the effects of age on ace2 expression by human tissues. the differences between animal-based studies and human data may well be related to the short life span of animals used and the fact that they are housed in environments that protect them from infections and pollution etc.it has also been claimed that arbs stimulate the expression of ace2 in the lung and that this accounts for a higher morbidity in hypertensive patients suffering from covid-19 (25) . as stated above, there is no evidence that arbs have this effect on pulmonary ace2, but arbs upregulate cardiac ace2. ang ii levels are likely to be elevated in patients treated with an arb. as ang ii is the major substrate from which ace2 produces ang-(1-7) (1), it might be expected that high levels of ang ii would upregulate ace2. however, ang ii and ang-(1-7) have counter regulatory actions on ace2 expression via map kinase/phosphatase pathways (45) . furthermore, ang ii downregulates ace2 activity in cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts (42) . therefore, the overall effects of arbs on pulmonary ace2 could be modified by counteracting the effects of ang- (1-7) .hypertension and diabetes are the most common comorbidities found in patients suffering from covid-19. in one study, there was no significant difference in the existence of either comorbidity between less severe and more severe cases (23) . however, in a study comparing 113 patients who died with covid-19 infections, hypertension and cardiovascular disease were more common than in patients who recovered (161). furthermore, acute cardiac injury and heart failure, like acute respiratory distress syndrome and respiratory failure, contributed to the critical nature of the illness (46) .ace2 protects the lung from acute lung injury because it reduces levels of ang ii by converting it to ang-(1-7). in 2005, imai et al. (1) showed that ace2 played a critical role in the prevention of lung injury. briefly, they induced acute lung injury in mice by sepsis, lipopolysaccharide (lps) endotoxin or by acid aspiration. these treatments all caused severe lung inflammation in ace2-/-knockout mice, which was mitigated by intraperitoneal injections of recombinant human ace2 (1). in a second publication in 2005, kuba et al. (13) not only showed that ace2 was the definitive receptor for sars-cov, but that loss of ace2 from the lung caused by the binding of viral spike protein was responsible for the acute lung injury caused by coronavirus infections. they also showed, as would be expected from the known actions of ace2, that this viral infection was associated with raised ang ii levels, which caused acute lung injury via the ang ii-at 1 r pathway. treatment with the arb, losartan, prevented sars-cov-induced lung injury (13) .we suggest that pulmonary ace2 plays a critical role in protecting the lung from ang ii-at 1 r induced inflammation because not only is there a local pulmonary ras but the lung is also the major site for conversion of ang i (which is inactive) to ang ii (47) . therefore, loss of ace2, by binding of sars-cov-2, not only exposes the pulmonary epithelium to locally formed ang ii but also to ang ii formed in the lung from circulating ang i.recently, a sars-cov-2 infected patient presented with acute heart failure a week after experiencing "flu-like symptoms" and was diagnosed with acute myocarditis without any interstitial pneumonitis (48) . it is known that sars binds to myocardial ace2 and downregulates myocardial ace2 protein (3) . the protective effects of ace2 in the heart are well-described (41, 49) and it is the major metabolic pathway for breakdown of ang ii in the heart (50) . ace2 protects the heart from ang ii-at 1 r signaling induced injury (34) .to summarize; the data described above demonstrate that there could be a problem in treating coronavirus infections. while it is most advisable to prevent viral infection and reduce the viral load, prevention of coronavirus-associated lung and cardiac injury saves lives. the dual role of ace2 as a receptor for the virus in the lungs and heart but a "protector" of the lungs and heart from coronavirus-induced injury has led to debate concerning the use of anti-hypertensive drugs that inhibit the ras because they upregulate ace2 in the lung, increase receptor availability and therefore may increase viral load.there is no doubt, however, that ang ii-acting via the at 1 r causes acute lung injury and probably cardiac injury when the ace2-ang-(1-7)-mas receptor pathway is blocked by downregulation of ace2. this pathway also protects from other forms of acute lung injury as well as sars-cov induced injury. arbs would prevent downregulation of this pathway once infection has occurred and ameliorate any unopposed pro-inflammatory effects of ang ii mediated via its at 1 r. aceis on the other hand may not upregulate ace2 but would prevent ang ii-induced inhibition of ace2 activity.since there is an approved serine protease inhibitor that could be used to block tmprss2, it is possible that this could be used to treat covid-19. another potential alternative could be to saturate the airways with recombinant ace2 or soluble ace2 so that viral particles are "mopped up" leaving bronchial pulmonary ace2 intact. treatment with recombinant human ace2 could have the added beneficial effect of protecting the lung against lung injury.the major problem facing treatment of coronavirus-induced lung and probably cardiac injury is that there is reduced ace2 caused by the virus binding to ace2. this means that ang ii is no longer metabolized by ace2, and the anti-inflammatory ang-(1-7) pathway is lost. thus, lung and cardiac ang ii-at 1 r pro-inflammatory pathways are activated and unopposed by the protective arm of the ras. as suggested by kuba et al. (13) , arbs are an appropriate adjunct therapy for treating coronavirusinduced lung injury. recent analysis of clinical data from patients with covid-19 support the use of ras blocking drugs in the treatment of this infection (8, 9) . other alternatives, as suggested by imai et al., include injection of recombinant ace2. haschke et al. (51) have shown the rhace2 is well-tolerated by healthy human subjects.the publication of the first clinical trials to test the efficacy of arbs and aceis in the treatment of acute lung injury induced by sars-cov-2 is welcome news because these drugs are widely used clinically. if the results of these trials support the clinical data already obtained and improve the outcome of coronavirus infections, they would be of immeasurable benefit in the clinical management of this pandemic.named by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the novel coronavirus, with origin associated with the city of wuhan, hubei province, china, spread rapidly worldwide causing thousands of deaths, characterizing the infection as a public health problem of global interest [1, 2] . with a high infectivity rate, the coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by sars-cov-2, reached pandemic proportions [3] . according to the report published by world health organization (who) on june 1st, the number of confirmed cases reaches 6,057,853 distributed in 216 countries, with emphasis on the european and american continents, with more than two million cases each, together adding up around 82% of infected global number. covid-19 has already killed more than 371,166 people worldwide, especially among elderly patients and individuals with comorbidities. currently, the united states (u.s.) has already more than 1,734,040 confirmed cases, but, despite its large number of infected people, it is countries like spain (29,045 deaths), italy (33,415 deaths) and the united kingdom (38,489 deaths) which presented the highest mortality rate, exceeding 10% [4] . the disease evolution and the symptoms vary from asymptomatic patients to severe cases of respiratory failure, which can lead to death [5] . some risk factors may be associated with the evolution and disease severity. in a study conducted in the u.s., during march 2020, with 1,482 patients hospitalized with covid-19 in fourteen states, 12% of the total were history of comorbidities. of this total, 49.7% were hypertensive, 48.3% were obese, patients with chronic liver diseases totaled 34.6%, diabetics represented 28.3 % and people with cardiovascular diseases were 27.8% [6] . in another study conducted in wuhan city, china, 191 patients with covid-19 were followed up, of which 48% had comorbidities such as hypertension (30%), diabetes (19%) and coronary disease (8%) [7] . until june 1st, 2020, brazil had 347,398 confirmed cases of covid-19 with 13,868 deaths associated with comorbidities. heart disease was the most common comorbidity with total of 7,318 deaths, followed by diabetes, kidney disease, neurological disease, pneumopathy, obesity, immunosuppression and asthma, with a total of 5627, 1218, 1159, 1061, 742, 740 and 397 deaths, respectively [8] . in this context, metabolic syndrome (ms) is inserted as a common denominator to these comorbidities, since it is defined as a set of metabolic disorders that include insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, central obesity and hypertension, which are risk factors for the development of type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular diseases [9, 10] . in 2017, it was estimated that ms affected 20% of north american population, 25% of european population and approximately 15% of chinese population [11, 12] . in this scenario, the relationship between ms and its comorbidities that aggravate the covid-19 prognosis cannot be ignored. also, its presence in different ethnicities and continents places sm as an important risk factor for covid-19. thus, this review is aimed at providing overview of metabolic changes associated with ms and its relationship with development and worsening of sars-cov-2 infection, as well as to review the proposed drugs for the treatment of these patients. we collated and discussed the available evidences that have emerged so far on the presence of obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular and liver disease in the patients with covid-19 and proposed therapies.we systematically searched the pubmed and google scholar databases until june 1st, 2020 using the keywords covid-19, metabolic syndrome, and following terms: obesity, diabetes, liver, nafld, hypertension, cardiovascular disease, chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, antiretroviral drugs, and treatment of coronavirus. we also accessed the full text of the relevant cross references from the search results.the who points obesity as a global epidemic, estimating that in 2016 more than 650 million people over aged 18 years were obese worldwide [12] . since obesity is a risk factor for several diseases, including infectious ones, these data become even more alarming [13] . the bodies of obese patients are in constant chronic inflammation, due to the high concentrations of chemokines, adipokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines. this chronic inflammation causes a delayed and inferior immune response, with decreased activation of macrophages in infection course. in addition, the immune memory of obese individuals is also impaired, both humoral and cellular, weakening both adaptive response of immune system to disease and immunization of these patients [13, 14, 15] . obesity had previously been identified as a risk factor for viral infections due to its influence on immune response [15] . during the 2009 h1n1 outbreak, obese patients had more stringent complications and care needs [14] . in relation to covid-19, research points to the high rate of obese patients with complications and need for hospitalization [16] . a study carried out in new york city (nyc), u.s., showed that among the 3,615 patients who tested positive for covid-19, 21% had obesity and 16% of total had a body mass index (bmi) > 35 kg/m 2 (severe obesity). being much more likely to develop the most severe forms of the disease, these patients had a greater need for hospitalization and care in the intensive care unit (icu) [17] . in another study also in nyc that followed 4,103 patients with covid-19, of which 1,999 (48.9%) were hospitalized, it was observed that individuals with bmi > 40 kg/m 2 were six times more likely to be hospitalized [18] . in a retrospective study of 112 patients with covid-19 conducted at a hospital in wuhan city, the bmi of patients in critical group (bmi > 25 kg/m 2 ) was significantly higher than the non-critical group, and of 17 patients who died, 15 (88.2%) had a bmi > 25 kg/m 2 [19] . in view of alarming number of cases in countries like the u.s., where it is estimated that around 36% of population is obese [20] , and in europe, where, according to the most recent who estimates, obesity affects 10% to 30% of the population [21], obesity represents a serious problem when related to covid-19. these data reflect the current alarming situation faced by european countries, such as those already mentioned, the united kingdom, italy, spain, and also the u.s. and brazil, whose number of serious cases and deaths tops the global statistics, pointing to obesity as risk factor for covid-19 mortality [4].in 2016, diabetes was seventh most deadly disease worldwide, with approximately 1.6 million deaths directly [22] . it represents a risk factor for the development of other pathologies, standing out as a disease of great medical interest [23] . its relationship with infectious diseases is not yet fully understood. however, in addition to suppressing the patient's immunity, it can cause metabolic dysfunction that directly affects homeostasis of the entire organism [24] . in a study about relationship between diabetes, morbidity and mortality rate among patients with sars-cov, it was observed that patients with a known history of diabetes who died were 21.5% versus 3.9% of diabetic survivors [25] . diabetes patients have been reported to have up to four times more chance of hospitalization during the h1n1 pandemic [26] . like sars-cov and h1n1, diabetes appears as a comorbidity with potential to aggravate and lead to death by the sars-cov-2 infection. in a metaanalysis that included more than 40,000 infected people from wuhan, hubei province, china, 8% of these were diabetic patients [27] . in another study conducted in wuhan, 191 patients were followed up and 54 died, among non-survivors, 31% were diabetic [28] . the death rate reported by the chinese center for disease control for more than 70,000 cases was 2.3%, but this was increased to 7.3% when analyzed diabetics patients in the same group [29] . diabetes has been identified as the second most common comorbidity among cases of covid-19. hypotheses have been raised that this high incidence rate in diabetic patients is directly linked to high gene expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) in their cells, which are used by sars-cov-2 to enter human cells, due to treatment with ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii type-i receptor blockers (arbs) [30] . this would not only increase the risk of these patients to infection but would also make it difficult to control comorbidity during treatment against covid-19. this relationship is not yet fully understood and further studies are needed to confirm it, since the drug treatment protocols for diabetic patients remain the same for their metabolic dysfunction [31] .hypertension has appeared in research in various countries and continents as the most common comorbidity among those infected with sars-cov-2 [5, 6, 7, 27, 28, 30] , as well as cardiovascular diseases (cvd) that appear as risk factors for severe complications of covid-19. arterial hypertension, heart failure and arrhythmia are some of diseases of the cardiovascular system that can generate several complications in sars-cov-2 infection course [32] . in an analysis of 99 patients with covid-19, it was observed that 21% of patients had problems such as hypertension or coronary heart disease and of the 32 patients who developed severe forms of pneumonia caused by sars-cov-2, 17 individuals had some heart disease [33] . a meta-analysis involving more than 3,000 patients with covid-19 found that patients with cvd are up to five times more likely to develop the disease critical stage [34] . data from the chinese center for disease control and prevention pointed a 2.3% mortality rate in a group of 44,672 infected with covid-19. however, this number was much higher among patients with hypertension and cvd, reaching 6% and 10.5%, respectively [32] . in addition to history of cvd being an aggravating factor in covid-19 development, cardiovascular complications can also be result of the infection. acute myocardial injury has been observed in 8% of confirmed cases of disease, with an elevation of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i found in up to 12% of cases, while the troponin among patients with mild symptoms of infection was found in low concentration [32, 35] . in the investigation, 187 patients with covid-19 were evaluated, of the 36 patients who had a history of cvd and died, 25 had high troponin levels [35] . the high concentration of ace2 in cardiac tissue can be pointed out as possible mechanism for the lesions, since this enzyme is used by sars-cov-2 to invade the cell, making the heart a favorable site for viral colonization. as in diabetes, many of drugs used to treat hypertension act as ace inhibitors and arbs, increasing ace2 expression in the individual [30, 32, 36] . as a highly active tissue with a high demand for energy produced by mitochondria, hypoxia promoted by covid-19 can cause damage in the myocardium and have severe consequences for the infected patient [32, 35] . currently, cvd are the main cause of death, being responsible for 31% of deaths in 2016. much of this is reflection of eating habits and sedentary lifestyle that modern life has provided for the population. ms is a contributing factor to the development of cvd and, in the current pandemic scenario, this sedentary lifestyle takes its toll [37].the liver is an important organ for the most diverse body metabolic functions. damage caused to hepatic tissue by covid-19 has been observed. in addition, pathologies that affect it are inserted as risk factors for complications and severe manifestations of pneumonia caused by the novel coronavirus [38] . like other organs, liver cells, especially bile duct cells, have ace2 enzyme on their surface, placing liver tissue as a possible infection site for the virus [39] . previously, during the 2002 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruses (sars-cov) outbreak, studies have shown direct action of virus on hepatocytes, causing apoptosis in cells and inducing injury. elevated serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines have also been found in patients with liver damage. like the 2012 epidemic by middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronavirus (mers-cov), liver damage caused by infection was observed in infected patients. however, unlike sars-cov and sars-cov-2, mers-cov uses another receptor to invade the cell, dipeptidylpeptidase iv (dpp-4), which is widely expressed in hepatocytes. as with sars-cov infection, high serum levels of inflammatory cytokines have been described in these patients [40, 41] . in the current pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus, some studies have already observed abnormal concentrations of liver function markers. in the study with 202 patients, it was observed that patients with nafld had a higher risk of covid-19 progression, and of the 39 patients with progressive condition, 34 (87%) had nafld. inflammation of liver tissue resulting from pro-inflammatory cytokines released by adipose tissue becomes even more aggravated by the pathogen presence, such as sars-cov-2, with complications not fully clarified, but potentially severe for infected patient [42] . it was observed that approximately 20% to 30% of patients with covid-19 had elevated transaminases, especially in those with metabolic disorders associated with obesity and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (nafld) [42, 43] . it is not yet clear whether liver damage is primary, caused directly by the virus and inflammatory reaction, or secondary, caused by drugs used in treatment and hypoxia caused by pneumonia. however, even if modest, the changes exist and certainly the history of pre-existing liver disease tends to worsen the infection prognosis [41, 44] . in this context, nafld, which is considered the hepatic manifestation of ms, characterized by the deposit of fat in liver tissue, is inserted as a comorbidity, subject to detailed observation [45] . its prevalence is estimated between 20% and 30% in the population of western countries and between 5% and 18% among asian countries, being significantly increased in obese and diabetic patients [46] . researches on the relationship between nafld and covid-19 are still scarce.in the absence of any known effective therapy and due to the pandemic situation, recently many drugs in the treatment of covid-19 have been tested. drugs previously proposed for the treatment of viral diseases, including previous outbreaks by other coronavirus (sars-cov and mers-cov), began to be tested, with emphasis on chloroquine and its hydroxychloroquine analog, associated or not with azithromycin, corticosteroids and other antiviral medications in patients with 48] . the proposed pharmacological treatments are summarized in table 1 , which shows the mechanism of action and adverse effects of drugs. experimental studies have suggested that chloroquine (cq) is a proven antimalarial drug that can inhibit the replication of various intracellular microorganisms, including coronavirus in vitro [49, 50] . it is suggested a possible inhibition of sars-cov-2 replication by terminal glycosylation of ace2, produced by pulmonary vessels, inhibiting the link between virus and receptor. inhibition of viral infection by raising the endosomal ph is also reported, thus interfering with virus-cell fusion. in addition, it was observed that this medicine contributed to prevention of viral spread in cell cultures [47] . hydroxychloroquine (hcq) can also increase intracellular ph and inhibit lysosomal activity in antigen-presenting cells. this process reduces t cell activation, differentiation and expression of costimulatory proteins and production of cytokines. in the cytoplasm, it interferes with synthesis of viral nucleic acids, attenuating proinflammatory response. both mechanisms strengthen the hypothesis that hcq can suppress sars-cov-2 by inhibiting the hyperactivation of immune system triggered by the virus and, thus, reducing disease progression from mild to severe. however, still without clinical evidence [49, 50] . although hcq and cq have shown antiviral activity against sars-cov-2 in vitro, hcq appears to have a more potent action. furthermore, hcq has a clinical safety superior to cq with its long-term use, as it allows the use of higher doses and has few interactions with other drugs [51] . a non-randomized controlled trial showed that azithromycin associated with hcq was significantly more efficient to eliminate virus, where 70% of patients had no detectable viral load after 6 days of treatment. however, these drugs must be used carefully. the azithromycin indiscriminate use, being an antimicrobial, can cause bacterial resistance. the use of cq may cause an increase of qt interval, retinopathy and cardiovascular disorders, which should certainly be of concern in hypertensive patients [52] . the research warns to the adverse effects and real effectiveness of medications. according to studies, widespread use of hcq will expose patients to fatal consequences, including skin reactions, liver failure and ventricular arrhythmia, especially if prescribed in association with azithromycin. furthermore, there is a risk that cq phosphate can cause acute poisoning or even death [53, 54, 55, 56] . researchers analyzed 1,376 patients with covid-19 in new york city, where 58.9% (811) were treated with hcq. of the treated total, 346 developed respiratory failure, 180 were intubated and 166 died without intubation. according to the analysis, patients who took hcq were more likely to develop respiratory failure than those who did not use it [54] . this makes randomized controlled trials with hcq extremely necessary in patients with covid-19, mainly associated with metabolic disorders. patients who have type 1 or type 2 diabetes and/or hypertension, who are treated with ace inhibitors and/or arbs, have a considerable increase in eca2 receptors expression, which may facilitate the virus entry. the same authors report that patients using these drugs can develop severe and fatal covid-19 [56] . as an appropriate alternative treatment, the use of calcium channel blockers as antihypertensive agents is suggested. a patient-centered approach should be used to guide the choice of pharmacological agents, considering age, severity of covid-19, cardiovascular comorbidities and risk of hypoglycemia [56, 57] . another possibly promising drug is favipiravir, a drug with proven action against ebola virus. the drug's efficiency in reducing sars-cov-2 infection is due to the inhibition of rna polymerase activity [58, 59] . a randomized clinical trial with 240 patients in china showed that favipiravir (71.43%) is more effective than arbidol (55.86%) in the treatment of covid-19. patients with hypertension and/or diabetes who used favipiravir experienced a reduction in fever and cough relief faster than patients who used arbidol. however, there was no difference in auxiliary oxygen therapy or noninvasive mechanical ventilation between patients [60]. antiretroviral drugs lopinavir/ritonavir, an oral combination agent, approved by the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) for the treatment of hiv, demonstrated in vitro activity against other coronaviruses by inhibiting 3-chymotrypsin-like protease [61] . adverse effects of lopinavir/ritonavir include gastrointestinal discomfort, such as nausea and diarrhea (up to 28%), and hepatotoxicity (2% -10%) [62] . in patients with covid-19, these adverse effects may be exacerbated by combination therapy or due to viral infection [43] . remdesivir (gs-5734), as adenosine nucleoside analogue prodrug, has a broad-antiviral spectrum against phyloviruses, paramyxoviruses, pneumoviruses and coronaviruses [63] . in vitro studies have shown the ability of remdesivir to inhibit coronaviruses replication in primary human lung cells [63, 64] . patients hospitalized with severe covid-19 treated with compassionate-use remdesivir showed clinical improvement in 36 of 53 patients (68%) [65] , well as showed shortened time to recovery and evidence of lower respiratory tract infection in the remdesivir group [66] . however, in another study, remdesivir in adults with severe covid-19 was not associated with significant clinical benefits, but the patients who received remdesivir had a numerically faster time to clinical improvement than those receiving placebo, with symptom duration of 10 days or less [67] . in all studies, adverse events were reported during follow-up of patients (between 28% and 66%), such as anemia or decreased hemoglobin, thrombocytopenia, acute kidney injury, decreased estimated glomerular filtration rate, increased blood creatinine, increased total bilirubin, hyperglycemia and increased aminotransferase levels, which suggests clinical investigation in patients with complications associated with metabolic syndrome [65, 66, 67] . another potential adjuvant therapy for covid-19 is the use of convalescent plasma or hyperimmune immunoglobulins [68] . the justification for this treatment is that the antibodies of recovered patients can help in the immune response against the virus in individuals with covid-19 or be a preventive measure of infection in cases of vulnerable individuals with diverse metabolic disorders. nitazoxanide, traditionally an anthelmintic agent, has broad antiviral activity and relatively favorable safety profile, demonstrated in vitro antiviral activity against mers and sars-cov-2 [69, 70] . in the lack of robust evidence, antiviral activity, immunomodulatory effects and safety profile of nitazoxanide justify further study as a therapeutic option for covid-19. current evidence demonstrates the use of corticosteroids to decrease inflammatory responses in the lungs. however, this benefit can be overcome by its adverse effects, including delayed viral clearance of the respiratory tract and blood and high rates of complications, including hyperglycemia, psychosis and avascular necrosis, as well as increased risk of secondary infection. although the direct evidence for the use of corticosteroids in covid-19 is limited, result revisions in other viral pneumonias are instructive. observational studies in patients with sars and mers have not reported an association of corticosteroids with improved survival [71, 72, 73] . the risk of hyperglycemia in diabetic patients can be reduced, although not eliminated, by good glycemic control. although several therapeutic agents have been evaluated for the treatment of covid-19, no therapy have yet been shown to be efficacious for patients.proposed treatments for covid-19: drugs, mechanisms of action and adverse effects.chloroquine metabolic syndrome is a risk factor that influences covid-19 progression and prognosis. the prevalence of obese, diabetic, hypertensive or liver damage patients with severe cases of covid-19, in multiple countries, demonstrates the importance of the care with this risk group, in prophylaxis, monitoring and treatment. similarly, the drugs currently evaluated for the infection treatment are promising but need further studies to prove their efficacy and safety, due to the adverse effects may be exacerbated by combination therapy or due to viral infection. the development of a vaccine for immunization is still the best long-term solution for the prevention of future outbreaks of sars-cov-2. in addition, people of any age who have pre-existing diseases, such as heart disease, diabetes, obesity, among others, also need to redouble their care in measures to prevent coronavirus.in the era of extremely aging society, hypertension is a highly prevalent chronic condition in the elderly that will overlap with many acute conditions such as infection, surgery, trauma or intoxication. infection is an unavoidable clinical problem in the elderly patient taking antihypertensive medications. pneumonia and influenza could be fatal in the elderly patients with cardiovascular complications, which are the result of long-term hypertension and other risk factors. in fact, vaccination against pneumonia and influenza is highly recommended in elderly with or without cardiovascular complications. recent pandemic outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (sars-cov-2), so called, coronavirus disease 2019 are posing a similar challenge in which the majority of fatalities are being observed in the elderly with hypertension, diabetes and/or their complications.antihypertensive drug therapy may have an impact on the clinical practice according to the wide variety of patient conditions. it will vary from mild conditions such as poor oral intake, volume depletion, orthostatic hypotension to severe conditions such as sepsis, septic shock, myocardial damage, overt hear failure, acute kidney injury, and/or multiple organ failure.the changes in antihypertensive drug therapy should be based on weighing the risk benefit ratio. but there are few specific recommendations to guide the use of antihypertensive drugs in terms of vulnerability to specific infection, septic shock, and/or organ failure.there are some general aspects in relation to hypertension management or antihypertensive drug use when some infection is impending or ongoing. first of all, because hypertension is basically dependent on the sodium balance, when sodium or food intake is stopped, there could be an increased risk for unexpected blood pressure decrease and hypotension. negative sodium balance can be exacerbated by febrile condition and the use of potent diuretics. in this situation, increase in renin-angiotensinaldosterone system (ras) activation and sympathetic nervous system acts as a compensatory mechanism to mitigate hypotension. as such, the patient taking potent or long acting ras blockade or beta blocker might be vulnerable to hemodynamic instability compared to calcium antagonist. for this issue, diuretics does not have blocking effect of compensatory system but it could exacerbate underlying sodium depleting situation. these theoretical speculations might be one of possible explanation for the reason why calcium antagonist have superior profile in term of inter-individual visit to visit blood pressure variabilities. but, despite of all these speculations, there is few studies to answer this questions and clinical practice when a patient has asymptomatic hypotension or orthostatic hypotension is solely dependent on the physician's discretions. because ras blockade or beta blocker is recommended for the patient with cardiovascular complications, stopping these drugs may be harmful. in a recent retrospective population based cohort study, hsu w, et al., reported that established ras blockade therapy before sepsis will be protective for the sepsis related mortality [1] . these results seems to be in line with the recent study showing depressed sympathetic modulation can be a signal for sepsis in patient with infection [2] . some mediators to suppress sympathetic nervous system may be required for sustained hypotension so that those mediators may not be effective if additional blocking is not possible due to already established sympathetic blockade. similarly, in retrospective studies for heart failure patients, withdrawal of ras blockade or beta blocker were associated with poor prognosis [3, 4] . as such, there is no evidence to stop using these drugs in infection patients unless they are associated with hemodynamic instability. however, in patients with volume depletion and symptomatic hypotension, it would be prudent to stop antihypertensive medications and diuretics until blood pressure is normalized and the volume status is recovered. in patients who are hemodynamically stable, temporarily stopping ras blockade or beta blocker seems to be possible only when the patient has no hypertension related complications such as heart failure, coronary artery disease, and other vascular complications. even in these subjects, one should consider the adverse events resulting from rebound increase in blood pressure. moreover, in the study by ohkubo et al., including 6105 patients with a history of stroke and/or transient ischemic attack (mean age, 64 years), it was reported that perindopril decreased pneumonia risk in asian but not in non-asian subjects [5] .even with those retrospective studies showing that stopping ras blockade or beta blocker is associated with poor prognosis, it is not usual to use vasoconstrictor or inotropic without temporary withdrawal of ras blockade or beta blocker in a real world clinical practice for the patient with acute hypotension, acute kidney injury, or hyperkalemia related to infection [6] . besides the toxin supplied by infectious organisms, catecholamine or stress induced cardiomyopathy, tachycardia induced cardiomyopathy, and direct invasion of infectious agents could precipitate hypotension during infection. acute hemodynamic instability or hypotension is a serious condition during acute infection which requires stopping or adjustment of antihypertensive drug dosage according to the patient's hemodynamic status.yearly outbreak of the seasonal flu is a huge burden on the healthcare system and survival in extremely older patients or in patients with high risk profiles such as older age, diabetes, chronic diseases of the heart, kidney, lung, and liver [7] . fortunately, there are key available strategies to cope with it, which are specific to the infectious agent such as anti-viral therapy, vaccination, and other preventive approaches. hypertension is prevalent in high risk flu patients because they are usually older and with cardiovascular complications. but antihypertensive agents could be adjusted according to the general and hemodynamic conditions only after infection begins and it will be only temporary even when the drugs need adjustments. there is no issue about adjustment of antihypertensive drug use to protect from infection preemptively because there is no direct involvement of antihypertensive drugs in the infectious process itself.in contrast to pandemic flu, it is highlighted that angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) of the lung type 2 alveolar epithelial cell acts as a non-catalytic receptor for sars-cov-1 and presumably for sars-cov-2 to infect the cell [8] . ace2 is reported to be predominantly localized on endothelial cells. its mrna is reported to be most highly expressed in testis, kidney, and, heart and also expressed in brain, intestine, and lungs [9] . thus, there have been growing concerns about hypertension being a risk factor for severe covid-19 and the possibility of ras inhibitors being an aggravating factor of severe covid-19 due to the theoretical increase in the expression of systemic ace2 with its use. the pandemic of sars-cov-2 which began in wuhan, china from december 2019, has spread rapidly around the world. severe lung damage and high mortality rates have been reported, particularly in the elderly and those with comorbidities. in particular, the high prevalence of hypertension and diabetes suggests that they maybe risk factors for severe covid-19. the prevalence of hypertension is apparently high in patients with severe covid-19, however, considering the age of those patients, the actual prevalence of hypertension does not seem to be higher. zhou et al. analyzed the clinical characteristics of 191 patients diagnosed in wuhan. among them, the average age of deaths (n = 54) was 69 years, and the prevalence of hypertension was 48%, which is quite comparable to the prevalence of hypertension in the representative population of those ages [10] . until now, none of the papers published through multivariate analysis indicated that hypertension was an independent risk factor for severe covid-19. in the study by guan et al., reporting the clinical features of 1099 covid-19 patients diagnosed in wuhan, the prevalence of hypertension was higher in severe patients (n = 173, mean age 52 years) than in mild patients (mean age 45 years)(23.7% vs. 13.4%), but it was not particularly higher when considering the prevalence of hypertension in that age group [11] . therefore, there is no scientific evidence to suggest that hypertension itself is an independent risk factor for severe infection or mortality by covid-19. the higher prevalence of hypertension in patients with covid-19 is more likely due to the fact that the age of severe patients was significantly older and because major complications of hypertension such as chronic heart failure, cerebral infarction, and chronic renal failure make the patient much more vulnerable to progression to severe infection or death.in 2004, since the sars-cov-1 outbreak in asia, the coronavirus has been shown to use ace2 proteins in the epithelial cell membrane in the lung alveoli as a receptor. the viral spike(s) glycoprotein attaches to the ace2 proteins which have been shown to facilitate viral entry and in theory, make the patient vulnerable to lower respiratory tract infection or viral pneumonia [12, 13] . since the covid-19 outbreak, role of ace2 in the pathophysiology of covid-19 has drawn a lot of interest in the social media world as well as scientific groups due to the growing concerns that increased expression of ace2 may increase the risk for severe covid-19. in a recent report, the main receptor of the spike (s) glycoprotein of sars-cov-2 is ace2 and its affinity has been reported to be higher than that of sars-cov 1 [14] . so the key point of concern is that ras inhibitor (ace inhibitor, angiotensin receptor blocker), a drug commonly used in hypertensive patients, can theoretically raise ace2 expression by a classical feedback system in the biochemical pathway when an enzyme or receptor was blocked (fig. 1, a) . when ace2 is activated, angiotensin 1-7 is increased instead of angiotensin ii. angiotensin 1-7 is known to have an effect of protecting cardiovascular diseases by binding to the receptor mas receptor to promote vasodilation, antioxidant and antiinflammatory effects [15] . on the other hand, when it comes to covid-19, the possibility exists that acei or arb can be an exacerbation factor by increasing the expression of ace2. as such, there have been increased incidence where patients or physicians change the antihypertensive medications to other drugs or discontinue the drugs due to concerns about the concerns, whether real or not, for increased risk of severe covid-19. however, the korean society of hypertension would like to emphasize that currently, there is no scientific basis for taking such measures. first, there is no epidemiologic evidence for increased severe covid-19 or mortality in patients who were taking ras inhibitors. second, it is still unclear whether or not ras inhibition results in increased expression of ace2 in systemic level and/or tissue including epithelial cells (fig. 1) . even though there are reports that the concentration of ace2 in the blood rises after administration of the first ras blockade, there are conflicting reports that also suggest otherwise [16, 17] . third, since ace2 is a receptor for sars-cov-1 and 2, if ras blockade does indeed exacerbates corona virus infection, obvious increase in mortality and severe infection in patients receiving ras inhibitor should have been reported during the sars-cov-1 epidemic. as we all know, this was obviously not the case. on the contrary, it has been reported that ace2 protects against severe acute lung injury. study by deshotels et al. have shown that angiotensin ii, which is highly activated in severe infection, results in increased ace2 internalization and ace2 degradation [18] . this has importance implications as the interaction between ace2 and sars-cov-1 is very complex and the net expression of ace2 cannot be predictable in a real patient (fig 1, b) [19] . moreover, in vivo studies have shown that decreased ace2 during sars-cov-1 infection exacerbated acute lung injury. imai et al. conducted experiments by inducing acute lung injury through gastric acid aspiration in mice. in ace knockout mice, acute lung injury was significantly inhibited, whereas in ace2 knockout mice, acute lung injury worsened compared to wild type. on the other hand, acute lung injury was significantly improved by recombinant ace2 administration, demonstrating the protective effect of ace2 in acute lung injury [20] . in addition, kuba et al. conducted experiments with the mice sars-cov-1 model. the spike protein of sars-cov-1 attaches to ace2 and downregulates ace2 and activates angiotensin ii to exacerbate acute lung injury. in contrast, ras blockade with losartan 15 mg/kg had a protective effect against acute lung injury caused by sars-cov-1 infection (fig 1, b) . given that covid-19 has similar pathophysiological mechanisms to sars-cov-1 infection, increase in ace2 or ras blockade might even be protective against severe infection or death.in summary, 1) the prevalence of hypertension in patients with severe covid-19 is high. however, it is more likely due to the fact that severe patients tend to be older and commonly have complications of hypertension, such as heart failure, coronary artery disease, stroke and ckd. currently, there is no scientific evidence that hypertension is an independent risk factor for severe infection or death until proven otherwise. 2) regarding the concerns for increased risk of severe infection or death due to the theoretical concerns that taking ras inhibitors may increase lung ace2, there is no clinical evidence to suggest that patients taking ras inhibitors may have adverse prognosis during covid-19. in fact, it is possible that ras blockade has protective effect against severe covid-19 based on previous reports of their protective effect in animal models of sars-cov-1 infection. 3) if ras inhibitors administered due to high blood pressure or other cardiovascular disease were stopped abruptly, there is risk for excessive increase in blood pressure that may precipitate cardiovascular complications. however, we do acknowledge that the abovementioned issues are valid concerns that deserve more research as quickly as possible. but without any scientific evidence to suggest otherwise, we the korean society of hypertension endorse the recent recommendation by the european society of cardiology and recommend 1) in hemodynamically stable patients who were taking ras inhibitors to be maintained on ras blockade 2) in hemodynamically stable, treatment naïve patients who have compelling indication for using ras inhibitors to be administered with ras inhibitors according to the current guidelines 3) in patients without covid-19 to be prescribed with ras inhibitors if there are clinical indications to do so. 4) in hemodynamically unstable patients with covid-19, prudent reduction or withdrawal of antihypertensive medications can be considered with consideration for the comorbidities and the indications for using the drug(s) before the infection.in conclusion, the use or temporary adjustment of antihypertension drugs during infectious disease could be individualized according to volume status, hemodynamic stability, comorbid cardiovascular disease profiles, and antihypertensive drug class. also, the use of ras blockade sars-cov-2 pandemic before infection should be maintained based on the current scientific knowledge. more researches are needed for the use of antihypertensive drugs before and during severe infection or epidemics. in classical renin angiotensin system, ace2 convert angiotensin i and ii to angiotensin 1-9 and 1-7, respectively. panel b. complex interaction among sars-cov-1, ace2, tmprss2, and adam17 in lung epithelial cells. in sars-cov-1 infection and presumably in sars-cov-2 infection, binding of spike protein to ace2 together with lysosome degradation resulting in ace2 down regulation, adam17 mediated ace2 shedding from cell membrane resulting in promotion of viral entry, facilitation of ace2 mediated viral entry by tmprss2 make a complex expression or interplay between ace2 and the virus. ace, angiotensin converting enzyme; adam17, a disintegrin and metallopeptidase domain 17; arb; angiotensin receptor blocker; s, spike protein; sars-cov, severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus; tmprss2, the type ii transmembrane serine proteasescoronavirus disease 2019(covid-19) is a viral respiratory disease caused by the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov), which has caused the pneumonia epidemic in the world [1] [2] [3] . as of march 5, 2020, a total of 96539 cases with laboratoryconfirmed covid-19 infection have been detected in the world reported by the world health organization (who). in china, there have been 80567 accumulated confirmed cases of covid-19, and 5952 of them were existing severe patients. given the rapid spread and high mortality rate of covid-19, it is absolutely necessary to evaluate the possible risk factors affecting the progression of disease in covid-19 patients.previous studies show that covid-19 patients with comorbidity may lead to a poor prognosis [5] . identifying the most important risk groups is essential when making decisions anti-2019-ncov therapy. to date, there has been no systematic review that comprehensively explores whether the presence of common comorbidities increase covid-19 patients' risk, to guide clinical practice better. therefore, we performed a meta-analysis of the available studies to explore relationship between comorbidity and patients with covid-19.the database searches identified a total of 324 potentially relevant articles. after the exclusion of duplicate references,243 articles were considered for the meta-analysis. of these,208 studies were excluded after screening the title and abstract. after careful review of the full texts, 29 articles were excluded because they were reviews, cases, and insufficient data. six studies qualified for inclusion [1, [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] . the flow diagram ( figure 1 ) showed the detailed literature search steps.a total of 1558 samples from 6 retrospective studies were enrolled in this meta-analysis [1, [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] . all six studies were performed in china. six studies [1, [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] reported that hypertension, diabetes, and copd, five covered liver disease [1, [4] [5] [6] [7] , four investigated malignancy [1, 4, 5, 8] , renal disease [4] [5] [6] [7] , and cardiovascular disease [4] [5] [6] [7] , and three [4, 5, 7] researched cerebrovascular disease. two studies [1, 5] used whether patients experienced icu care to judge the severity of the disease, and the other four studies used clinical symptoms to judge the severity of the disease. all articles are of high quality because of nos score no less than 6. detailed descriptions of the studies included are shown in table 1 .six studies, including 324 severe group cases and 1234 non-severe group cases, provided the data in terms of hypertension, diabetes, and copd [1, [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] . the figure 2c ) had a higher risk of exacerbation.four included studies reported the relationship between cardiovascular disease and patients with severe covid-19 [1, [4] [5] [6] . no significant heterogeneity was found (i 2 =0, p=0.989) among these trials, so a fixed effect pattern was selected. the results showed that cardiovascular disease is a risk factor for patients with covid-19 (or:2.93, 95% ci: 1.73-4.96, p<0.001) ( figure 2g ).three studies provided the data in terms of cerebrovascular disease [4, 5, 7] . a fixed-effects model was used since the heterogeneity test suggested that there was no significant heterogeneity (i 2 =44.8%, p=0.163). the meta-analysis shows a significant relationship between patients with severe covid-19 and cerebrovascular disease (or:3.89, 95% ci: 1.64-9.22, p=0.002) ( figure 2h ).five studies comprising 313 severe group cases and 1167 non-severe group cases evaluated the role of liver disease in patients with covid-19 [1, [4] [5] [6] [7] . the meta-analysis showed that patients with the previous liver disease did not increase the risk of disease progression (or:0.67, 95% ci: 0.30-1.49, p=0.326) ( figure 2d ).the relative risk assessments associated with malignancy and kidney disease are presented in figure  2e and 2f, respectively. the meta-analysis suggested that there was no correlation between malignant tumor (the 95% confidence interval includes 1) or kidney disease (p=0.070) and covid-19 patients' aggravation.to further verify the correlation of comorbidity and covid-19 patients' aggravation, subgroup analysis was conducted. the results of the subgroup analysis are presented in table 2 . the subgroup analysis results further support the results of hypertension, copd, liver disease, and renal disease. in the clinical symptom group, we further observed that hypertension, diabetes, copd, malignancy, and cardiovascular disease were a risk factor in covid-19 patients.the risk of publication bias was analyzed in the following comorbidities: hypertension, diabetes, copd, and liver disease. figure 3 shows the results of publication bias, which were evaluated by funnel plots and eggers test. begg's test (all pr>0.05) and egger's regression test (all p >0.05) suggest no significant publication bias.currently, the increasing number of cases and extensive geographical expansion of the covid-19 are causing widespread concern in the world [9] . tian et al [10] . [11] . therefore, early identification of severe patients is of great significance for improving the therapeutic effect of covid-19 and reducing mortality.previous studies have described that the presence of common comorbidities increase covid-19 patients' risk [5] . besides, some scholars think that the presence of any coexisting illness was more common among patients with severe disease than among those with the non-severe disease [4] . however, the specific comorbidity by which can lead to disease progression remain unknown in covid-19 patients.a total of 1558 covid-19 patients were included in the analyses, 324 (20.8%) of whom were severe. the meta-analysis of retrospective studies confirms that copd is associated with a dramatically increased risk of aggravation in patients with covid-19. covid-19 patients with copd had a 5.9-fold higher risk of progression than patients without copd. moreover, we identify an increased risk of aggravation in aging individuals who have hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, or cerebrovascular disease. our meta-analysis did not provide sufficient evidence that there was a correlation between liver disease, malignant tumor or kidney disease, and covid-19 patients' aggravation.however, this conclusion needs to be taken with caution, as this study has several limitations. firstly, the small sample size may reduce the significance of the results. secondly, the judgment criteria for severe and non-severe patients included in the study were not uniform. thirdly, some included patients who had more aging than one coexisting illness. fourth, the quality of different studies was different, which might lead to bias.the meta-analysis identified hypertension, diabetes, copd, cardiovascular disease, and cerebrovascular disease as significant risk factors for covid-19 patients. the knowledge of these factors can better define those covid-19 patients at higher risk, and thus allow a more targeted and specific approach to prevent those deaths. given the limitations of this conclusion, well-designed trials of high quality are needed to explore the relationship between comorbidity and patients with covid-19.the meta-analysis was performed according to the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analysis (prisma) statement [12] . relevant literature was extracted by systematic retrieval of pubmed (medline), embase, springer, web of science, and cochrane library databases up to date to march 1, 2020. our search strategy included terms for "2019-ncov" or "coronavirus" or "covid-19" or "sars-cov-2" or "2019-ncov" or "wuhan coronavirus." besides, we manually screened out the relevant potential article in the references selected. the above process was performed independently by two participants.inclusion criteria are as follows: (1) types of studies: published studies reported the relationship between comorbidity and patients with covid-19; (2) subjects: diagnosed patients with covid-19; (3) exposure intervention: covid-19 patients with comorbidity included: hypertension, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), liver disease, malignancy, renal disease, cardiovascular disease, cerebrovascular disease; (4) outcome indicator: the odds ratios (or) with 95% confidence intervals (ci) for each comorbidity.the exclusion criteria: (1) case reports, reviews, summaries of discussions, (2) insufficient data information provided; (3) patients were not stratified for the degree of severity.two participants separately conducted literature screening, data extraction, and literature quality evaluation, and any differences could be resolved through discussion or a third analyst. information extracted from the included literature: first author surname, year of publication, country of the population, sample size, relevant data on comorbidity of severe and non-severe patients, etc.the newcastle-ottawa scale (nos) was adopted to evaluate the process in terms of queue selection, comparability of queues, and evaluation of results [13] . the quality of the included studies was assessed independently by two participants. nos scores of at least six were considered high-quality literature. higher nos scores showed higher literature quality.all data analysis was performed using stata12.0 software (stata corp, college station, texas). the or and relevant 95% ci were used to estimate pooled results from studies. after that, the heterogeneity test was conducted. when p≥0.05 or i 2 <50% was performed, it indicated that there was no obvious heterogeneity, and the fixed-effect model should be applied for a merger. otherwise, the random-effect model was applied. results were considered significant statistically when the p-value less than 0.05.studies were grouped according to the type of disease severity judgment basis. one subgroup is based on the clinical symptoms of patients, and the other subgroup is based on whether patients experience icu care or not. subgroup sensitivity analyses were conducted to explore potential sources of heterogeneity.publication bias was assessed using begg funnel plot and egger test linear regression test (where at least five studies were available). if p < 0.05 indicates obvious publication bias.bolin wang made the substantial contributions to the conception and design of the work; zhong lu, ruobao li, and bolin wang searched, selected materials and extracted data; bolin wang wrote this manuscript; yan huang and bolin wang revised the paper carefully and also contributed to the statistical analysis. all authors have read and approved the final manuscript.the authors declare no conflicts of interest.this research received no external funding.accepted: may 12, 2020 article in press: may 12, 2020 published online: may coronavirus disease-19 (covid-19) has emerged as a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. as of this writing, over half a million cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infections have been recorded. a global arms race for a vaccine or viable therapy is currently underway. however, most experts project that development of a vaccine will take at least 18 mo [1] , and an effective pharmacologic treatment has yet to be discovered. it therefore appears increasingly likely that covid-19 will become embedded in the fabric of modern medicine for years to come.management of chronic illnesses in patients with covid-19 should be considered a priority. hypertension affects over 1.4 billion individuals worldwide [2] and has been associated with markedly increased morbidity and mortality in the setting of covid-19 [3, 4] . angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) are among the most frequently prescribed antihypertensive agents throughout most of the developed world [5] . these drugs are safe, well-tolerated, and effective as a first-line therapy. however, emerging evidence suggests that aceis and arbs may increase patient susceptibility to sars-cov-2 host cell entry and propagation by upregulation of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) viral binding site [6] [7] [8] .there is insufficient data to recommend withdrawal of aceis and arbs among individuals who have been diagnosed with covid-19. indeed, most major medical organizations -including the american heart association and european society of cardiology -recommend maintaining acei or arb therapy in all hypertensive patients with covid-19. however, we propose that an alternative agent should be considered in patients presenting with covid-19 and a new diagnosis of hypertension.verapamil is a non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker that was once used for the management of hypertension. it has largely been supplanted by aceis, arbs, and dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers; in the modern era, verapamil is primarily used for rate control in supraventricular tachycardia, migraine prophylaxis, and hypertension with co-morbid atrial fibrillation. we believe that this drug may be appropriate as a first-line agent for the management of hypertension in patients with covid-19. preliminary data from animal studies have demonstrated that verapamil has no effect on ace2 expression. furthermore, it has been shown to ameliorate the clinical and pathological course of viral myocarditis in murine models. indeed, in a study of mice inoculated with encephalomyocarditis virus, investigators found that those treated with verapamil before and/or during infection exhibited markedly less cardiac inflammation and necrosis as compared to an untreated group [9] . cardiac involvement -and, specifically, sars-cov-2-associated myocarditis -represents a serious and potentially fatal manifestation of covid-19 [10] . management of hypertension with a drug that may reduce inflammation in viral myocarditis and does not pose a theoretical risk of promoting covid-19 proliferation would appear to be a rational strategy to optimize patient outcomes.carvedilol, a nonselective β-adrenoreceptor antagonist with additional α1adrenergic blocking properties, represents another promising antihypertensive agent in the setting of covid-19. similar to verapamil, carvedilol attenuates inflammation in murine models of acute viral myocarditis. in a study of mice infected with coxsackie b3 virus, those receiving carvedilol exhibited superior survival as compared to an untreated group and those treated with metoprolol [11] . the mechanism of action is unclear, but it has been postulated that carvedilol exerts anti-inflammatory effects via inhibition of peroxidants in the myocardium. carvedilol also has the added benefit of reducing heart rate, which may reduce myocyte injury and ventricular remodeling in the setting of myocarditis [12] .notably, there are demonstrable anti-inflammatory effects associated with upregulation of ace2. indeed, lung function improvement with acei or arb treatment has been described in the setting of covid-19 [13] . however, irrespective of the purported benefits of aceis and arbs, the potential of these agents to facilitate viral disease remains under investigation.in conclusion, we believe that verapamil or carvedilol should be considered for the management of hypertension in patients at risk of covid-19. the pathogenic mechanisms of sars-cov-2 remain under investigation, but data suggest that the ace2 receptor plays a central role in infection. it is therefore theoretically possible that drugs known to increase ace2 expression, such as aceis and arbs, could promote covid-19 proliferation. we are in agreement with the recommendation of major medical societies to maintain acei or arb therapy in individuals who are already receiving treatment. however, patients with a new diagnosis of hypertension who are at risk of covid-19 would likely benefit from verapamil or carvedilol, as these agents effectively control blood pressure and may conceivably attenuate inflammation and necrosis in sars-cov-2 myocarditis.the recent outbreak of the life-threatening severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in many countries has resulted in deaths of patients infected by coronavirus [22, 23, 28, 34] . in addition to sars, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) can be induced by various disorders. accordingly, investigations of the mechanism of ards can further our understanding of the yet unknown mechanism of sars. in this brief review, we present early and recent studies in animal and human subjects with either ards or acute pulmonary edema (pe).a series of studies on neurogenic pe resulting from cerebral compression or intracranial hypertension suggest that brain injuries initiate massive central sympathetic activation. this, in turn, causes systemic vasoconstriction and shift of blood from the systemic circulation to the lung [2-4, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 14] . in an isolated lung that is subject to air embolism, ischemia/reperfusion (i/r) or endotoxin, nitric oxide (no) is detrimental to lung tissues and causes acute injury, although it reduces pulmonary hypertension [21, 24, 36] . recently, we reported [19] that in patients with diseases of rare causes, ards is induced by several other mechanisms. in patients with japanese b encephalitis, the viral infection destroys depressor areas in the medulla, implying that central sympathetic activation might be the cause of ards. on the other hand, no, cgmp and serotonin are possibly involved in ards due to fat embolism. we suggest that further investigation of the involvement of no, central nervous lesions and other chemical factors will advance our understanding of sars caused by coronavirus infection.our early studies used whole animals (mainly rats of the sprague-dawley strain) to investigate the mechanism of neurogenic pe induced by cerebral compression [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . right and left heart bypass were employed to elucidate the importance of cardiac output and venous return in the genesis of pulmonary pathology [8] . a technique of regional weighing described by fell and rushmer [15] was used to demonstrate the shift of blood volume from the systemic circulation to the lung [2, [9] [10] [11] 14] . the total heart bypass technique has allowed us to perfuse the systemic and pulmonary circulation with constant flow. we examined systemic and pulmonary hemodynamics in response to intracranial hypertension and found that intracranial hypertension causes an increase in systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance and a decrease in capacity [ 13] . spectral analysis for the assessment of steady and pulsatile hemodynamics demonstrated that intracranial hypertension causes an increase in characteristic impedance, wave reflection and total peripheral resistance, along with a decrease in cardiac output [32] . in sprague-dawley rats, endotoxin causes systemic hypotension with an increase in cytokine and inducible no synthase (inos) mrna expression in the injured lung. these changes are attenuated by nos inhibitors such as n'~-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester (l-name), s,s'-i,4phenylene-bis-(1,2-ethanedinyt) bis-isothiourea dihydrobromide and dexamethasone [37] .a good preparation for the study of acute lung injury is isolated lungs in situ [17, 18, 21] . a previous method involved removing the isolated lung from the body and placing it on a force-displacement transducer to record the change in lung weight. because this procedure is rather complicated and unstable, we invented a device for measuring the change in lung weight by a scale. the isolated perfused lung is not removed from the body. instead, the whole body is placed on a scale platform and a digital-analogue converter records the change in lung weight on a recorder. in the isolated lung preparation, lung weight gain, lung weight/body weight ratio, microvascular permeability and protein concentration in bronchoalveolar lavage could be measured and calculated to evaluate the extent of lung injury, as well as to determine the pulmonary vascular tone.wang et al. [36] found that in an isolated lung, l-arginine and inhaled no increased lung injury induced by air embolism, while l-name attenuated it. mecaprine, an agent that reduces oxygen free radicals, also protects the lung from acute injury following i/r [29] . it was surprising to find that hypoxia-induced vasoconstriction is associated with an increased release of no from the lung [35] . this observation is in contrast with the notion that no is a vasodilator and that the reduction of no may lead to vasoconstriction. in endotoxic shock, no was shown to be harmful to the lung, and the major site of no formation is in the lung, not the organs [24] . no also mediates lung damage following i/r. l-arginine and inhaled no enhance i/r-induced pe, while nos inhibitors reverse i/r lung injury [21] .a recently-developed animal model of conscious and unrestrained rats is now available [26] . with this model, the condition of the animals can be observed and arterial pressure, heart rate and biochemical factors can be measured for more than 72 h without anesthesia. we used this novel model to investigate the physiological and chemical indicators for early and late stages of sepsis-associated pulmonary injury [25] . extensive studies using this technique have been carried out in our laboratory.pe induced by cerebral compression is not affected by cholinergic blockers (atropine) or beta-adrenergic blockers (propranol). however, it is prevented by a-adrenergic blocking agents (phentolamine and phenoxybenzamine), norepinephrine depleter (respine) and a sympathetic neuronal blocker (bretylium). high doses of intravenous nor-epinephrine, angiotensin and vasopressin induce severe systemic vasoconstriction and pe [4] .previous studies have demonstrated that vasodilators such as nitroprusside and nitroglycerin cause a dosedependent attenuation of neurogenic pe, while oxidant scavengers such as dimethylthiourea and superoxide dismutase exert no significant effect on centrogenic pe [7] . no is an important substance in the regulation of arterial pressure [5, 6, 20, 27, 30] . since no is a free radical, however, it may lead to the formation of hydroxyl radical and peroxynitrite, which are toxic to many organs including the lung [27, 33, 38] . thus, the effects of exogenous and endogenous no were investigated in our recent studies on tung injury induced by various disorders.in sprague-dawley rats, endotoxin produces systemic hypotension, accompanied by enhancement of cytokines (tumor necrosis factor and interleukins) and inos mrna expression [37] . in isolated perfused lung, exogenous and endogenous no is detrimental to the lung following air embolism and i/r [29, 36] . the endotoxininduced ards was found to be caused by large amounts of no release in the lung [24] . the i/r-induced lung injury is exacerbated by no inhalation and l-arginine administration, but is attenuated by an nos inhibitor, l-name [21 ] . in patients with fat embolism due to long bone fracture, the plasma levels of cgmp and nitrate/nitrite are significantly increased, suggesting that no is involved in ards associated with fat embolization [19] .our early work indicated that massive sympathetic drive is responsible for the pathogenesis ofneurogenic pe. pe induced by cerebral compression is not affected by vagotomy and adrenalectomy, but is prevented by spinal transaction [12, 14] . in rats under monitoring of aortic and pulmonary blood flow, cerebral compression causes a dramatic decrease in aortic flow (cardiac output), to less than 50% of the basal value. the pulmonary flow then slowly declines. we showed that the imbalance in right and left cardiac output resulted in the accumulation of blood in the lung [8] . furthermore, we used right and left heart bypass in that study. in the left heart bypass, aortic flow was kept constant. the lung change was not discernible following cerebral compression. in the right heart bypass, the pulmonary flow was constant and the left cardiac output was allowed to change. cerebral compression produced severe pe. these findings suggest that the decrease in left ventricular output is the major cause of pe. venous return, however, is not essential. in another study, regional sympathectomy was performed to elucidate the participation of various vascular beds in neurogenic pe [10] . splanchnic sympathectomy by dissection of the splanchnic nerves and celiac plexus almost completely prevented pe induced by cerebral compression. on the other hand, pulmonary sympathetic denervation by excising the thoracic sympathetic chains from the stellate ganglia to t4 attenuated the extent of pe by approximately 30%. these results suggest that sympathetic splanchnic vasoconstriction is essential for the production of neurogenic pe and that pulmonary sympathetic vasoconstriction is not the major factor involved. when the lung is distended by accumulation of blood volume, pulmonary vasoconstriction can, however, cause an additional effect to enhance the pulmonary venous hypertension and pe.hypoxia-induced pulmonary vasoconstriction is a well-known phenomenon. the physiological significance is that capillary flow to hypoxic alveoli can be reduced, and the flow is thus shifted to oxygenated alveoli. it has been speculated that inadequate no formation may be responsible for the increased vascular tone, pulmonary vasoconstriction and hypertension [for reviews, see ref. 6, 27] . this contention was challenged by a study from our laboratory [35] . an no detector probe was placed in the pulmonary vein in isolated perfused tung. real-time no monitoring revealed that no release was increased, accompanied by pulmonary arterial hypertension following hypoxia. l-arginine was able to potentiate no release and reduce the pulmonary hypertension, while l-name produced opposite effects. these findings suggest that continuous no release from the lung maintains pulmonary arterial pressure and that insufficient no formation is not the cause of hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension. in this connection, studies from our laboratory [5, 6, 20] also contest the early consensus that impairment of endothelial function and no formation is the cause of hypertension due to reduction of the vasodilatory effect of no [for a review, see ref . 27] .pulmonary arterial pressure, microvascular permeability, lung weight/body weight ratio and protein concentration in bronchoalveolar lavage have been measured or calculated before and after air embolism, i/r and endotoxin administration in isolated perfused lung. no only exerts a beneficial effect on the increase in pulmonary arterial pressure (pulmonary hypertension). this substance mediates the induction of acute lung injury induced by air embolism, i/r and endotoxin administration [2 t, 24, 36] . in the case of sepsis, the no concentration is increased in exhaled air, thus acting as an early marker of lung inflammation [ 16, 31] . we found that no production is mainly from the lung. furthermore, the extent of acute lung injury and the no concentration in exhaled air are greatly reduced in tung perfused with physiological solution when compared to lung perfused with whole blood [24] . this finding suggests that cellular elements are essential to the production of no and lung injury. these changes are attenuated by pretreatment with l-name, aminoguanidine and dexamethasone, suggesting that inos is involved in the pathogenesis of sepsis-induced pe. exogenous and endogenous no also causes lung injury following i/r [211.in conscious and unrestrained rats following intravenous infusion of lipopolysaccharide (lps; 10 mg/kg), hypotension and plasma nitrite/nitrate reached a peak at 9-12 h. this finding indicates that increased no release accounts for the systemic hypotension. plasma amylase reached a peak at 18-24 h after lps infusion. the increase in plasma amylase may be an indication of multiple organ damage in the late stage of sepsis. postmortem examination of the lung revealed a slight increase in lung weight compared to normal lung. lung injury was mild [25] . higher doses of lps may be required to induce severe pe, and changes in biochemical factors may be used to elucidate the pathogenesis of acute lung injury in this conscious rat model.our recent report of ards patients suggests that cerebral compression, air embolism, i/r and endotoxin are not the only causes of ards [19] . in patients with japanese b encephalitis, viral destruction of the depressor areas may induce central sympathetic activation resulting in ards. disruption of a cerebral aneurysm can cause severe intracranial hypertension and ards. obstruction of lymphatic drainage can also lead to severe ards. in fat embolism, biochemical mediators such as cgmp, no and serotonin may be involved in the pathogenesis of ards.japanese b encephalitis demonstrate viral destruction of the medullary depressor areas. the release of sympathetic drive may be the cause of ards due to viral lesions in the brain. chang et al. [1] reported that patients with enterovirus infection demonstrated hand, foot and mouth lesions, and in the most dramatic case, ards ensued. unfortunately, pathological examination of the brain was not reported in their study. the outbreaks of sars from early to mid-2003 resulted in high mortality. the mechanism of coronavirus-induced sars is still unknown. it may be interesting to see whether coronavirus and/or enterovirus introduced into the animal can produce brain lesions as observed in patients with japanese b encephalitis. a recent observation by hsu et al. [unpubl. data] revealed that ards occurred after rabies infection as a consequence of a brain lesion similar to that seen in japanese b encephalitis.research with isolated lung used no substrate and blockers to elucidate the detrimental role of no in the acute injury caused by air embolism, i/r and endotoxin. we are now extending this research with the measurement of biochemical factors and expression of mrna for cytokines and nos.in the conscious rat model, investigation of dosedependent changes in physiological parameters, biochemical factors and pathological changes should be carried out in order to observe dose-dependent organ injury, including that in the lung.experimental results in animals with chronic deprivation of constitutive nos and inos and with no knock-in or knock-out may further elucidate the involvement of different nos forms in the pathogenesis of ards.certain underlying conditions, including diabetes mellitus (dm), hypertension, chronic cardiac disease, and chronic renal disease, are recognized risk factors for illness and death caused by infection with mers-cov (2,3). we further explored this relationship among mers patients admitted to a referral hospital in riyadh, saudi arabia, during august 1, 2015-august 31, 2016. enrollment criteria and data collection methods have been described (4) .we considered persons with a medical history of dm as having documented dm and persons with multiple recorded periods of hyperglycemia during hospitalization as having possible dm (4). we similarly identified patients with hypertension or chronic kidney disease (ckd) by using documentation in the medical chart. we defined cardiovascular disease as having documentation of coronary artery disease or a history of heart failure or stroke. we considered patients with cardiovascular disease or ckd to have chronic organ dam-diabetes mellitus and hypertension are recognized risk factors for severe clinical outcomes, including death, associated with middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection. among 32 virus-infected patients in saudi arabia, severity of illness and frequency of death corresponded closely with presence of multiple and more severe underlying conditions. age (cod). we performed statistical analysis by using sas version 9.4 (https://www.sas.com) and microsoft excel (https://www.microsoft.com).of 33 enrolled patients, medical history was available for 32 through medical charts. underlying disease status among the 32 patients were no dm, hypertension, or cod (n = 11); dm without hypertension or cod (n = 5); dm and hypertension without cod (n = 5); and dm or hypertension with cod (n = 11). of the 21 patients who had dm, 19 had dm documented in the medical chart, and 2 had possible dm, with random glucose readings >350 mg/dl during hospitalization. all 15 patients with hypertension had concomitant dm ( figure; appendix table, of the 32 patients, 21 survived until discharge, including 8 who required supplemental oxygen during hospitalization. eleven died in the hospital, all of whom required ventilatory support. casepatients with multiple and more severe underlying conditions generally had worse clinical course and outcomes than those without these conditions ( figure; appendix table) . of the 11 case-patients with no dm or hypertension, 100% survived, as did all patients with dm but without hypertension or cod. in comparison, 2 (40%) of 5 with dm and hypertension but without cod died, and 9 (82%) of 11 with dm or hypertension and with cod died (appendix table) .in a previous study (5), dm, chronic lung disease, heart disease, and smoking were identified as underlying health conditions and behaviors associated with primary infection with mers-cov. alqahtani et al. reported that dm, hypertension, cardiac disease, renal disease, and bronchial asthma were frequent underlying conditions associated with death of mers-cov-infected patients and also found that the risk for death increased for patients with multiple comorbidities (3). we found that dm, hypertension, and cod co-occurred frequently in mers-cov-infected patients, and severity of illness and frequency figure. characteristics of 32 case-patients infected with middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus, by underlying condition and survival status, saudi arabia. 1, dm defined as hyperglycemia recorded during hospitalization (n = 2). 2a, chronic lung disease in 1 patient with no dm or htn who survived, 1 patient with dm and htn but no cod who died, and 1 patient with cvd and not ckd who died. 2b, epilepsy in 1 patient with cvd and ckd who died. 2c, uterine cancer in 1 patient with cvd and not ckd who died. cod, chronic organ damage; ckd, chronic kidney disease; cvd, cardiovascular disease; dm, diabetes mellitus; htn, hypertension. of death were higher for patients with multiple and more severe underlying conditions. further studies are necessary to better clarify the mechanisms that lead to severe outcomes among these patients.for case-patients infected with mers-cov, the presence and compounding of underlying conditions, including dm, hypertension, and, ultimately, cod, corresponded with an increasingly complicated clinical course and death. these findings indicate that increased clinical vigilance is warranted for patients with multiple and severe underlying conditions who are suspected of being infected with mers-cov.influenza d virus (idv) can potentially cause respiratory diseases in livestock. we isolated a new idv strain from diseased cattle in japan; this strain is phylogenetically and antigenically distinguished from the previously described idvs. (1) (2) (3) (4) . in addition, both idv rnas and specific antibodies have been detected in many animal species (1, 5, 6) . to date, idvs have been phylogenetically classified into 3 lineages: d/ok, d/660, and japanese lineages. we isolated a new idv strain from cattle in japan with respiratory disease, whose hemagglutinin-esterase-fusion (hef) gene did not belong to the known phylogenetical lineages.at a herd in yamagata prefecture in northern japan, 15 holsteins (37.5% of bred cattle in the herd) had respiratory signs develop during january 6-10, 2019 (appendix table 1 , http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/ eid/article/26/1/19-1092-app1.pdf). we collected nasal swab samples from 9 of 15 cows on january 7 and 10. all samples subjected to idv-specific realtime reverse transcription pcr (rt-pcr) (7) were found positive. we also subjected these samples to rt-pcr analyses specific for bovine viral diarrhea virus 1 and 2, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus, bovine parainfluenza virus 3, bovine respiratory syncytial virus, bovine coronavirus, bovine rhinitis a virus, mycobacterium bovis, mycoplasma bovigenitalium, mycoplasma dispar, ureaplasma diversum, and mycoplasma bovirhinis. all samples were found negative for these pathogens except for the sample from cow no. 5, which was positive for m. dispar. despite these cows receiving antimicrobial drug treatment, we isolated mannheimia haemolytica from 7 of them (nos. 1-5, 7, 8); cow no. 5 died on january 7. taken together, thesethe 2019 pandemic coronavirus has affected more than three million people in 211 countries, causing more than two hundred thousand deaths as of the end of april 2020 1 . the etiologic agent of this disease is the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov2), which is transmitted through contact with infected persons or contaminated fluids 2, 3 .several risk factors are associated with this disease. in a multicenter cohort study, advanced age was found to be significantly correlated with overall covid-19 prevalence, which is consistent with the higher incidence observed in older adults 4 . the sex is another risk factor as a higher prevalence has been seen in men than women 4 . other studies have shown that the presence of any comorbidity increases the chances of covid-19 infection causing respiratory failure and death in patients 5 . another study reports that patients admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) had a higher number of comorbidities (72.2%) than those not admitted to the icu (37.3%) 6 . hence, comorbidities are considered a risk factor for fatality, and data from other reports show up to a 90% prevalence of comorbidities in fatal cases 7 , with cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease being the most prevalent known comorbidities in covid-19 cases 8 .currently, several published studies describe the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of patients and mortality cases affected by covid-19 in different parts of the world. for this reason, the aim of this meta-analysis was to estimate the prevalence and geographical distribution of comorbidities in all patients, in those admitted to the icu, and in mortality cases affected by covid-19 using the previously published data.the protocol for this systematic review was published in the international prospective registry of systematic reviews (prospero 2020: crd42020182479) before its implementation. the protocol and the final report were developed based on the cochrane manual of systematic reviews of interventions 9 .what is the prevalence of comorbidities in all patients, patients admitted to the icu, and in fatal cases affected by the new coronavirus (covid-19)?this review considered studies that conducted epidemiological and clinical descriptions in patients and in fatal cases from different parts of the world, in order to determine the prevalence and geographic distribution of comorbidities in patients affected by covid-19.an initial search limited to medline was performed using mesh index terms and related keywords. this search was followed by an analysis of the words in the text of the title, abstract, and index terms used to describe the articles. a second search using all the identified keywords and index terms was conducted on may 15, 2020 using the following databases: latin american and caribbean health sciences literature (lilacs), the bibliographic database of the us national of medicine (medline), the elsevier database (embase), web of science and scopus. the mesh index term search included covid-19, sars-cov2, prevalence, and comorbidity. as covid-19 is a recent topic, thesis and dissertation papers have not yet been published and were not evaluated.the articles selected for data recovery were analyzed by two independent reviewers who assessed the methodological validity of each text before their inclusion in this review. the quality of the publications included were evaluated based on the criteria derived from the grading of recommendations assessment, development and evaluation method (grade). points were awarded to the studies if they did not present limitations in study design or execution (risk of bias), inconsistency of results, evidence based on indirect data, imprecision, and publication bias. a score of four to five points was considered as high quality, three points as moderate quality, and zero to two points as low quality.the data were added to the review manager (revman 5.3) for analysis. a data extraction table was created to assess the quality of demographic data, study location, sample size, number of cases, number of positives and the diagnostic test.the random-effect model meta-analysis method was used to analyze the pooled prevalence of comorbidities in patients and in fatal cases affected by covid-19 in different parts of the world. the heterogeneity among the studies was analyzed using the higgins test (i 2 ) that shows the percentage of variation among studies. these analyses were compiled by using the stata software, version 12 (statacorp llc, texas, usa). the odds ratio test, with a 95% confidence interval (95% ci), was calculated to measure the likelihood of death for a patient with a comorbidity compared to a patient without comorbidities. after applying the eligibility exclusion criteria (duplicate texts, articles related to other topics, text excluded by the review criteria or method quality), 42 studies were considered for analyses [5] [6] [7] . of them, 39 were used to calculate the total prevalence of comorbidities in patients affected by covid-19, six were used to calculate the prevalence of comorbidities in patients admitted to the icu, and 11 were used to calculate the comorbidity prevalence in fatal cases. the characteristics of the studies included in this meta-analysis are shown in table 1 . the results of the search strategy are shown in a prisma flow chart ( figure 1 ). the data extracted from the final selection are shown in the supplementary table s1 .according to the criteria applied based on grade, the studies that met the selection criteria presented high methodological quality with a score of five. the i 2 test indicated a low heterogeneity among the studies. publication bias was not evaluated because the currently available methods are not considered useful for studies on proportions. the summaries of methodological quality and bias risk and applicability for each study and among the included studies are shown in the supplementary figures s1 and s2.in the 39 studies used to calculate the pooled prevalence of comorbidities, 89,238 patients affected by covid-19 were analyzed; 11,341 (12.7%) presented one or more comorbidities, 2,172 (2.4%) were admitted to the icu, and 3,532 (4 %) patients died. the patients age range was 41 to 70 years. among these studies, only one was conducted in the usa 43 , and included a large number of patients (74,439) but did not segregate patients according to sex. in the other 38 studies, 14,844 patients were registered with a total of 8,518 (57.4%) males and 6,413 (42.6%) females. the reported comorbidities included hypertension, heart disease, diabetes, cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, chronic diseases of the liver, kidneys, digestive system, autoimmune disorders, immunodeficiencies, stroke, and others. only one study specified which diseases were included in the category "others".regarding the geographical distribution of the studied patients, 80,139 (88.7%) were in the usa and 9,051 the analysis of the general population affected by covid-19 indicated a 42% pooled prevalence of comorbidities (95% ci: 25-60; weight 100%). in china, the geographical distribution analysis showed a 43% prevalence of comorbidities (95% ci: 37-48; weight 89.4%), followed by the usa with 8% (95% ci: 7-8; weight 5.34%), india 29% (95% ci: 14-50; weight 2.59%), and singapore 28% (95% ci: 12 -51; weight 2.58%) (figure 2 ).among those who had one or more previous diseases, there was a total of 16,222 comorbidities. hypertension was the most prevalent in 32% (95% ci: 31-33; weight 6.54%), followed by diabetes 22% (95% ci: 21-23; weight 6.57%), heart disease 13% (95% ci: 13-14; weight 6.62%), and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) 8% (95% ci: 7-8; weight 6.65%). in addition to these, other comorbidities were also assessed, such as kidney disease (5%), cancer (3%), asthma (3%), liver disease (2%), stroke (2%), immunodeficiencies (2%), and others (8%). the pooled prevalence with 95% ci values for each disease are shown in table 2 .of the six studies that conducted descriptions of the epidemiological and clinical profiles in patients admitted to the icu, five divided the data according by sex. in these five studies, 1,661 patients were described 6, 11, 13, 36, 48 . among these patients, 1,345 (81%) were male, 316 (19%) were female, and the age range was 46 to 63 years. the clinical characteristics of 2,730 patients were also described, indicating that 1,449 (53%) had one or more comorbidities. in total, there were 2,050 comorbidities among patients admitted to the icu.the pooled prevalence of comorbidities in icu patients was 61% (95% ci: 42-80; weight 100%). the geographical distribution analysis showed a 69% prevalence of comorbidities (95% ci: 52-86; weight 61.09%) in china, followed by italy, with 66% (95% ci: 63-68; weight 19.47%), and the usa, with 33% (95% ci: 31-36; weight 19.44%). the forest plot for a random-effect meta-analysis of comorbidities in patients admitted to icus by covid-19, are shown in the supplementary figure s3 .the most prevalent comorbidities in the icu population were hypertension 26% (95% ci: 25-29; weight 6.86%), heart disease 18% (95% ci: 16-19; weight 7.15%), diabetes 17% (95% ci: 16-19; weight 7.17%), and others 17% (95% ci: 16-19; weight 7.15%). in addition to these diseases, patients with copd (7%), cancer (5%), kidney disease (5%), liver disease (2%), and stroke (1%) were also evaluated. the pooled prevalence with the 95% ci values for each disease is shown in table 2 .eleven studies included descriptions of the epidemiological and clinical profiles of a total of 624 cases of mortality. in these studies, 394 patients were males and 218 females, with an age range between 64 and 70 years. among the 624 fatal cases, 415 of the patients had one or more previous diseases, totaling 751 comorbidities. the pooled prevalence of comorbidities among the fatal cases was 77% (95% ci: 68-86; weight 100%). only two countries were analyzed in the geographical distribution: china, with 71% (95% ci: 63-82; weight 76.79%) and korea, with 92% (95% ci: 87-97; weight 23.21%) (figure 3) .the most prevalent comorbidities in this population were hypertension 35% (95% ci: 25-29; weight 8.10%), diabetes 19% (95% ci: 16-22; weight 8.53%), heart disease 17% (95 % ci: 14-20; weight 8.61%), and copd 9% (95% ci: 7-11; weight 9.22%). in addition to these diseases, patients with cerebrovascular accident (6%), cancer (5%), kidney disease (4%), liver disease (3%), and other (2%) were also evaluated. the pooled prevalence with 95% ci values for each disease is shown in table 2 .the probability of a patient with comorbidity of dying from covid-19, and the significance of this associations using the fisher's exact test, were calculated. the number of patients with comorbidities who died and those who survived, in addition to the patients without comorbidities who died and who survived, were used to calculate an odds ratio of 2.4 with 95% ci 1.7-3.3 and in the fisher's exact test the value of p < 0.0001.this meta-analysis was based on 42 studies, including a large number of descriptions from china and the united states. studies conducted in india, italy, the united kingdom, south korea, and singapore were also analyzed. a higher prevalence of male patients infected with covid-19 was observed compared to females. this predisposition of the male sex was also observed in the diseases mers-cov and sars-co, which are also caused by viruses of the coronavirus family 49, 50 .the pooled prevalence of comorbidities in the general population of patients affected by the new coronavirus (covid-19) was 42% (95% ci: 26-59). china was the country with the highest prevalence, although there were also more studies analyzed from this country. however, it is important to highlight that two studies from the united states resulted in contrasting prevalence values (4% and 94%). since the united states is the country that leads the statistics so far with the highest number of confirmed cases (more than one million) and deaths from coronavirus (more than seventy thousand), on may 8, 2020, it is of utmost importance to publish more data on the clinical characteristics of the disease in this country.the results of this study confirm that the prevalence of comorbidities increases as the patient's clinical conditions worsens. in the general population affected by covid-19, the prevalence of comorbidities was 42%, 61% among patients admitted to the icu, and 77% among fatal cases. males were the most affected in the three groups. on the other hand, the mean age also increases when we compare the group of patients in general with the group of fatal cases, as previously described among risk factors such as age, sex, and comorbidities [4] [5] [6] [7] .regarding comorbidities, in the three groups analyzed (general population, admission to icu, and fatal cases), hypertension was the most prevalent comorbidity, accounting for 32%, 26%, and 35%, respectively. in the general population, diabetes was the second-most prevalent (22%) comorbidity, followed by heart disease (13%) and copd (8%). however, in patients admitted to the icu, diabetes (17%) and heart disease (18%) showed similar values. the same phenomenon was observed in fatal cases, with diabetes (19%), and heart disease (17%) showing similar values. considering that type 1 diabetes mellitus usually manifests during childhood or adolescence, type 2 diabetes frequently manifests in adults, and heart diseases are more prevalent in older patients, one may think that the earlier onset of diabetes may account for it to rank second among the comorbidities in the general population affected by covid-19. on the other hand, the group of fatal cases is composed of predominantly older adults, a population in which hypertension, diabetes, and heart disease are prevalent.the odds ratio for any comorbidity was 2.4 with 95% ci 1.7-3.3 with a statistical significance of p < 0.0001. in other words, a patient with a comorbidity has 2.4 times the chance of dying from covid-19 compared to a patient without a comorbidity. this may explain the high prevalence of comorbidities among fatal cases,in developing this study, we encountered several limitations. firstly, not all studies segregated epidemiological and clinical data (age, sex, percentage of comorbidity, and patients hospitalized in the icu). secondly, some studies classified comorbidities in the "other" category, but only one study described which diseases were comprised in this category. thirdly, since china is the primary focus of the rise of the pandemic, most of the studies included were from this country. no studies from africa, oceania, or latin america were found. finally, in meta-analyses, it is recommended that publication bias are always assessed by statistical methods. however, currently available methods, such as the funnel plot and the egger regression test, are not considered useful tools in studies on proportions 51 .one can conclude that the existence of comorbidities increases the probability of dying from covid-19 by 2.4 times compared to those who do not have pre-existing conditions. the most relevant comorbidities were shown to be hypertension, heart disease, and diabetes. thus, comorbidities are more prevalent in the group of mortality cases when compared to the general population group. however, these conclusions are based on the evidence obtained, mostly from studies conducted in china. for this reason, studies describing the epidemiological and clinical profiles of covid-19 cases in africa, oceania, and latin america are recommended to clarify the behavior of this disease in these regions, and, thus, be able to apply effective measures aimed at safeguarding populations at risk.oae and asz contributed to create and design the study, analyze, and interpret the data, and write the first and final version of the manuscript; efa, fgl, tam and pfb contributed to analyze data and wrote the first version of the manuscript. all authors approved the final version of the manuscript and are responsible for all aspects of the work, including ensuring its accuracy and integrity. provide an explicit statement of questions being addressed with reference to participants, interventions, comparisons, outcomes, and study design (picos).methods: review question.indicate if a review protocol exists, if and where it can be accessed (e.g., web address), and, if available, provide registration information including registration number.specify study characteristics (e.g., picos, length of follow-up) and report characteristics (e.g., years considered, language, publication status) used as criteria for eligibility, giving rationale.information sources 7describe all information sources (e.g., databases with dates of coverage, contact with study authors to identify additional studies) in the search and date last searched. state the process for selecting studies (i.e., screening, eligibility, included in systematic review, and, if applicable, included in the meta-analysis).data collection process 10describe method of data extraction from reports (e.g., piloted forms, independently, in duplicate) and any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators.data items 11list and define all variables for which data were sought (e.g., picos, funding sources) and any assumptions and simplifications made.methods: data extraction/quality assessmentdescribe methods used for assessing risk of bias of individual studies (including specification of whether this was done at the study or outcome level), and how this information is to be used in any data synthesis.additional file. figure s1 . additional file. figure s2 .describe methods of additional analyses (e.g., sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression), if done, indicating which were pre-specified.give numbers of studies screened, assessed for eligibility, and included in the review, with reasons for exclusions at each stage, ideally with a flow diagram.study characteristics 18 for each study, present characteristics for which data were extracted (e.g., study size, picos, follow-up period) and provide the citations. (table 1) risk of bias within studies 19 present data on risk of bias of each study and, if available, any outcome level assessment (see item 12).additional file. figure s2 and figure s1 .for all outcomes considered (benefits or harms), present, for each study: (a) simple summary data for each intervention group (b) effect estimates and confidence intervals, ideally with a forest plot.results. additional file. figure s2 .give results of additional analyses, if done (e.g., sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression [see item 16] ).summarize the main findings including the strength of evidence for each main outcome; consider their relevance to key groups (e.g., healthcare providers, users, and policy makers).discuss limitations at study and outcome level (e.g., risk of bias), and at review-level (e.g., incomplete retrieval of identified research, reporting bias). discussionprovide a general interpretation of the results in the context of other evidence, and implications for future research. conclusiondescribe sources of funding for the systematic review and other support (e.g., supply of data); role of funders for the systematic review. na figure s1 -the methodological quality summary bias risk concern and applicability for each study. -the methodological quality summary bias risk concern and applicability for across the included studies.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is the virus responsible for covid-19, a global pandemic with catastrophic consequences for healthcare systems and populations around the world. sars-cov-2 was initially described in december 2019 in wuhan, china [1] . the virus rapidly escalated and on march 11, 2020 ; the world health organization declared it a pandemic. sars-cov-2 shares similarities with sars-cov, the virus responsible for the 2002-2003 sars epidemic, and middle eastern respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers), the virus responsible for mers [2] . following the sars epidemic, researchers extensively investigated the pathophysiologic mechanisms of sars-cov infection, including the interaction of the virus with the heart and lungs. based on these studies, researchers believe that the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor, located on alveolar epithelial cells, serves as a high affinity receptor and co-transporter for sars-cov-2 to enter the lungs [3] . medications, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (acei), block ace2 receptors, which may predispose or protect against covid-19 infection. this editorial summarizes the current scientific evidence surrounding this subject in order to guide clinical practice.juan simon rico-mesa and averi white share first authorshipthe renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) maintains plasma sodium concentration via feedback from blood pressure, baroreceptors, and sodium and potassium levels. first, the kidneys secrete renin, which metabolizes angiotensinogen into angiotensin i. next, the kidneys and lungs secrete ace, which converts angiotensin i into angiotensin ii. finally, angiotensin ii stimulates vasoconstriction, cardiovascular response, and aldosterone and adh production; this ultimately increases blood pressure and body fluid volume through sodium, potassium, and free water resorption [3] . ace2 receptor, a homolog of the angiotensin i-converting enzyme (ace) receptor, is a type i transmembrane aminopeptidase with high expression in heart and lung tissue [4] , but which is also expressed in the endothelium and kidney (see fig. 1 , illustrating the raas activation pathway). discovered in 2000, ace2 receptor appears to counter-regulate raas activation by degrading angiotensin ii [5] . the raas system is widely implicated in dm, hypertension, and heart failure. acei and arb drugs, based upon strong evidence of efficacy, are commonly used in the management of hypertension, heart failure, post myocardial infarction care, and to slow progression of renal disease associated with diabetes.with the exponential rise of covid-19 cases worldwide, observational studies have identified risk factors for infection and poor outcomes. three separate studies identified hypertension and dm as highly prevalent among covid-19 patients:a. according to yang et al., among 52 critically ill patients, dm was present in 17% of cases [6] . b. according to guan et al., among 1099 patients, dm was present in 16.2% of cases and hypertension was present in 23.7% of cases [7] . c. according to zhang et al., among 140 hospitalized patients, dm was present in 12% of cases and hypertension was present in 30% of cases [8] .while both hypertension and dm are treated with acei and arb, medication use was not assessed in any of the three aforementioned studies, leading to an inconclusive hypothesis. however, one study to date has analyzed the effect of acei and arb use on the covid-19 population. according to peng et al., among 112 patients, cardiovascular comorbidities led to worse outcomes, with most deaths occurring secondary to fulminant inflammation, lactic acidosis, and thrombotic states [9] . acei and arb use did not influence morbidity or mortality [9] .in addition to these observations, there is a well-known association between the viruses, sars-cov and mers-cov, and deleterious cardiac events, including cardiac injury in sars-cov as well as myocarditis and heart failure in mers-cov [10] . furthermore, sars-cov-2 was recently associated with cardiac injury, defined by a troponin > 28 pg/ml or electrocardiogram/echocardiogram abnormalities, in 12% of patients from a covid-19 cohort. these data demonstrate a cardiac affinity with all three viruses [11] .the etiology of cardiac damage in patients with covid-19 is unclear, but ace2 receptors may play a role, given the high affinity of sars-cov for ace2 receptors [12] . a recent fig. 1 raas pathway showing acei/arb mechanism of action and sars and sars-cov2 infectious mechanism via ace2 receptors commentary published in the lancet respiratory medicine hypothesizes that the use of ace2 receptor increasing drugs is at higher risk for severe covid-19 infection. acei initially inhibits ace leading to decreased angiotensin i levels, causing a possible negative feedback loop that ultimately upregulates more ace2 receptor to be able to interact with the decreased angiotensin i substrate available [13] (see fig.  1.) . this ace2 receptor upregulation results in increased binding sites for sars-cov-2, leading to preferential covid-19 infection. this is particularly observed in patients with diabetes and/or hypertension, since they are usually taking acei or arb [12] . this comment was released before the findings published by peng et al. [9] . an editorial response by sommerstein et al. [14] , based on the findings by ferrario et al. showing a 5-fold increase in ace2 levels with lisinopril and 3-fold increase in ace2 levels with losartan [15] , was published in the british medical journal.conversely, some investigators argue that acei or arb use may be beneficial in covid-19 infection prevention. li et al., for example, proposed that acei inhibition of ace may stimulate a negative feedback (given the lack of angiotensin ii, upregulating ace2 receptors and decreasing overall inflammation [16] ). sun et al. argued that acei use im pairs the ace/angiotensin ii/angiotensin-1 receptor pathway, therefore, impairing the integrity of the ace2/angiotensin 1-7/ mas (mas-related g protein-coupled receptor). a disruption of the ace2/angiotensin 1-7/mas pathway could lead to decreased production of ace2, decreasing chances of sars-cov-2 entering the cell [17] . some raas inactivated animal models demonstrate symptom relief in acute severe pneumonia and respiratory failure, through vasoconstriction mechanisms [17] . recent findings also demonstrate that patients on the arb olmesartan had increased secretion of urinary ace2, likely from an upregulation mechanism, although unclear [18] . despite this hypothesis of ace2 upregulation, a causal relationship decreasing mortality has not been demonstrated.finally, given the contradictory hypotheses, rapidly evolving nature of the disease, and social media-related hysteria, several cardiology associations (hfsa/acc/aha and esc hypertension council) released an official statement regarding the continuation of acei and arb for covid-19 patients [19] . the associations strongly recommend continuing treatment with acei/arb in patients who were previously taking either class of medication.there is a lack of scientific evidence and clinical data to support discontinuing ace/arb use in patients with covid-19 and co-existing heart failure, hypertension, or ischemic heart disease. the well-studied reduction in mortality conferred by ace/arb use and the beneficial effects for patients with diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and proteinuria or albuminuria currently outweigh the theoretical risks. as the covid-19 pandemic continues to rapidly evolve and affect more patients with cardiovascular comorbidities, further research is needed to clarify the accuracy of existing hypotheses.conflict of interest dr. rico-mesa and ms. white have nothing to disclose. dr. anderson has received honoraria from novartis, pfizer. he is a consultant for edwards lifesciences and received research support from abbott.human and animal rights and informed consent this manuscript does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects.the renin-angiotensin system (ras) maintains the homeostasis of blood pressure and the balance of fluid and salts [1] . the homeostasis of ras is critical for the physiological and pathological regulation in various organs, including the heart, kidneys, and lungs [1] . angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) 2 is a potent negative regulator of ras, which is critical for maintaining the homeostasis of ras [2, 3] . the human ace2 gene is located on chromosome xp22 and includes 18 exons. functioning as a typical zinc metallopeptidase, ace2 protein, which contains 805 amino acids, is a type i integral membrane glycoprotein containing a single catalytic domain [3] . in ras, ace2 degrades angiotensin (ang) ii, which is potent in vasoconstriction, pro-inflammation, and pro-fibrosis, and converts it into ang (1-7) which is vasodialatic, anti-proliferative and apoptotic [3] . besides the systemic effect in blood pressure regulation, ace2 has local regulatory effects in the pathological changes in several organs, including the heart, kidneys, and lungs [2] . ace2 also regulates the amino acid absorption in the kidney and the gut and modulates the expression of transporters for amino acid [2] . ace2 was identified as the receptor for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), which could rapidly cause acute lung failure in humans [4] . hence ace2 is vital for the viral entry to the host cells during sars-cov infection.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic as declared by the world health organization on 11 march 2020 [5] has accumulated over one million confirmed cases globally as of the early april 2020 [6] . epidemiological study revealed that covid-19 infected people of all ages [8] . the elderly and co-morbid patients are at higher risk of having poor clinical outcomes and prognosis [8, 9] . high-throughput sequencing identified the pathogen of covid-19 as a novel betacoronavirus [10] , which was named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses [11] . comparing to sars-cov, sars-cov-2 is more infective for causing more than 120 times of infections globally (1,051,635 confirmed cases of covid-19 as of 4 april 2020 [6] vs. 8096 sars patients [12] ) but seems to be less virulent because only parts of the patients showed similar severity as sars-cov infection [8] . also, the global case fatality rate of covid-19 was 5.4 % (56,985/1,051,635, according to the data on 4 april 2020 [6] ), which was lower than that of sars-cov infection (9.6 %, 774/8096) [12] . similar to sars-cov, sars-cov-2 mainly transmits through respiratory droplets and direct contact according to the reported cases [8, 13] . also, the entry of sars-cov-2 to the host cells requires binding with the receptor via the sspike on the surface of the virus [10] . computational modeling [10, 14] and viral infection experiments using hela cells that express ace2 protein from humans, chinese horseshoe bats, civets, pigs, and mice [15] provided evidence that ace2 is the receptor for sars-cov-2. results in the cryo-em experiments demonstrated that sars-cov-2 had a ten times higher affinity to ace2 comparing to sars-cov, which was consistent with the higher efficiency of infection of sars-cov-2 [16] . these findings indicated that ace2 might be crucial for the human infection of sars-cov-2 and for the progression and prognosis of covid-19. understanding the expression and activity of ace2 under different physiological and pathological conditions may help to predict the susceptibility of sars-cov-2 in different cohorts of people and the clinical outcomes and prognosis of covid-19 patients. in the present review, we will summarize the regulation and function of ace2 in different physiological and pathological states and discuss the potential implication in sars-cov-2 infection-induced covid-19.organs that express a higher level of ace2 are potential targets of sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, the distribution and abundance of ace2 in organs may be closely related to the clinical symptoms of covid-19. it is known that ace2 is enriched in the heart, kidneys, and testes, and is also broadly distributed in the lungs, liver, intestine, and brain [2] . the lung is the primary target organ of sars-cov-2 infection [8, 9, 17] . most of the hospitalized patients infected with sars-cov-2 developed pneumonia, which was typically characterized as groundglass opacity and bilateral patchy shadowing in chest computed tomography [8, 17] . pathological examination on the biopsy samples obtained from a deceased covid-19 patient revealed diffused alveolar damage with cellular fibromyxoid exudates in both lungs [18] . an analysis of the single-cell rna sequencing data obtained from 43,134 human lung cells revealed that 0.64 % of cells in lungs expressed ace2 and 83 % of ace2 was expressed on type ii apical surface of epithelial cells (at2) [19] . other types of cells, including type i apical epithelial cells, airway epithelial cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages, also express ace2 at lower levels than at2 [19] . these results indicated that at2 is likely to be the primary target of sars-cov-2 in the lungs [19] .in addition to respiratory symptoms, the common complications found in patients infected with sars-cov-2 include acute cardiac injury and acute kidney injury [9, 17] . rectal swabs, stool, urine, and saliva sampled from some covid-19 patients were positive for the sars-cov-2 virus [8] . these findings demonstrated the broad distribution of sars-cov-2 in humans, whose pattern was similar to the distribution of ace2. an analysis on the single-cell rna sequencing data from human organs revealed that cells that express ace2 included 7.5 % of cardiomyocyte, 4 % of proximal tubular epithelial cells, 2.4 % of bladder urothelial cells, 30 % of ileum epithelial cells, 1 % of esophageal epithelial cell, and 2 % of respiratory tract epithelial cells [20] . sars-cov-2 may attack these cells after binding with ace2. the tissue damage and inflammation may cause severe complications that may worsen the clinical outcomes. moreover, positive detection of the rna of sars-cov-2 in the samples of gastrointestinal tissues and stool from covid-19 patients suggested that fecal-oral transmission might be possible [21] . it is noteworthy that the placental villi and the uterus also express ace2 [22, 23] , indicating the possibility of vertical maternal-fetal transmission. current reports on clinical observations indicated that this transmission route is possible [24] [25] [26] but may be low risk [27, 28] .some of the sex hormones affect the homeostasis of ras. although the ace2 activity showed no difference between the male and female [29] , the males have higher expression levels of ace2 in the lungs compared to the females [19] . moreover, at least five types of cells in the lungs from the males express ace2, while only two to four types in the female's lungs do so [19] . consistent with these findings, the sars-cov-2 infected males were slightly but not statistically significantly higher than the females (58.1 % vs. 41.9 %) in a survey included 1099 patients [8] .the female sex hormones may affect ace2 [29] . the ace/ace2 activity ratio in the male serum is higher than that in the females, which may partially attribute to the activation effect of estrogen on ace2 activity [30] . during pregnancy, the fluctuation of hormones may drastically change the expression of ace2 both in the reproductive system and in other organs [23] . the ace2 mrna expression in the uterus of pregnant rats was significantly higher than the one in the unpregnant rats [23] , indicating the implication of progesterone in the regulation of ace2 expression [31] . similar up-regulation of ace2 expression was also found in the kidneys of pregnant rats [32] . these results suggested that pregnant women infected with sars-cov-2 should be watched for severe complications and rapid progression.according to the data which collected 1099 patients with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 from 552 hospitals in mainland china, the average age of the severe patients (n = 173) was significantly older than the non-severe ones (n = 926) by seven years [8] . among the critically ill covid-19 patients, the non-survivors (64.6 years) were older than the survivors (51.9 years) [9] . these data indicated that aging might be correlated with the pathological progression and poor prognosis of covid-19. results obtained from the genetic knockout mice model demonstrated that ace2 depletion caused physiological early aging independent of ang (1-7), indicating the regulatory role of ace2 in aging [33] . ace2 expression in the lungs may decrease during aging according to the results in aged rats [34] . in humans, the ace2 activity did not differ from the young and aged males but showed significant difference in the young and aged females [29, 30] . this finding indicated that the effect of aging in ace2 activity might have a gender difference [29, 30] . in a study that included 220 healthy chinese volunteers, young chinese females showed significantly higher ace2 activity than aged females [30] . however, the activity of ace2 in women during aging is controversial, as a spanish group reported lower ace2 activity in the young females comparing to the aged females [29] . such controversy may due to sample number-induced deviation or race, which requires further validation and investigation.although children of all ages were susceptible to covid-19, accumulating clinical data indicated lower infection rates and better clinical outcomes in children compared with adults [7, 8] . recently, a retrospective study analyzed clinical data from 2135 pediatric cases with covid-19 and found that over 90 % of these pediatric patients were asymptomatic, mild, or moderate cases [35] . although there currently lacks an explanation to this phenomenon, the authors speculated a potential implication of ace2 [35] .results in the animal studies implied that ace2 expression in adults might be higher than that in children. sheep could be used as an animal model for studying the development of ras [36] . the expression of ace2 was significantly lower in the neonatal sheep comparing to that in y. li, et al. pharmacological research 157 (2020) 104833 the adult ones [36] . this finding seems to indicate that lower ace2 expression might be correlated with the lower susceptibility of children to sars-cov-2. however, the expression and activity of ace2 during the development of human children and teenagers are largely unclear [35] .according to the latest study on covid-19, 12.6 % were current smokers (137/1085), and these patients are more severe than neversmokers as indicated by the severe rate (smoker: 21.2 %, 29/137 vs. never-smoker: 14.5 %, 134/927) [8] . these data suggested that cigarette smoking may affect the pathogenesis and progression of covid-19. the ace2 content in the blood of healthy male volunteers was decreased by long term smoking experience [37] . the effect of cigarette smoking may attribute to nicotine, which could suppress the activity of the ace2/ang (1-7)/mas receptor axis and upregulate the ace/ang ii/ ang ii type 1 receptor [38] . the decreased ace2 level is accompanied by the imbalance of ace/ace2 and hence the disturbance in ras homeostasis. animal experiments have demonstrated that downregulation of ace2 contributes to the pathogenesis of cigarette smoking-induced pulmonary arterial hypertension (pah) [39] .the expression and activity of ace2 may be promptly modulated by diets, especially the salt, glucose and fat. high salt diet increased activity of ace2 in the urine in mice, while low salt intake decreased it [40] . the activity of ace2 in the urine may reflect the ace2 in the kidneys [40] . indeed, it has been found that high salt diet increased the ace/ace2 ratio in the glomeruli which resulted in renal dysfunction via inducing oxidative stress [41] . ace2 was also implicated in the hypertension whose pathogenesis was closely correlated with high salt intake. high salt intake increased the prevalence of hypertension in human with ace2 rs2285666 tt and rs714205 gg genes [42] . in the spontaneous hypertension rat model, high salt diet profoundly worsened the symptoms of hypertension and impaired kidneys via decreasing ace2 [43] . high glucose diet could also up-regulate ace and down-regulate ace2, leading to the imbalance of ace/ace2 in the heart [44] . strikingly, the effect of diet could affect the offspring. animal experiments using high salt diet-fed pregnant sheep revealed that the suppress effect of high salt diet on ace2 may affect the embryo and last post natal [45] . western diet could decrease the methylation of ace2 gene in the kidneys and brain stem of perinatal mice and resulted in autonomic dysfunctions in the male offspring [46] . these findings collectively demonstrated the impact of diet on ace2 may be involved in the pathogenesis of several chronic diseases and may even affect the offspring.covid-19 patients with comorbidities were more likely to progress to critically ill patients compared with those without comorbidities [9, 17] . it has been found that patients with coexisting disorders, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), hypertension, coronary heart disease, chronic kidney disease or diabetes were significantly more severe than patients without any existing disorders (table 1 ) [8] . it is likely that patients with these chronic diseases were usually aged, weak in immunity, or poor in respiratory tract function, including the weakened movement of respiratory mucosal cilia cells, reduced ability to excrete, and cough reflexes. several complications have been reported in covid-19 patients. some of them were closely correlated with the severity of the disease (table 2) . studying the implication and regulation of ace2 in the diseased status would help in the understanding of the progression of covid-19 and prognosis.since sars-cov-2 mainly transmits via respiratory droplets and that ace2 is mostly distributed on the at2 cells, the lung is the most preliminary target organ for sars-cov-2 infection, and pneumonia was the most common complication seen in covid-19 patients with the occurrence of 91.1 % [8] . acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is one of the most severe complications in covid-19 patients, with the severity rate ranged from 73 % to 92 % [8, 17, 47] . ace2 has well-established protective effects in the lungs [2] . ace2 polymorphism was correlated with the severity of ards [2] . ace2 knockout mice showed severe ards-like injury pathology in the lungs comparing to the wild type controls [48] . these symptoms can be alleviated by treatment of catalytically active, but not enzymatically inactive, recombinant ace2 (race2) protein [48] . moreover, ace2 was also protective of sarsinfection induced acute lung disease [49] . the expression of ace2 in the lungs of mice infected with sars-cov was greatly reduced, which aggravated the lung failure [49] . these results convincingly proved that ace2 is protective against lung injury and may be a therapeutic target for ards shown in covid-19.ace2 mrna expression decreased in the lungs of copd rats model comparing to controls [50] . the reduction of ace2 in the copd lungs revealed the dysregulation of ras, which may attribute to the up-regulation of et-1. because et-1 increased in the sputum and serum samples of copd patients [51] , and et-1 dose-and time-dependently decreased the expression and activity of ace2 in the cell culture of human bronchial epithelial cells [52] . recent data showed that covid-19 patients with copd as coexisting disorder were more likely to progress into severe cases [8] , which may partially attribute to the decrease in ace2.many pulmonary diseases, such as copd, are accompanied by hypoxia [53] . in the early phase of hypoxia, ace2 expression was profoundly elevated in pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells. later, with the elevation of the hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (hif-1α), the expression of ace, the target gene of hif-1α, increased accompanied by decrease of ace2 [54] . animal experiments demonstrated that similar regulation by hif-1α on ace2 level, possibly via mirna let-7b after hypoxia in rats [55] . these results indicated that hypoxia and the cellular adaptation to hypoxia could profoundly induce the fluctuation of ace2 in the lungs.ras dysregulation is primarily implicated in the pathogenesis and progression of hypertension [56] . being the negative regulator of ras, ace2 decreases the blood pressure in animal models of hypertension [2] . a decrease of ace2 has been reported in the lungs of patients with idiopathic pah [57] . similarly, ace2 was also decreased in the blood vessel, the kidneys, and the brain in the hypertension models [58, 59] . since ace2 was protective of tissue injuries in the lungs [48] and heart [60] , these results suggested that covid-19 patients with hypertension may be more likely to develop complications and progress into severe cases. indeed, data in table 1 showed that covid-19 patients with hypertension have a high severity rate [8] . besides, severe cases of covid-19 have significantly higher systolic pressure comparing to the non-severe cases (145 mmhg vs. 122 mmhg) [47] . this phenomenon may due to the deprivation of ace2 by the sars-cov-2, leading to a drastic decrease of ace2.ace2 is enriched in heart and is known as an essential regulator of heart function [60] , suggesting heart may be one of the primary target organs of sars-cov-2 infection. patients infected with sars-cov-2 were at higher risk of progressing into severe cases when having coronal heart disease as comorbidity [8, 17] . acute cardiac injury is one of the most common complications found in covid-19 patients [17, 47] . according to a retrospective study published in the lancet that included 41 covid-19 patients, 12 % developed acute cardiac injury, 80 % of these cases were diagnosed as severe cases [47] . therefore, coronal heart disease in the covid-19 patients was closely watched both as baseline comorbidity and as complications. the pathogenesis and progression of cardiac injury were one of the preliminary factors that determined the clinical outcomes and prognosis of covid-19 patients [17, 47] . the cardiac injury found in covid-19 patients may be at least partially attributed to the fluctuation of ace2. in the rat model of myocardial infarction, the infarcted and peri-infarcted regions showed increased ace2 expression comparing to surviving myocardial tissue after three days of infarction [61] . after 28 days of infarction, the surviving tissue also showed elevated ace2 expression comparing to normal control [61] . the up-regulation of ace2 in the heart after myocardial infarction may be triggered by a compensatory protective mechanism [62] . however, in the lungs of patients with pah, the ace2 expression and phosphorylation were drastically decreased [57] . therefore, the pulmonary function of covid-19 may progressively deteriorate upon the occurrence of cardiac complications.the kidneys may be a major target organ of sars-cov-2 infection because laboratory examinations demonstrated that the urine samples from some covid-19 patients were found positive for the virus [8] . acute kidney injury is one of the most severe complications in covid-19 patients as sars-cov-2 may infect the renal intrinsic cells such as proximal tubular epithelial cells and directly induce renal dysfunction. the occurrence of acute kidney injury as a complication of covid-19 was 7 % in 41 cases reported in the lancet, and all of them developed into severe cases [47] . in a cohort of 1099 covid-19 patients, the occurrence of acute kidney injury was 0.5 %, and the severity rate was 83.3 % [8] . in a consecutive cohort study that included 701 covid-19 patients, renal dysfunction characterized as elevation in serum creatine, blood urea nitrogen, the appearance of proteinuria or hematuria showed a significantly higher risk of mortality compared with normal renal function [63] . renal dysfunction was an independent risk factor of mortality in hospitalized patients [63] . these studies demonstrated that acute kidney injury was one of the most critical complications that occurred in covid-19 patients.ace2 is enriched in the kidneys [2] . the activity of ace2 in the renal cortex is even higher than that in the heart [2] . the expression level of ace2 decreased both in the acute kidney injury [64] and in several models of chronic kidney disease induced by hypertension, diabetes and nephrectomy [65] , which disrupted the homeostasis of ras in the kidneys and worsened the pathological changes in the kidneys [2, 65] . accumulating evidence has also demonstrated that ace2 played a crucial role in the pathogenesis and progression of renal diseases as reviewed in [65] . ace2 knockout could worsen renal dysfunction modeled in ischemia/reperfusion [64] and aggravate the fibrotic pathologies in obstructive renal diseases [66] . further investigation in the implication of ace2 in the renal dysfunction occurred in the covid-19 patients, and in the clinical outcome in the covid-19 patients with chronic kidney diseases as comorbidity is required.ace2 modulates the expression of neutral amino acid transporters on the cell surface of epithelial cells, including the insulin secretion pancreatic β-cells and/or growth of pancreatic islet cells [2] . ace2 knockout mice showed impairments in the islet dysfunction and abnormality in glucose tolerance [67] . the diabetic mice model infected with an adenovirus expressing human ace2 showed an increase in the production of insulin and a reduction in cellular apoptosis in the pancreatic islet [68] . moreover, ace2 could improve the endothelial function in the pancreatic islet microvascular unit [69] . these findings demonstrated that ace2 prevented pancreatic dysfunction in diabetes. ace2 was implicated in the diabetic nephrology. in the human kidneys with diabetic nephropathy, ace2 was profoundly suppressed while ace was increased [70] . the ratio of ace/ace2 was positively correlated with the systolic pressure, the fasting blood glucose level, serum creatine, and proteinuria in the patients [70] . race2 showed promising prevention against diabetic nephrology [2] . covid-19 patients with diabetes as coexisting disorders had a worse clinical outcome. these phenomena may partially attribute to the deprivation of ace2 by sars-cov-2 infection.sars-cov-2 binds with ace2 to enter the host cells, leading to the systematic deprivation of ace2. race2 has shown a therapeutic effect in pulmonary injury [48] , diabetic nephrology and hypertension [2] . recently, it was found that a human recombinant soluble ace2 (hrsace2) which has already been tested in phase 1 and phase 2 clinical trials effectively reduced the recovery of sars-cov-2 from vero cells and prevented the infection of sars-cov-2 in engineered human blood vessel organoids and human kidney organoids [71] . this progress suggested the therapeutic potential of hrsace2 in covid-19.since ace2 activation has demonstrated a protective effect on pulmonary injury, including ards, developing ace2 activator as a potential therapy may be a promising approach against covid-19. diminazene aceturate [72] , resorcinolnaphthalein and xanthenone [73] were found to activate ace2 in a drug screening test, which showed potential as a candidate therapy for covid-19.acei and arb are commonly-used treatments for hypertension. the safety and effect of using these drugs on covid-19 patients with hypertension are still unclear. animal experiments revealed that these drugs might decrease the systolic pressure in normal rats and up-regulate ace2 [74] . since the ace2 expression is suppressed in hypertension [56] and may be further deprived by sars-cov-2 virus upon infection, the application of arb may be protective for the pulmonary injury under careful blood pressure management.ace2 is currently under intensive investigation as it is the receptor of sars-cov-2, the novel coronavirus that causes covid-19 pandemic. we summarized the increasingly emerging findings in the covid-19 and discussed the potential role of ace2 in the pathogenesis, progression, and prognosis of covid-19. the susceptibility of sars-cov-2 in different cohorts seemed to correlate with the ace2 level. the distribution of target organs that are susceptible to the sars-cov-2 infection and complications of covid-19 is similar to the one of ace2. the three functions of ace2, which are a peptidase that negatively modulates ras, a regulator for the amino acid transport in the kidneys, and a receptor for the virus, including sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, together with the local protective effect on the tissue injury, are implicated in the progression and prognosis of covid-19. these findings indicated that targeting ace2 by using hrsace2 or ace2 activator may be a potential therapeutic strategy for covid-19. prescription of drugs that may affect ace2, such as acei and arb, in covid-19 patients requires close observation of the blood pressure and the progression of covid-19.the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.background covid-19 patients with chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes and coronary heart diseases is more likely to worsen, but with mixed results for covid-19 severity. this meta-analysis is to analyze the correlation between hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease and covid-19 disease severity.methods available data from pubmed, web of science, china national knowledge infrastructure database, wanfang database and vip database, were analyzed using a fixed effects model meta-analysis to derive overall odds ratios (or) with 95% cis. funnel plots and begg's were used to assess publication bias.findings of 182 articles found following our initial search, we assessed 34 full-text articles, of which 9 articles with 1936 covid-19 patients met all selection criteria for our meta-analysis. no significant heterogeneity between studies. there were significant correlations between covid-19 severity and hypertension [or=2. in december 2019, a cluster of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause was linked to a seafood wholesale market in wuhan, china. 1 the pathogen has currently been named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). 2 covid-19 caused severe acute respiratory syndrome and was associated with icu admission and high mortality. 3 the major comorbidities of the fatality cases include hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, cerebral infarction, and chronic bronchitis. 2 some research results show that covid-19 severe patients had a higher proportion of hypertension, diabetes and coronary heart disease. covid-19 patients combined with cardiovascular disease are associated with a higher risk of mortality. 4 in this study, we aimed to analyze the correlation between hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease and covid-19 disease severity. this has certain clinical guiding significance for the development of a reasonable comprehensive treatment plan for patients with covid-19. we strictly followed the inclusion criteria and increased the exclusion criteria to reduce selection bias. mesh, emtree, meth terms and free-text, such as "covid-19", "sars cov-2", "clinical characteristics", "clinical features", and "epidemiological characteristics". the strategy is as follows:the included studies were selected based on strobe statement: describe the setting, locations, and relevant dates, give characteristics of study participants (e.g. the eligibility criteria, diagnostic criteria, the sources and methods of selection), clearly define all outcomes and exposures, etc. the inclusion criteria are listed below. (a) subjects with laboratory-confirmed covid-19. (b) it defined the degree of severity of covid-19 (severe vs. non-severe; or intensive care unit (icu) vs. non-icu; or progression and improvement/stabilization) at the time of admission using the american thoracic society guidelines for community-acquired pneumonia or novel coronavirus pneumonia diagnosis and treatment plan (published by the national health committee of the people's republic of china, trial version 4-6). (c) the outcomes have the number of covid-19 with hypertension, diabetes and coronary heart disease in severe patients and non-severe patients. literature exclusion criteria: (a) literatures with review, review, meta-analysis, monographs, conference abstracts, and duplicate literature data. (b) the observation group and the control group did not distinguish the literature of disease severity. (c) reference quality evaluation scale: newcastle-ottawa scale (nos) standard, low-quality literature with a score of <6. two independent reviewers determined whether the observational studies met the eligibility criteria. the reviewers screened the qualified studies in the order of title, abstract and full text. all publications were managed using endnote x9 software (endnotex9), and trials that were excluded in each step were recorded and the reasons were indicated. the data were extracted and collected in specialized spreadsheets. the extracted contents included the number of hypertension, diabetes and coronary heart disease in covid-19 patients according to disease severity. discrepancies between reviewers were resolved by a third reviewer.counts and proportions for categorical endpoints were extracted. all statistical analyses were conducted with revman 5.3 software. the results for dichotomous outcomes were reported as odds ratios (or) and 95% cis. the mantel haenszel (statistical method) and fixed effect models (analysis model) were used to assess outcomes. the i 2 value was used to evaluate heterogeneity. when i 2 ≤ 50%, the results are considered to be statistically homogeneous, and used a fixed effect model is used for analysis. if the heterogeneity between the studies is large (i 2 ＞ 50%), the random effects model is used for analysis. when the research data cannot be combined for analysis or a small probability event all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 25.20043133 doi: medrxiv preprint occurs, the general description is used for qualitative evaluation or only descriptive analysis is performed. the test level of the meta-analysis was set to α =0.05. forest plots visually showed effect estimates of the included studies. funnel plots and begg's were used to assess publication bias.the process used to select the observational studies followed the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta analyses (prisma) flow diagram. 182 studies were retrieved, and 9 studies were finally included after selection. the detailed screening process is illustrated in figure 1 . all of the studies were conducted in china and published in the chinese or english language. baseline data are shown in table 1 . except for peng et al 4 , which scored 5 points, other studies scored 6 points and above.our study extracted the data of covid-19 comorbidities included in the literature and listed thein the included studies, the comorbidities of covid-19 mainly included hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, chronic liver disease, cancer/malignant tumor, and cerebrovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd). (figure 2) efficacy outcomes through a systematic review, 9 studies were ultimately included in the statistical analysis (n=1936 participants author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 25.20043133 doi: medrxiv preprinthypertension, diabetes, and coronary heart disease can affect the severity of covid-19. it may be related to the imbalance of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) and the cytokine storm induced by glucolipid metabolic disorders (glmd).angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a homologue of carboxypeptidase ace, is the main active peptide of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas). 13 by targeting angiotensin ii (ang ii), ace2 has shown protective effects in the cardiovascular system and many other organs 14 , and even protects from severe acute lung failure which infections with severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus. 15 decreased ace2 shifts the balance in the raas to the angiotensin ii (ang ii)/at1r axis, resulting in heart failure progression. 16 sars-cov-2 through spike (s) glycoprotein binds human ace2 with high affinity. 17 covid-19 infection leads to ace2 more reductions, causing raas imbalance and aggravate cardiovascular disease and covid-19.in addition, some views consider patients with cardiac diseases, hypertension, or diabetes, who are treated with ace2-increasing drugs, are at higher risk for severe covid-19 infection. 18 however, some reports find ace inhibitor (acei) may have beneficial effects for patients with or at risk for pneumonia, use of lipophilic, but not hydrophilic, acei was associated with decreased mortality for patients with community-acquired pneumonia. 19 therefore, covid-19 patients with hypertension, diabetes, or coronary heart disease should be monitored for ace2-modulating medications, describe the specific medications received, for research to determine the mechanism(s) of effect on covid-19 diseases severity.hyperlipidemia, diabetes, nonalcoholic fatty liver, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and many other metabolic disorders are often combined and affect each other. professor jiao guo from our team proposed the new concept of glucolipid metabolic disorders (glmd). 20 glmd is associated with neuroendocrine disorders, insulin resistance, oxidative stress, chronic inflammatory responses, and intestinal flora disorders. [21] [22] [23] in covid-19 patient, over activation of t cells lead to the severe immune injury. 24 severe covid-19 patients had higher concentrations of pro-inflammatory cytokines than non-severe patients, suggesting that the cytokine storm was associated with disease severity. 6 we hypothesized that chronic inflammation in glmd patients seems to be more activated than in other patients after covid-19 infection, cause cytokine storm, with hyperinduction of proinflammatory cytokine production 25 , or the cytokine storm caused by covid-19 may lead to exacerbation of glmd.we suggest that a comprehensive analysis of glmd patients with covid-19. that is not limited to assess hypertension, diabetes, and coronary heart disease, but also obesity, dyslipidemia, atherosclerosis, and other metabolic disorders etc. multi-target therapy will help regulate dysfunction of neuronal-endocrine-immune system, which will improve the severity of covid-19 disease.it should be acknowledged that the limitations of this meta-analysis may exist in the following points: first, we have included a total of 9 studies, a total of 386 severe patients, 1550 non-severe patients, which is limited to improve the accuracy of the results, only large samples and high-quality research can truly and accurately reflect the correlation between hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease and the severity of covid-19. second, due to the relatively small number of eligible studies, it is not possible to perform subgroup analysis on the type of severity. in addition, most of the literature does not carry out correlation studies on disease severity time and outcome, so corresponding subgroup analysis cannot be performed. this may also affect its accuracy. third, there are many factors that affect the severity of covid-19 disease. in addition hypertension, diabetes and coronary heart disease, it is also related to various factors such as age, other diseases, living environment, economic and health conditions, smoking, viral virulence, and compliance. most of the included literature is unable to control all factors, which may also affect our results. finally, as with all meta-analysis, most gray literature is rarely published, and the impact of publication bias on the results of this study cannot be completely ruled out.yyc and jg designed the study. yyc and xg undertook review activities including searches, study selection, data extraction and calculation, and quality assessment. yyc and xg did the meta-analyses. yyc wrote the manuscript with contributions from jg, lxw and xg. all authors reviewed the study. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 25.20043133 doi: medrxiv preprintwe declare no competing interests. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.25.20043133 doi: medrxiv preprint na=not applicable *refers to chronic cardiovascular disease all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the the x-axis represents the point estimate of odds ratio and corresponding 95% confidence interval; the y-axis represents the source of study patients; or, odds ratio; cl, confidence interval.fang x 2020guan w 2020huang c 2020liu w 2020wang d 2020xiang t 2020xiong j 2020yuan j 2020zhang j 2020total (95% ci)heterogeneity: chi² = 15.85, df = 8 (p = 0.04); i² = 50%test for overall effect: z = 6.07 (p < 0.00001) all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 25 clinical outcomes observed with raas inhibitors in covid-19 patients.human covs (hcovs) belong to the coronavirinae subfamily that are classified into 4 phylogenic clusters: α, β, γ, and δ covs (s. f. zhang, et al., 2018) . among all covs, 7 prominant strains from the α and β subgroups can infect humans (madjid, safavi-naeini, solomon, & vardeny, 2020) . of these 7 human-infectious covs, 4 (hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43 and hcov-229e) cause self-resolving upper respiratory tract infections that are the second-most common cause (15%-30%) of the common cold (killerby, et al., 2018; su, et al., 2016) . clinical manifestation vary in different strains of covs.hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1, hcov-oc43 and hcov-229e mainly cause mild symptoms, but can cause organ damage in some individuals. for example, giacomo et al. reported that hcov-oc43 triggered fulminant myocarditis in a 51-year-old woman (veronese, et al., 2020) . van doremalen, falzarano, & munster, 2016) . while these three viruses can induce respriratory distress, they each have distinctive properties (table 1) . sars-cov-2 is most infectious, with a reproductive number (r 0 ) estimated by the who of 2.0-2.5. by comparison, sars-cov and mers-cov have respective r 0 estimates of 1.7-1.9 and 0.7, respectively (petrosillo, sars-cov-2 binds to the same surface protein (ace2) while mers-cov enters host cells via binding to dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) (petrosillo, et al., 2020) . relative to the sars-cov spike protein, the sars-cov-2 spike protein contains several amino acid changes which increase salt bridge formation and hydrophobic interactions and strengthen ace2 binding (gheblawi, et al., 2020) .these changes may contribute to virulence and the considerably larger global spread of sars-cov-2 compared to sars-cov (gheblawi, et al., 2020) .ace2 is a transmembrane protein that plays a central role in downregulation of raas (gheblawi, et al., 2020) . when co-expressed with transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2), ace2 acts as receptor for sars-cov-2 cell entry (guzik, et al., 2020) . ace2 expression is considerably reduced after sars-cov and sars-cov-2 infection (jung, choi, you, & kim, 2020) . interaction between ace2 and the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the s1 subunit on the viral spike protein facilitates virus entrance. endocytosis of sars-cov-2 along with ace2 into endosomes reduces surface ace2 expression (k. wang, gheblawi, & oudit, 2020) . viral entry of sars-cov-2 subsequently upregulates adam metallopeptidase domain 17 (adam-17), which mediates ectodomain shedding of ace2 (patel, et al., 2014) . adam-17 activation also mediates liberation of membrane bound cytokine precursors, including il-4 and ifn-γ which repress ace2 mrna expression (k. . sars-cov-2 activation of raas combined with reduced ace2-mediated conversion of angiotensin ii (ang ii) to ang-(1-7) results in increased angii accumulation. ang ii activates the angiotensin receptor type 1 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f receptor (at1r) to trigger a signaling cascade whereby activation of erk/p38 map kinase signaling results in upregulation of adam-17 to initiate a positive feedback loop that limits ace2 expression (patel, et al., 2014) . in addition, inflammation-induced lung injury leads to apoptosis of clara cells and type ii alveolar epithelial cells, which are major ace2-expressing cell subsets.reduced survival of these cells also contributes to the down-regulation of ace2 ( figure 2) (wiener, cao, hinds, ramirez, & williams, 2007) .clinical outcomes in covid-19 patients are strongly associated with the pre-existing health status of infected patients. cvd comorbidities increase mortality of patients with covid-19 (shahid, et al., 2020) . cvd comorbidities have direct consequences upon sars-cov2 infection. for example, patients with abnormally high blood pressure may exhibit increased apoptosis, not only in the heart but also in the kidney, which may be exacerbated by the additional stress of sars-cov2 infection (a. gonzalez, et al., 2003; hamet, et al., 1995) .over the course of severe covid-19, biomarkers indicating heart injury become elevated (mehta, et al., 2020; . in a washington state case series of 21 critically ill covid-19 patients, 7 patients (33%) developed cardiomyopathy and 4 (19%) developed acute renal injury (arentz, et al., 2020) . ace2 expression in human heart might be one potential mechanism underlying heart injury during infection with sars-cov-2; however, sars-cov-2 infection-induced cytokine storm may also contribute to cardiovascular injury (l. chen, li, chen, feng, & xiong, 2020) .tissue kallikrein produces kinin and bradykinin peptides by cleaving its j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f substrate kininogen. in addition to its role in production of angiotensin ii, ace mediates bradykinin degradation. thus, both kinin and bradykinin are increased with use of ace inhibitors ( figure 3 ). increased bradykinin levels are believed to be responsible for the dry cough adverse effect observed in some patients on ace inhibitors. moreover, kinin and bradykinin peptides can also participate in shock and respiratory allergy. thus, well-known side effects suggest that ace inhibitors may aggravate lung inflammation and cause lung dysfunction during covid-19.despite the potential adverse effect of dry cough on respiratory tract, the kallikrein/kinin system (kks) has many positive functions which may ameliorate cvd ( figure 3 ). in experimental models, the expression of human tissue kallikrein caused significant reduction of blood pressure in fructose-induced hypertension rats, but did not affect blood pressure of non-fructose-fed normal rats (yao, yin, shen, chao, & chao, 2007) .accumulating evidence indicates that the kks is capable of exerting organ protection apart from its blood pressure-lowing effect. an in vivo study showed that the infusion of kinin improved renal function of hypertensive rats and lowered the corresponding increase in capase-3 activity .recombinant adeno-associated virus (raav) mediated human tissue kallikrein exerted a protective effect on myocardial apoptosis in spontaneous hypertensive rats (shrs), specifically by modulating the activity of caspase-3 through the b2 receptor (yan, wang, & wang, 2009 ). tissue kallikrein not only reduced blood pressure, but also attenuated remodeling of the myocardium, large blood vessels and kidney (t. wang, et al., 2004) . in addition, tissue kallikrein efficiently protected against diabetic nephropathy and chronic renal j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f failure (tu, et al., 2008; yuan, et al., 2007; zhao, et al., 2003) . it has also been suggested that tissue kallikrein prevents apoptosis and ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction (yao, et al., 2007) .in summary, bradykinin may improve blood pressure regulation and provide organ protection in hypertensive patients. since organ injury often determines mortality in hypertensive patients infected with sars-cov-2, we hypothesize that the 'by product' of increased bradykinin levels induced by ace inhibition may provide more benefit than harm in cvd-comorbid covid-19 patients.many studies have demonstrated that ang ii-induced hypertension and the accompanying vascular inflammation result in organ damage (d. chen, et al., 2019; f. chen, et al., 2017; g. e. gonzalez, et al., 2015; yang, et al., 2018) .il6 markedly attenuates the cardiac injury and inflammation induced by ang ii, which suggests that il-6 acts downstream of the ang ii effector (d. chen, et al., 2019; f. chen, et al., 2017; g. e. gonzalez, et al., 2015; yang, et al., 2018) .ang ii also induces the production of other pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tnf-α and il-1β (guo, et al., 2011) . several studies suggest that ang ii not only acts as a vasoactive peptide that regulates blood pressure but also works as an inflammatory cytokine causing cardiovascular remodeling (gibbons, pratt, & dzau, 1992; griendling, minieri, ollerenshaw, & alexander, 1994; sadoshima & izumo, 1993) . during the immune response activated by sars-cov-2, a cytokine storm is often observed. in severe cases, serum j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines including il-6, il-2r, and il-1β are elevated qin, et al., 2020; xu, et al., 2020) . increased markers of this cytokine storm, such as serum il-6, predict poor outcome in patients with severe covid-19 (cao, 2020) . covid-19 patients also have elevated ang ii levels which are positively associated to viral load and lung injury . thus, sars-cov-2 infection dysregulates ang ii, over-activates the immune response and augments the cytokine storm that causes organ damage. the inhibition or the blockage of raas may be helpful to attenuate the inflammatory storm and prevent end-organ damage.ace2 plays an important role in the regulation of angiotensin signaling.the generation of ang ii is well understood. liver-derived angiotensinogen (atg) is cleaved by renin into ang i, which is further processed by ace to ang ii, and is converted by ace2 into ang-(1-7). ang-(1-7) is generally considered cvd-protective; it counters the action of ang ii through a g protein-coupled sars-cov-2 uses ace2, abundantly expressed in pulmonary epithelium, kidney and heart, for intracellular entry (figure 3 ). after infection by sars-cov-2, ace2 expression is reduced (crackower, et al., 2002; kuba, et al., 2005) . animal models of infection with sars-cov showed that ace2 downregulation resulted in pro-inflammatory responses, including lung injury and cardiac contractility impairment (crackower, et al., 2002; imai, et al., 2005; kuba, et al., 2005) . if sars-cov-2 infections progress similarly to sars-cov, the virus may deteriorate a patient's condition via two production and contribute to tissue damage in covid-19. although ace inhibitors and arbs do not directly affect ace2, they can indirectly lead to increased ace2 activity and ang-(1-7) expression (hanff, harhay, brown, cohen, & mohareb, 2020) . a study by ferrario and co-workers showed that ace inhibitor caused a 2.5-fold rise of plasma ang-(1-7) concentrations and an approximately 25% increase of ace2 expression in the left ventricle (ferrario, et al., 2005) . thus, the usage of ace inhibitors and arbs may have a potential benefit in preventing covid-19-triggered organ damage via its upregulation of ang-(1-7) and depletion of ang ii.in conclusion, dysregulation of raas due to increased ang ii and decreased ace2 can lead to a harmful inflammatory response and worsening j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f of elevated blood pressure. ace inhibitors and arbs may have a potential role in preventing the harmful effects by directly countering ang ii and upregulating ace2.acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is a common and devastating (orfanos, et al., 2000) . ace activity is considerably elevated in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (balf) of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f patients with ards (idell, et al., 1987) . a polymorphic insert that reduces ace expression and activity is associated with reduced ards severity (marshall, et al., 2002) . ace expression activates macrophage function and stimulates interleukin (il) formation . covid-19 is associated with an increased proportion of mononuclear phagocytes which are regulated by the raas (merad & martin, 2020) . in addition, alveolar macrophages are associated with tissue repair and fibrosis generation in covid-19 patients (ramachandran, et al., 2019) . lastly, ace inhibitors decrease oxygen free radical production generated by lung alveolar macrophages (suzuki, et al., 1999 (yamamoto, et al., 1997) .ang ii can also induce endothelial expression of il-8, e-selectin, p-selectin, cc-chemokine ligand-5 (ccl5) and ccl2 which increase pulmonary leukocyte recruitment and retention (bernstein, et al., 2018) . moreover, ang ii induces nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (nadph) oxidase in vascular smooth muscle cells and endothelial cells to increase reactive oxygen species (ros) and cause vascular injury (bernstein, et al., 2018) . in addition, ang ii reduces alveolar epithelial cell survival by accelerating cellular j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f apoptosis with an ec 50 of just 10 nm (r. wang, et al., 1999) . epithelial apoptosis is linked to subsequent fibrotic responses (shetty, et al., 2017) . (uhal, et al., 2012) . finally, during the severe ards or covid-19, patients often suffer from septic shock.prolonged ang ii signaling induces at1r phosphorylation and desensitization which is a major cause of the vascular hyporesponsiveness that leads to pulmonary vasoplegia (levy, et al., 2018) . together, this data suggests that ang ii may be a potential therapeutic target for the treatement many vascular pathophysiologies of covid-19.ang ii. lower ace2 has deleterious cardiovascular consequences and also worsens lung functional decline. compared to wt mice, ace2-deficient mice had impaired lung function and higher mortality in sepsis-induced lung injury . severe lung failure in ace2-deficient mice could be rescued j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f by inactivation of ace and at1r blockage . arbs can prevent downregulation of ace2 during lps-induced ards, suggesting that raas inhibitors may also protect against lung damage in patients with sars (wosten-van asperen, et al., 2011) . furthermore, downregulation of ace2 can lead to elevated activation of ace and ang ii (li, et al., 2008; simoes e silva, et al., 2013) , which can exacerbate the physiological progression of ards in covid-19. thus, despite acting as the receptor for sars-cov-2, ace2 activity is likely protective during covid-19 disease progression.in conclusion, elevation of ace and ang ii and down-regulation of ace2can exacerbate sars-cov-2 induced ards. drugs that target ace and ang ii, ace inhibitors and arbs, may play an important role in abrogating the inflammatory response, vasoconstriction and v/q mismatching that causes clinical deterioration in patients with covid-19.animal models and clinical experience suggest both beneficial and deleterious effects of ace inhibitors and arbs in patients suffering from covid-19. this uncertainty raises concerns regarding the overall effect of raas inhibitors after sars-cov-2 infection (sriram & insel, 2020) . such concerns should not be ignored. examination of clinical outcomes of raas inhibitor application in covid-19 patients should be a top priority (g. l. zhou, et al., 2013) .accumulated clinical data demonstrates that hypertension is associated with higher mortality in patients with covid-19, sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) (d. . inhibitors in covid-19-related outcomes in south korea (jung, et al., 2020) .among the 5,179 confirmed sars-cov-2 patients, raas inhibitor use did not alter mortality (adjusted or, 0.88; 95% ci, 0.53-1.44; p=0.60) (jung, et al., 2020) . among hospitalized covid-19 patients with hypertension, in-hospital mortality was lower (9%) in patients given raas inhibitors than those not treated with raas inhibitors (13%) although this difference was not statisticaly significant (p=0.14) (jung, et al., 2020) . multivariate analysis that adjusted for baseline co-morbidities revealed no independent association between raas inhibitor use and risk mortality among hypertensive covid-19 patients (adjusted or, 0.71; 95% ci, 0.40-1.26; p=0.25) (jung, et al., 2020 (mancia, et al., 2020) . these data suggest that treatment with ace inhibitors/arbs did not increase the inhibitor-treated subjects may seek more routine or intensive medical care or have heightened awareness that leads to more diligent hygiene and/or social distancing. in addition, these findings may not replicate in other populations.geographically and ethnically diverse cohorts and randomized, controlled clinical trials are needed to better understand the specific effect of raas inhibitors in covid-19 patients.two recent studies suggest the interesting finding that, while ace inhibitors might reduce covid-19 morbidity, arbs have a less pronounced effect. khera et al. reported that of 2,263 hypertensive sars-cov-2 patients, those treated with ace inhibitors were 40% less likely to be hospitalized than those not treated with ace inhibitors, while there was no reduction in hospitalization in patients treated with arbs (khera, et al., 2020) . milne et al. j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f analyzed gene expression of 1,051 lung tissue samples and discovered that ace inhibitor treatment was associated with significantly lower expression of the ace2 co-receptor tmprss2. in contrast, tmprss2 expression was not altered in patients treated with arbs (milne, yang, timens, bosse, & sin, 2020) . these data provide a potential mechanistic explanation for a protective role of ace inhibitors, but not arbs, in covid-19 treatment.our review of the recent literature suggests potential for protective effects of continued treatment of cvd covid-19 subjects with ace inhibitors and/or the authors have declared that no competing interests exist. and arb, angiotensin-receptor blocker. coronavirus disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a global pandemic that initially started in wuhan, china, and spread extremely quickly, making its way to over 180 countries. as the novel coronavirus continues to evolve, there are still many limitations to our knowledge of who exactly this virus would impact critically. older adults and people of any age who have underlying medical conditions, such as hypertension and diabetes, have shown worse prognosis [1] . diabetic patients have increased morbidity and mortality rates and have been linked to more hospitalization and intensive care unit (icu) admissions [1] . people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) or any respiratory illnesses are also at higher risk for severe illness from covid-19 [2] . the risk of contracting covid-19 in patients with copd is found to be 4-fold higher than patients without copd [2] . this article is part of the topical collection on covid-19 * adekunle sanyaolu sanyakunle@hotmail.com 1 federal ministry of health, abuja, nigeria a retrospective study of middle-aged and elderly patients with covid-19 found that the elderly population is more susceptible to this illness and is more likely to be admitted to the icu with a higher mortality rate [3] . the age-related changes in the geriatric population may be due to the changes in lung anatomy and muscle atrophy which results in changes in physiologic function, reduction of lung reserve, reduction of airway clearance, and reduction of the defense barrier function [3] .the clinical outcomes and length of stay directly correlate with the underlying conditions and age of the covid-19 patient. researchers in china studied 344 patients in the icu with covid-19. of the 344 subjects, 133 patients died on the 28th day with a median survival of 25 days [4] . of these patients, there were many with different comorbidities with 141 patients having hypertension [4] . in survivors, the median duration of hospitalization for a negative test result was 12 days [4] . furthermore, another study conducted in china studied 633 covid-19 patients, of whom 247 patients had at least one comorbidity and that concluded that older individuals, greater than 60 years, were more likely to exhibit a more severe form of covid-19 disease [5] . during the study, 25 patients with a median age of 69.3 years died giving an effective mortality rate of 3.77% [5] .it has been concluded that the older the patients are, the more likely they are to succumb to the covid-19 disease. in the usa, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) uses covid-net in 14 states to monitor the demographics of covid-19 patients who are being hospitalized [6] . from march 1 through 30, 2020, there were a total of 180 patients on covid-net, of which 89.3% of the patients had an underlying comorbidity [6] . of the 180 patients, 94.4% aged 65 years and older had at least comorbidity [6] . the most common comorbidities found were obesity, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus [6] . the purpose of this paper is to review these comorbidities, given that most patients with severe covid-19 cases had comorbidity. furthermore, we would like to examine specific comorbidities in relation to the covid-19 disease progression and outcomes based on the literature report since the outbreak.an electronic literature search was performed using pubmed, google scholar, ebscohost, mendeley, and medline plus. the search was limited to peer-reviewed articles published from january to april 20, 2020. an article was selected if it included keywords such as coronavirus, covid-19, sars-cov-2, clinical features, comorbidity, diabetes, and hypertension. articles were then reviewed and included based on the applicability to the topic.confirmed and reported cases of covid-19 have a wide range of symptoms from mild complaints, such as fever and cough, to more critical cases associated with difficulty in breathing [7] . some of the most common symptoms include cough, fever, chills, shortness of breath (sob), muscle aches, sore throat, unexplained loss of taste or smell, diarrhea, and headache [8] . symptoms can start as mild and become more intense over 5 to 7 days, worsening if pneumonia develops in patients [8] . approximately, 1 out of 6 infected individuals become seriously ill and develop difficulty in breathing, especially in the elderly with underlying health conditions [9] .a meta-analysis study of covid-19 patients, as depicted in fig. 1 , showed fever (88.8%) as the most common symptom, followed by dry cough (68%) and fatigue (33%) [10] . other symptoms noted were productive cough (28.5%), sob (17%), muscle pain (14.4%), sore throat (11.4%), and headache (10.2%) [10] . the least common symptoms were diarrhea (4.4%), nausea and vomiting (4.1%), rhinorrhea (3.2%), abdominal pain (0.16%), and chest pain (0.11%) [10] .symptoms of covid-19 may appear anytime from 2 to 14 days after exposure; therefore, 14-day quarantine is recommended [7] . the average incubation period for covid-19 is approximately 5.2 days [11] . in wuhan, china, the most common symptoms observed from the onset of this outbreak include fever, cough, and fatigue, while some features that were not so prevalent were sputum production, headache, hemoptysis, and gastrointestinal (gi) symptom such as diarrhea [12, 13] . another study that was conducted in beijing, china, showed that the average age of patients with covid-19 was 35.5 years and had a mean of 3.5 days from the onset of symptoms to admission in the hospital [14] . the same study also showed that fever was present in 87.5% of patients, which persisted for 6.5 days, and symptoms resolved 2.5 days after a negative test result [14] .some individuals who are infected do not develop any symptoms at all, and about 80% of positive cases recover from the disease without any treatment [9] . however, there have also been instances of transmissions of covid-19 from one person to another before the person became aware of being sick, or the symptoms were so mild that the person did not know he/she had the illness [15] . it becomes essential to seek medical attention immediately if a person suspects that he/she may have been infected or is a confirmed case of covid-19 experiencing respiratory distress, has blue lips, is in constant pain, or has pressure in the chest [7] . also, it is important to note that covid-19 is more infectious than sars-cov and mers-cov due to its numerous epidemiological and biological characteristics [16] .due to covid-19 being a relatively new and understudied disease, the data available is limited. however, from the cases that emerged, it was observed that comorbidities increase the chances of infection [7] . based on current information and clinical expertise, the elderly, especially those in long-term care facilities, and people of any age with serious underlying medical conditions are at a greater risk of getting covid-19 [7] . the elderly, a vulnerable population, with chronic health conditions such as diabetes and cardiovascular or lung disease are not only at a higher risk of developing severe illness but are also at an increased risk of death if they become ill [15] . people with underlying uncontrolled medical conditions such as diabetes; hypertension; lung, liver, and kidney disease; cancer patients on chemotherapy; smokers; transplant recipients; and patients taking steroids chronically are at increased risk of covid-19 infection [7] .a meta-analysis study on covid-19 comorbidities, as depicted in fig. 2 , had a total of 1786 patients, of which 1044 were male and 742 were female with a mean age of 41 years old [10] . the most common comorbidities identified in these patients were hypertension (15.8%), cardiovascular and cerebrovascular conditions (11.7%), and diabetes (9.4%) [10, 17] . the less common comorbidities were coexisting infection with hiv and hepatitis b (1.5%), malignancy (1.5%), respiratory illnesses (1.4%), renal disorders (0.8%), and immunodeficiencies (0.01%) [10] .patients with moderate to severe asthma are at a disadvantage because this virus affects their respiratory tracts, leading to increased asthmatic attacks, pneumonia, and acute respiratory distress [7] . according to the cdc's morbidity and mortality weekly report, 34.6% of patients aged 18 to 49 years old have an underlying chronic lung disease, such as asthma [6] . in iran, a case study reported that genetic predisposition to covid-19 can increase the probabilities of getting infected with sars-cov-2 and can lead to death from this virus [18] . this genetic predisposition was seen in 3 brothers in iran who were 6 years apart in age (54, 60, and 66) years who died due to covid-19, despite no identified comorbidities and living separately from one another [18] . as of january 2, 2020, wuhan, china, had 41 patients admitted to the hospital who tested positive for covid-19, of which 73% (30/41) were men with a median age of 49 years old, 66% (27/41) of these patients had been exposed to the huanan market, 32% (13/41) had underlying diseases such as diabetes 20% (8/41), hypertension 15% (6/41), and cardiovascular 15% (6/41) [12] . patients who are hiv positive, along with a low cd4 count and not on antiretroviral therapy, have a higher risk and incidence of other medical issues including covid-19 [7] . according to the international aids society (ias), people [10] who are human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) positive, taking antiretroviral treatment, and do not have a low cd4 count will have the same risk of having covid-19 as one without hiv [19, 20] . as depicted in fig. 3 , a population-based surveillance report via covid-19-associated hospitalization surveillance network (covid-net) reported clinical data on 1478 covid-19-positive patient hospitalizations from march 1 to march 30, 2020 [6] . among the 1478 patients studied, 12% of adults showed clinical data of underlying medical conditions with the most prevalent being hypertension (49.7%) and obesity a close second (48.3%) [6] . other medical conditions included chronic lung disease (34.6%), diabetes mellitus (28.3%), and cardiovascular diseases (27.8%) [6] .outcome covid-19 can cause severe disease leading to hospitalization in icu and potentially death, especially in the elderly with comorbidities [21] . according to the cdc, 8 out of 10 deaths reported in the usa occurred in adults 65 years old and above [7] . roughly 80% of covid-19-positive cases result in full recovery from the illness without any hospitalizations or interventions [9] . there are still many facts that we do not know about covid-19 due to gaps in knowledge; therefore, many studies are underway to better understand this virus [15] .wuhan, china, had 41 patients admitted to the hospital who tested positive for covid-19 from december 16, 2019, to january 2, 2020, and the clinical outcomes are shown 15 [6] in fig. 4 [12] . of the 41 patients with confirmed covid-19 in the hospital, 100% had pneumonia, 29% developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), 15% exhibited an acute cardiac injury, and 12% acquired a secondary infection [12] . the majority of these patients (68%) were discharged, 17% remained hospitalized, 10% ended up in the icu, and 15% ended in death [12] .from february 20 to march 5, 2020, a study was conducted in evergreen, washington, on the characteristics and outcomes of 21 critically ill patients with confirmed covid-19 diagnosis [22] . this study showed that 71% of these patients required mechanical ventilation and acute respiratory arrest was seen in all of them [22] . within 72 h of developing ards, 53% of these patients showed increasing severity of respiratory problems, leading to poor short-term outcomes and a higher risk of death [22] . as of march 17, 2020, the mortality rate was 67% in these patients, with 24% critically ill and 9.5% discharged from hospital [22] .as shown in the cdc's mortality and morbidity weekly report in fig. 5 , case mortality increased as the patient's age increased [21, 23] . among the age group ≤ 19 years, no icu admission or mortality was reported [21] . covid-19 has also been noticed in children, but the disease took a more moderate course when compared with adults. the prognosis was also seemingly better, and deaths were infrequent [24] .on april 29, 2020, who reported over 3 million confirmed covid-19 cases worldwide, with over 200,000 of these cases resulting in mortality [25] . the majority of these [12] deaths are within the usa with over 50,000, followed by italy with over 25,000 and spain with over 20,000 [25] . new york is being hit the hardest by the novel coronavirus spreading across the usa, with more cases and deaths per capita than any other state. table 1 reports that over 86% of covid-19 deaths involved at least one comorbidity, according to the new york state department of health [26] .multiple comorbidities are associated with the severity of covid-19 disease progression. many of the poorer outcomes for covid-19 have been related to cardiovascular comorbid conditions [27] . however, this may be a direct result of the cardiovascular condition itself or attributed to other comorbidities along with a cardiovascular condition [27] . patients with type 2 diabetes were also more likely to have increased severity of covid-19 [28] . in a cohort study of 7337 patients with covid-19 with and without type 2 diabetes, it was shown that those with type 2 diabetes required increased interventions for their hospital stay versus those that were nondiabetic [28] . it was shown that those with poorer blood glucose control had an all-around increased mortality rate than those with better glucose control [28] . the study concluded that patients with blood glucose specifically those in the range of 3.9 to 10.0 mmol/l had overall decreased composite adverse events and mortality [28] . it was noted that poor blood glucose control resulted in a substantially increased risk of complications and death [28] . among other comorbidities, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) has also been associated with poor disease progression. a meta-analysis of multiple studies in china found that there was a four-fold increase in mortality in patients with preexisting copd that were diagnosed with covid-19 [29] . in this analysis, the smoking status of patients and severity of covid-19 were also studied. only one study was found to have an association with smoking and severe course of covid-19 [29] . after this study was removed, there was no significant association with smoking and severe covid-19 disease [29] . patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome and respiratory failure associated with the novel coronavirus may be linked to a prothrombotic coagulopathy [30] . the autopsy of covid-19-related deaths revealed dispersed microthrombi in the pulmonary vasculature, demonstrating an occlusive etiology of respiratory failure [30] . a 38 to 100% improvement was noted in three cases with covid-19-related acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and respiratory failure, following treatment with intravenous (iv) antithrombotic alteplase [30] . the results, although reassuring, were transient in two of the three cases with recovery succumbing posttreatment [30] . the use of anti-thrombolytic therapy needs to be further studied to ascertain that the results are due to treatment and not chance alone [30] . a retrospective meta-analysis including 1558 covid-19 patients was conducted until march 1, 2020, on subjects with underlying comorbidities and the risk for acquiring covid-19 [31] . common comorbidities such as hypertension, copd, diabetes, and cardiocerebrovascular disease were observed to be the more significant risk factors in subjects when compared with other underlying disease states [31] . other than intense supportive measures, a definitive treatment has yet to be identified [31] . authorities speculate that subjects with comorbidities were linked to a more severe disease outcome when infected with the novel coronavirus when compared with patients with no underlying disease [31] . the study was met with barriers due to the diminutive sample size and some subjects having more than one underlying comorbidity [31] . in literature and earlier research, underlying diseases increase the mortality rate in patients who acquired covid-19 with cardiac disease and diabetes being the most significant risk factors [32] . once again, insufficient sample size and inadequate time have led to limitations in the data collected [32] .over 180 countries have been affected by covid-19, resulting in mass death worldwide. as cases evolve globally, it has been noted that persons with underlying chronic illnesses are more likely to contract the virus and become severely ill.due to sars cov-2 being a relatively new virus, the data available is limited. however, patients with comorbidities have more deteriorating outcomes compared with patients without. covid-19 patients with history of hypertension, obesity, chronic lung disease, diabetes, and cardiovascular [26] disease have the worst prognosis and most often end up with deteriorating outcomes such as ards and pneumonia. also, elderly patients in long-term care facilities, chronic kidney disease patients, and cancer patients are not only at risk for contracting the virus, but there is a significantly increased risk of death among these groups of patients. of the cases reported worldwide, symptoms of covid-19 ranged from mild respiratory disease to severe illness, which requires intubation and mechanical ventilation. since there is a period where the patient is asymptomatic, and the incubation period is between 2 and 14 days, it is difficult to establish an early diagnosis, much less curb the transmission of the infection if the patient is unknowingly exposed. however, within this period, if respiratory symptoms develop, it is important to seek immediate care.therefore, patients with comorbidities should take all necessary precautions to avoid getting infected with sars cov-2, as they usually have the worst prognosis. these precautions include regular handwashing with soap and water or use of alcohol-based hand sanitizer, limiting person-to-person contact and practicing social distancing, wearing a face mask in public places, and overall limiting going to public areas at this time unless it is necessary. hence, there is a need for a global public health campaign to raise awareness, on reducing the burden of these comorbidity illnesses causing deaths in covid-19-infected patients.the renin-angiotensin system (ras) plays a critical role in maintaining normal cardiovascular (cv) functions and contributes to a spectrum of cv diseases, such as hypertension, coronary heart disease, myocarditis, and congestive heart failure. 1 generally, the ras is composed of angiotensinogen, renin, angiotensin ii (ang ii), ang ii receptors (at1 and at2 receptors), and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace). 2, 3 ace is ubiquitously present in many cell types, tissues, and organs. ace is an ectoenzyme that plays a role in the generation of ang ii by catalysing the extracellular conversion of the decapeptide ang i. 4 in the past two decades, a new homologue of the enzyme, termed angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), was identified, and ace2 can convert ang ii to ang (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) or convert ang i to ang(1-9). 5, 6 although ang ii increases blood pressure (bp), ang(1-7) is a vasodilator, and the ace2/ang(1-7) axis has been suggested to act as a natural damping mechanism for the activation of the classical ras. 7 besides its crucial role in cv disease, ace2 has also been considered as a functional potential coronavirus [including severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus, human coronavirus nl63 (hcov-nl63), and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), also called 2019-ncov] receptor that binds directly to the viral spike protein. [8] [9] [10] [11] in addition, ace2 plays an important role in acute lung injury induced by influenza viruses, such as h1n1, h5n1, and h7n9, [12] [13] [14] suggesting that ace2 still has unexpected facets with clinical implications.cv diseases are the most common non-communicable diseases globally. 15 in addition, emerging viral infections also represent a major global public health concern, 16-18 such as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19,caused by sars-cov-2) in china 19 and 2009 h1n1 in the usa and canada. 20 ace2 could be a novel therapeutic target for cv diseases and a potential target for the treatment of coronaviruses and influenza viruses. the present review is primarily focused on the findings indicating the role of ace2 in the relationship of coronaviruses and influenza viruses to cv disease ( figure 1 ).both influenza viruses and coronaviruses are typically contagious viruses that cause respiratory disease. coronaviruses are members of the subfamily coronavirinae, in the coronaviridae family and the nidovirales order, including four genera-alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gamma coronavirus, and deltacoronavirus. 21 coronaviruses cause respiratory and intestinal infections in animals and humans. they were not considered to be highly pathogenic to humans until the outbreak of sars in 2003. six human-infecting types of coronaviruses were discovered before 2019. hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, and hku1) induce only mild upper respiratory tract diseases in immunocompetent hosts. 15, 22, 23 in 2019, a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) was identified in china and all over the world. it has infected >1 300 000 of the population and became a public health emergency declared by the world health organization (who). so far, the pathology of covid-19 pneumonia is still not clear. human influenza viruses are members of the orthomyxoviridae family. based on the matrix and nucleoprotein genes, influenza viruses have been classified as type a, b, c, and d. in humans, only influenza a and b viruses (influenza a and b) are of epidemiological and public interest, 24 although other related viruses (influenza c and d viruses) may also cause at least subclinical infections in humans. 15 despite the production of annually designed vaccines and the many improvements in public health surveillance and infrastructure, each year, in the usa alone, seasonal influenza a and b viruses continue to evolve and take the lives of 3000-48 000 people. 25 highly transmissible and pathogenic virus outbreaks cause a significant disease burden in terms of morbidity and associated complications, and have a huge economic impact. 11, 26, 27 meanwhile, cv disease is also the leading cause of death and disease burden worldwide. 15 infection with the virus might be one of the pathogeneses of atherosclerosis and related cv disease. atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the arteries associated with pro-inflammatory lipid abnormalities. 28 infectious diseases are suggested to be a causative factor, and several viruses have been studied for their relationship to cv diseases. 15, 29 influenza can trigger heart attacks, and vaccination against influenza reduces the risk of cv events. for example, influenza infection has long been thought to directly contribute to cv morbidity and mortality. 30 various influenza viruses are involved in the development and progression of atherosclerosis and related cv disease, 31,32 and influenza virus rna has even been found in mouse and human atherosclerotic plaques. 33, 34 further, acute influenza infection has been shown to accentuate the progression of atherosclerosis and related cv disease. 35 epidemiological data on the coronavirus and cv disease are scant. however, it is shown that mers-cov patients have a high prevalence of hypertension and cv disease. in mers-cov patients, the prevalence of chronic heart disease and hypertension is 15% and 33%, respectively. 36 more recently, there are new pieces of evidence which show that the precondition of cv disease may increase the risk of sars-cov-2 infection. among 41 admitted hospital patients infected with sars-cov-2 in wuhan, 15% had hypertension, and 15% had cv disease. 15 another study included 138 patients infected with sars-cov-2 in wuhan and found that 31% of the patients had hypertension, and 15% had cv disease. 37 in another retrospective study of 99 patients with pneumonia, 40% had cv and cerebrovascular diseases. 38 the association between coronaviruses and cv disease still needs further study.ace2 has emerged as a key regulator of the ras. 39 increasing evidence suggests that ace2 plays a protective role in cv disease and other pathologies. 40 in atherosclerosis-prone apolipoprotein e knockout mice, ace2 deficiency results in augmented vascular inflammation, and the inflammatory response contributes to increased atherosclerotic plaque formation. 41 in animal studies, sarkissian et al. found that cardiac overexpression of ace2 exerted a protective influence on the heart during myocardial infarction by preserving cardiac function, left ventricular wall motion, and contractility. 42 yamamoto et al. reported that ace2 gene knockdown resulted in severe cardiac dysfunction (i.e. reduced contractility, increased hypertrophy, and dilation). 43 in addition, ace inhibitors and at1 receptor antagonists, which have been proven to be beneficial for the treatment of myocardial infarction and heart failure, increase ace2 gene expression, attenuate ace2 gene down-regulation, and normalize at1 receptor expression in the myocardium postmyocardial infarction. [44] [45] [46] loss of ace2 enhances adverse remodelling and susceptibility to pressure and volume overload. 47 human recombinant ace2 suppresses myocardial hypertrophy, fibrosis, inflammation, and bp. 47 feng et al. reported that ace2 overexpression reduced ang iiinduced cardiac hypertrophy partially through a decrease in sympathetic drive in syn-hace2 transgenic mice. 48 wysocki et al. found that, during ang ii infusion, recombinant human ace2 effectively degraded ang ii and, in the process, normalized bp. 49 one of the ace2 activators, xanthenone, has been demonstrated to decrease bp and improve cardiac function with inhibition of cardiac and renal fibrosis in spontaneously hypertensive rats. 50 the key role of ace2 in the progressive deterioration of cardiac remodelling and systolic dysfunction has further been found in humans. 51 circulating ace2 activity increases with increasing vascular tone, which suggests that elevated ace2 may be a compensatory response to hypertension. 15 ohtsuki et al. reported that the up-regulation of the ace2 gene in the left ventricular myocardium of patients with severe heart failure was associated with the degree of left ventricular dilatation and may thereby constitute an important adaptive mechanism to retard the progression of adverse left ventricular remodelling. 15 studies with recombinant human ace2 have shown beneficial cardiac effects. 49, 50 human ace2 is an endothelium-bound carboxymonopeptidase with a single active site catalytic region whose expression is limited mainly to endothelial cells of the arteries, arterioles, and venules in various organs including the heart, lungs, and kidneys. 52 loss of ace2 leads to age- dependent cardiomyopathy and kidney disease, while also enhancing pulmonary, cardiac, and renal injuries. 53 on the other hand, ace2 was identified as a functional sars coronavirus receptor. 8 ace2 and the at2 receptor protect mice from sars coronavirus-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome, whereas ace, ang ii, and the at1a receptor promote the impairment of lung function in mouse models. 9 , 54 kuba et al. provided the genetic proof that ace2 is a crucial sars-cov receptor in vivo, and sars-cov infections and the spike protein of sars-cov reduce ace2 expression. 9 this study also found that blocking the reninangiotensin pathway can attenuate the worsened acute lung failure induced by the injection of sars-cov spike protein in mice. furthermore, antibodies directed against ace2 and soluble ace2 molecules and derivatives were demonstrated to be capable of blocking sars-cov infection. 55 like sars-cov, hcov-nl63 also employs ace2 as a receptor for cellular entry. 56 wevers and hoek found that hcov-nl63 infection induced a reduction of cellular ace2 expression. 57 tseng et al. demonstrated that transgenic mice expressing hace2 were highly susceptible to sars-cov infection, resulting in a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations, including death, depending upon the transgenic lineages. 58 letko and munster first demonstrated that sars-cov-2 used the same cell entry receptor, ace2, as sars-cov, 10 and subsequent studies also confirmed this result. 15, [59] [60] [61] in experimental mouse models, zou et al. found that infection with highly pathogenic avian influenza a h5n1 virus results in a downregulation of ace2 expression in the lung and increased serum ang ii levels. 12 genetic inactivation of ace2 causes severe lung injury in h5n1-challenged mice, confirming the role of ace2 in h5n1-induced lung pathologies. 12 yang et al. reported that ace2 could mediate the severe acute lung injury induced by influenza a (h7n9) virus infection in an experimental mouse model. moreover, ace2 deficiency worsened the disease pathogenesis markedly, mainly by targeting the at1 receptor. 13 this result is consistent with a study by huang et al., who found that plasma ang ii levels were linked to h7n9-induced disease severity and predicted a fatal outcome in h7n9 patients. 62 myocardial injury has been observed during coronavirus infection. 63 ,64 pulmonary infection with human sars-cov in mice led to an ace2dependent myocardial infection, and myocardial damage was found in patients who had sars-cov in their hearts. 53 thus, the use of cardioprotective medications is essential. the effect of ace inhibitor (acei) treatment during coronaviruses/influenza virus infections in humans is unclear. lei et al. reported that fusion proteins (ace2-ig) exhibit potent inhibitory activity against sars-cov and sars-cov-2 in vitro. 65 huentelman et al. identified n-(2-aminoethyl)-1 aziridine-ethanamine as a novel ace2 inhibitor that was effective in blocking the sars coronavirus spike protein-mediated cell fusion. 66 a case study found that treatment with an acei together with plasma exchange improved the condition of a patient with scleroderma renal crisis complicated with thrombotic microangiopathy triggered by influenza b virus infection. 67 another case study of a woman positive for h1n1 and with severe acute left ventricular failure found that aggressive initial therapy followed by beta-blockers and aceis led to restoration of the patient's left ventricular function and an associated marked improvement in symptoms. 68 angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs), a first-line therapy of hypertension, could inhibit the actions of ang ii through selective binding of at1 receptors in vascular smooth muscle, 69 and are effective in lowering bp and preventing major cv outcomes. 70 previous studies suggest that arbs could up-regulate ace2 in both rats and humans. 71, 72 a recent commentary suggested that arb could be used as a therapy for reducing the aggressiveness and mortality from coronavirus infections. 73 there is now an urgent need to study the effect of acei and arb treatment during coronavirus/influenza virus infections in humans.vaccination constitutes the primary approach for controlling influenza. in recent decades, numerous advances have been made in the development of vaccines against influenza viruses, such as the replacement of inactivated whole-virus vaccines with split or subunit vaccines, which comprise less reactogenic alternatives. 74 the majority of available annual trivalent influenza vaccines contain two influenza a strains (h1n1 and h3n2) and only one influenza b virus. 75 more recently, inactivated quadrivalent vaccines containing both victoria and yamagata lineages of type b iv have become available. 76, 77 several epidemiological and clinical studies have demonstrated the beneficial effects of the influenza vaccine in patients with cv disease. 35, 78, 79 in a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials, udell et al. reported that the use of the influenza vaccine was associated with a lower risk of major adverse cv events. 80 in another metaanalysis including eight trials with 12 029 participants, clar et al. reported that influenza vaccination may reduce cv mortality and combined cv events in patients with cv disease. 81 furthermore, a recent metaanalysis including six cohort studies and 179 158 participants also confirmed that influenza vaccination was associated with a significant decrease in all-cause mortality in patients with heart failure. 82 to date, no vaccine has been developed to prevent sars-cov-2 or other coronavirus infections. scientists across the world are racing to develop a vaccine, which is also a promising tool to prevent cv disease, for the coronavirus to tackle the outbreak of covid-19.a role for ace2 in involvement in vascular protective actions has been postulated. we therefore hypothesize that the risk of coronavirus or influenza virus infection is high among the cv disease-susceptible population, at least partly due to high ace2 expression in this population, which needs to be confirmed in the future. our hypotheses suggest that more protection should be employed for patients with cv disease. coronavirus or influenza virus vaccine usage in the high cv risk population could be a potential strategy to prevent both cv disease and coronavirus/influenza virus infections. furthermore, there is an urgent need to develop a vaccine for coronavirus prevention and control, and it will be important to evaluate the effect of coronavirus vaccines on cv protection.conflict of interest: none declared.two years after the disaster, their blood pressure remained significantly elevated by~4-5 mmhg on average, and the incidence rates of obesity, diabetes and dyslipidemia, as well as hypertension, remained 1.2-1.5 times higher than those before the disaster [3] . the current situations in 2020 under the policy of social distancing and "stay at home" with self-restraint from going out are similar to those of the evacuation in 2011: sudden death of familiar persons, fear for death of ourselves, stresses produced due to family members being in the house all day long, feeling of detachment from friends and others, job loss and economic difficulties and so on. 2020 is the year of the 20th anniversary of the discovery of ace 2 (angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) [4] . it is a mystery why this molecule, which cleaves angiotensin ii, one of the central players of blood pressure and cardiovascular homeostasis, into angiotensin (1-7), is used for the entry of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) into host target cells [5] . the reninangiotensin system is a relatively new endocrine system in phyletic evolution that produces high blood pressure to deliver adequate oxygen and nutrients throughout the body for survival.ace2 is expressed not only on pulmonary cells but also on intestinal and renal epithelial cells, cardiomyocytes and vascular endothelial cells [6] . vascular endothelial cells are infected by sars-cov-2, resulting in the occurrence of systemic vasculitis and severe thromboembolism in relation to the "cytokine storm". chromosome x harbors the gene coding for ace-2, and the activity of transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2), which facilitates the fusion of viral and cellular membranes, is androgen dependent [7] . these facts might be related to the sex preference of this disease [8] . regulation of ace2 expression by sars-cov-2 infection or by the administration of ace inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers has been reported in in vitro cultured cells and in vivo animal models, and its clinical implication for covid-19 has been argued [9] .along with the observation that underlying cardiovascular diseases that are often caused by or complicated with hypertension are associated with an increased risk of severity of the disease [10] , we should constantly attempt to discover and investigate the true picture of covid-19 in relation to hypertension that has so far been delineated, that is, what is known and what is not yet known, to be well prepared for a possible pandemic of ncds, including hypertension.our sincere scientific approach to cope with the reality of hypertension with covid-19 would yield a new normal hypertension medicine. this perspective opens up a new field of hypertension research to produce a concept of combined disease types of communicable and noncommunicable diseases, specific to each person's particular lifestyle and life environment. this new disease entity would include a new type of physical-mental stress-induced hypertension, a new type of vasculitis with hypertension, diseases evoked by lung-mediated organ miscommunication, or cardiovascular dysregulation produced by discordance between the human host and microorganisms. facing the difficulty of frequent face-to-face examination of the patients performed in old normal medical practice, the new normal of hypertension medicine also prompts us to cultivate the digital transformation of the medical practice of hypertension management to realize life-long care to naturally maintain a happy and healthy life, respecting the diversity of each person with hypertension. the establishment of a medical care system with constant connection to each person with hypertension by various iot (internet of things) technologies and a medical advisory system to give personalized proper advice at the appropriate time according to the lifelog data of each person and the construction of a dynamic community remodeled with mutual dependence on each person's diverse quality of life are expected. among them, the most important requirement is a "redesign" of the image of medical doctors being engaged in hypertension medicine to welcome the new normal of hypertension medicine.conflict of interest the author declares that they have no conflicts of interest.publisher's note springer nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.coronavirus disease (covid-19) represents a public health crisis of global proportions [1] . caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (sars-cov-2), covid-19 was first announced in december 2019 in wuhan, the capital of china's hubei province [2, 3] .the symptoms most commonly reported include cough, fever, and shortness of breath. the pathophysiology of the disease explains why respiratory symptoms are so common: indeed, the virus accesses host cells via the protein angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [4, 5] , which is very abundant in the lungs [6] .nevertheless, ace2 is also expressed by endothelial cells [7, 8] , and other major clinical events usually observed in covid-19 patients (e.g., high blood pressure [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] , thrombosis [14] [15] [16] to access host cells, sars-cov-2 uses a surface glycoprotein (peplomer) known as spike; ace2 has been shown to be a co-receptor for coronavirus entry [28] [29] [30] . therefore, the density of ace2 in each tissue may correlate with the severity of the disease in that tissue [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] . other receptors on the surface of human cells have been suggested to mediate the entry of sars-cov-2 [5] , including transmembrane serine protease 2 (tmprss2) [37, 38] , sialic acid receptors [39, 40] , and extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (cd147, also known as basigin) [41] . additionally, catepsin b and l have been shown to be critical entry factors in the pathogenesis of covid-19 [38, 42] .intriguingly, all of these factors involved in the entry of sars-cov-2 in the host cell are known to be expressed by endothelial cells [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] (figure 1 ).ace2 remains the most studied of these receptors [34, [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] : for instance, its genetic inactivation has been shown to cause severe lung injury in h5n1-challenged mice [55] , whereas administration of recombinant human ace2 ameliorates h5n1 virus-induced lung injury in mice [55] . the sars-cov-2 coronavirus accesses host cells via the binding of its spike glycoprotein to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), sialic acid receptor, transmembrane serine protease 2 (tmprss2), and extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (cd147); catepsin b and l also participate in virus entry. all of these factors are expressed in endothelial cells. endothelial dysfunction is a common feature of the clinical manifestations observed in covid-19 patients. all of the drugs proposed as a potential therapeutic strategy to treat covid-19 patients have been shown to improve endothelial function, including tocilizumab, colchicine, chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, and famotidine (see text for details and references). figure 1 . endothelial dysfunction is a major determinant of covid-19. the sars-cov-2 coronavirus accesses host cells via the binding of its spike glycoprotein to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), sialic acid receptor, transmembrane serine protease 2 (tmprss2), and extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer (cd147); catepsin b and l also participate in virus entry. all of these factors are expressed in endothelial cells. endothelial dysfunction is a common feature of the clinical manifestations observed in covid-19 patients. all of the drugs proposed as a potential therapeutic strategy to treat covid-19 patients have been shown to improve endothelial function, including tocilizumab, colchicine, chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, and famotidine (see text for details and references).these studies also raise numerous questions regarding the association between hypertension and covid-19. indeed, hypertension is known to be one of most common diseases and co-morbidities worldwide, considered a silent killer for the worldwide population [88] . we speculate that the higher rate of hypertension and the worse prognosis in patients with covid-19 infection could be seen as the spy of a cause-effect mechanism, more than as a casual pre-existing association between these two different diseases.ace inhibitors (acei) and angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arb) represent very effective strategies for the treatment of hypertension [88] . these drugs reduce the effects of renin-angiotensin axis by inhibiting ace (acei) or by blocking the angiotensin receptors (arb), as shown in figure 2 . a growing question for the scientific community and physicians is to understand whether acei/arb could affect the prognosis of hypertensive covid-19 patients [34, [89] [90] [91] .ace inhibitors (acei) and angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arb) represent very effective strategies for the treatment of hypertension [88] . these drugs reduce the effects of renin-angiotensin axis by inhibiting ace (acei) or by blocking the angiotensin receptors (arb), as shown in figure 2 . a growing question for the scientific community and physicians is to understand whether acei/arb could affect the prognosis of hypertensive covid-19 patients [34, [89] [90] [91] .the exact role of acei/arb in the control of ace2 molecular pathways is controversial: indeed, preclinical studies evidenced that the selective blockade of either angiotensin ii synthesis or activity in rats induces increases in ace2 gene expression and activity [92] [93] [94] [95] [96] ; similarly, treating infarcted rats with arb increased plasma concentration of angiotensin 1-7 and ace2 [97] . in mice, arb treatment augmented ace2 mrna and protein levels [98, 99] and prevented the decrease in ace2 protein levels induced by angiotensin ii [100] . equally important, mineralocorticoid receptor blockers prevented aldosterone-induced reduction in cardiac ace2 mrna expression in rat cardiomyocytes [101] and increased ace2 expression and activity in murine hearts and in monocyte-derived macrophages obtained from ten patients with heart failure [102] .nevertheless, there is no clinical evidence that acei could directly affect molecular pathways linked to ace2 activity. for instance, urinary ace2 levels were reported to be higher in patients treated with olmesartan vs untreated controls, but this finding was not observed in patients treated with other arb or enalapril [103] ; instead, another study reported no difference in ace2 activity in patients who were taking acei or arb vs untreated patients [89] . of note, ace2, which functions as a carboxypeptidase [104] is not inhibited by clinically prescribed acei.in particular, ace2 acts to counterbalance the effect of ace [105] ; indeed, whereas ace generates angiotensin ii from angiotensin i, ace2 converts angiotensin ii into an active heptapeptide (angiotensin 1-7), which binds the mas receptor (masr), triggering vasodilative, anti-oxidant, and anti-inflammatory properties [106] [107] [108] [109] (figure 2 ). angiotensin ii and angiotensin 1-7 binds heptahelical receptors; namely, angiotensin ii can activate at1r (type 1 angiotensin ii receptor) and at2r (type 2 angiotensin ii receptor), whereas angiotensin 1-7 binds the mas receptor (masr). the actions mediated by these receptors are depicted in the figure. the exact role of acei/arb in the control of ace2 molecular pathways is controversial: indeed, preclinical studies evidenced that the selective blockade of either angiotensin ii synthesis or activity in rats induces increases in ace2 gene expression and activity [92] [93] [94] [95] [96] ; similarly, treating infarcted rats with arb increased plasma concentration of angiotensin 1-7 and ace2 [97] . in mice, arb treatment augmented ace2 mrna and protein levels [98, 99] and prevented the decrease in ace2 protein levels induced by angiotensin ii [100] . equally important, mineralocorticoid receptor blockers prevented aldosterone-induced reduction in cardiac ace2 mrna expression in rat cardiomyocytes [101] and increased ace2 expression and activity in murine hearts and in monocyte-derived macrophages obtained from ten patients with heart failure [102] .nevertheless, there is no clinical evidence that acei could directly affect molecular pathways linked to ace2 activity. for instance, urinary ace2 levels were reported to be higher in patients treated with olmesartan vs. untreated controls, but this finding was not observed in patients treated with other arb or enalapril [103] ; instead, another study reported no difference in ace2 activity in patients who were taking acei or arb vs. untreated patients [89] . of note, ace2, which functions as a carboxypeptidase [104] is not inhibited by clinically prescribed acei.in particular, ace2 acts to counterbalance the effect of ace [105] ; indeed, whereas ace generates angiotensin ii from angiotensin i, ace2 converts angiotensin ii into an active heptapeptide (angiotensin 1-7), which binds the mas receptor (masr), triggering vasodilative, anti-oxidant, and anti-inflammatory properties [106] [107] [108] [109] (figure 2 ). some media sources have recently called for the discontinuation of acei and arb, both prophylactically and in the context of suspected covid-19 [110] . however, several associations have recommended not to suspend these therapies [61, [111] [112] [113] [114] , and these recommendations have been confirmed by three recent studies: the first one performed on 362 hypertensive patients showed that aceis/arbs are not associated with the severity or mortality of covid-19 [91] ; the second one verified the effects of acei/arb on 1128 hypertensive covid-19 patients, showing that the use of acei/arb was associated with lower risk of all-cause mortality compared with acei/arb non-users [115] ; the third one demonstrated that without increasing the risk for sars-cov-2 infection, acei/arb outcompeted other antihypertensive drugs in reducing inflammatory markers like c-reactive protein and procalcitonin levels in covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension [116] . consistent with these findings, three observational studies performed in different populations and with different designs [117] [118] [119] (published in the same issue of the new england journal of medicine), arrived at the consistent message that the continued use of acei/arb is unlikely to be harmful in covid-19 patients. notably, in one of these studies [117] , the use of either acei or statins-two classes of drugs that are known to ameliorate endothelial function [120] [121] [122] [123] -was found to be associated with a lower risk of in-hospital death than non-use.the binding of the sars-cov-2 spike protein to ace2 has been suggested to cause the down-regulation of ace2 from the cell membrane [124] . consequently, ace2 down-regulation could lead to a loss of protective effects exerted by acei/arb in humans [125] . such down-regulation of ace2 is an attractive research field [95, [126] [127] [128] . indeed, it could be a valid therapeutic target to ameliorate response and clinical prognosis in hypertensive patients affected by covid-19. moreover, some investigators proposed the restoration of ace2 by administration of recombinant ace2 to reverse the lung-injury process during viral infections [4] . actually, these effects are being investigated in ongoing clinical trials (clinicaltrials.gov nct04287686), alongside the use of losartan as first therapy for covid-19 in hospitalized (nct04312009) or not hospitalized patients (nct04311177). a major role in the pathogenesis of (as well as in the clinical response to) covid-19 could also be played by ace2 polymorphisms, which are relatively under-investigated if compared to ace [129, 130] .finally, we have to consider the higher rate of cardiac injury and adverse outcomes in hypertensive patients during the covid-19 pandemic [131] [132] [133] . therefore, acei/arb chronic therapy should not be discontinued in hypertensive patients with covid-19. indeed, the loss of their pneumo-and cardioprotective effects could be detrimental [88] . in addition, in the absence of adequate follow-up visits, switching from acei/arb to another anti-hypertensive therapy could cause a suboptimal control of blood pressure.thus, as suggested by several medical associations [110] , in the absence of definitive clinical studies and without clear evidence, hypertensive patients should avoid discontinuation and/or therapeutic switching during covid-19 infection.another noteworthy feature of covid-19 for cardiologists is the significant decrease in the rates of hospital admissions for acute coronary syndromes which has been reported both in italy [134] and us [135] during the covid-19 outbreak, and despite being initially attributed to reduced air pollution, better adherence to treatment, or absence of occupational stress during lockdown, this phenomenon seems to be most likely due to the fear of going to the hospital and/or seeking medical attention during a pandemic. unfortunately, the current decline in hospitalization for acute coronary syndromes will trigger an increase in cases of heart failure in the near future.acute kidney injury (aki) has been reported in > 20% of critically ill or deceased covid-19 patients, a percentage that is consistent in studies from china [136] , italy [137] and united states [10] . it is important to note that aki, proteinuria, and hematuria have been independently associated with a higher risk of death in covid-19 patients [138] . furthermore, in a meta-analysis including 1389 covid-19 patients [139] , the prevalence of underlying chronic kidney disease was significantly more frequent among those with a severe covid-19 disease (3.3% vs. 0.4%; odds ratio 3.03, 95% ci: 1.09-8.47).according to immunohistochemistry assays [140] , ace2 seems not to be expressed in renal endothelial cells; however, a study based on single-cell analysis has confirmed the expression of ace2 and tmprss2 in human renal endothelial cells [141] , and most recently the presence of viral particles was confirmed by electron microscopy in endothelial cells of the glomerular capillary loops of a covid-19 patient [142] . besides, endothelial damage was a common finding in renal histopathological analyses of 26 covid-19 patients, in the absence of interstitial inflammatory infiltrates [143] .diabetes mellitus is a frequent co-morbidity and a cause of worse prognosis in covid-19 patients [12, [144] [145] [146] [147] [148] . indeed, evaluating pneumonia cases of unknown causes reported in wuhan and in patients with history of exposure to huanan seafood market before jan 1, 2020, 20% had diabetes [85] . similarly, among 1099 covid-19 patients analyzed by guan and colleagues, 7.4% had diabetes: this percentage goes up to 16.2% among patients with severe disease (vs. 5.7% in patients with non-severe disease) [84] ; furthermore, 35.8% of patients experiencing the composite endpoint of icu admission, mechanical ventilation and death, had diabetes (vs. 13.7% of patients that did not experience such endpoint) [84] . data from italy show that more than two-thirds of covid-19 patients that did not survive had diabetes [149] . in summary, diabetes is a frequent co-morbidity, a risk factor, and an independent prognostic factor in covid-19 patients. a strong evidence of the negative effects of diabetes in covid-19 patients is also corroborated by two meta-analyses [150, 151] .the worse prognosis in patients with diabetes and covid-19 could be attributed to the fact that the pneumonia evolves towards clinical stages more refractory to medical therapies, oxygen administration and mechanical ventilation, with necessity of icu care. these data have been investigated in a previous study conducted in patients with sars [152] , in which the relationship between a known history of diabetes and fasting plasma glucose (fpg) levels with death and morbidity rate was assessed, showing that the percentage of patients with diabetes was significantly higher in deceased vs. survivors (21.5% vs. 3.9%, p < 0.01) [152] . moreover, diabetic subjects with hypoxemia (sao 2 < 93%) had higher fpg levels and fpg was independently associated with an increased hazard ratio of mortality (1.1, 95% ci: 1.0-1.1) and hypoxia (1.1, 95% ci: 1.0-1.1) after controlling for age and gender [152] ; the authors concluded that both diabetes (3.0, 95% ci: 1.4-6.3) and fpg > or = 7.0 mmol/l (3.3, 95% ci: 1.4-7.7) were independent predictors of death [152] .in covid-19 patients, the incidence of diabetes is two times higher in icu/severe vs. non-icu/severe cases [151] . indeed, the diagnosis of diabetes in a cohort of patients with covid-19 infection evidenced a sub-group of patients with a 2.26-fold higher risk of experiencing adverse disease outcome analyses [150] . additionally, patients with obesity and/or glucose intolerance seem to be particularly vulnerable to covid-19 [10, 148, 153, 154] . unfortunately, no data are hitherto available on anti-diabetic medications and glucose homeostasis in covid-19 patients. this aspect is really limiting, because diabetes and altered glucose homeostasis during a condition of severe pneumonia with sars are reported as main factors of worse prognosis and death [152] . covid-19 could also induce new onset diabetes, by augmenting insulin resistance and/or by a direct action [155] on the islets of langerhans; supporting this view, previous studies have shown that ace2 can be a therapeutic target to ameliorate microcirculation in the islets [156] , and ace2 is known to be expressed by pancreatic beta cells [157] [158] [159] [160] [161] [162] .moreover, frequent cases of ketoacidosis in covid-19 patients have been reported [163] . therefore, the investigation of anti-diabetic medications and glucose homeostasis could be harnessed to evaluate patients with higher risk of experiencing worse prognosis and death by covid-19. we speculate that the amelioration of glucose homeostasis in diabetic covid-19 patients by specific hypoglycemic drugs could result in the amelioration of clinical outcomes with death reduction. however, these data are not reported in trials on covid-19, and they need to be investigated in further studies [164] .patients with covid19 often show clotting disorders, with organ dysfunction and coagulopathy, resulting in higher mortality [15, 165, 166] . critical data came from the analysis of coagulation tests including prothrombin time (pt), activated partial thromboplastin time (aptt), antithrombin activity (at), fibrinogen, fibrin degradation product (fdp), and d-dimer, in samples collected on admission and during the hospital stay of covid-19 patients [167] . non-survivors had significantly higher d-dimer and fdp levels, and longer pt vs. survivors on admission [167] . moreover, significant reduction and lowering of fibrinogen and at levels were observed in non-survivors during late stages of hospitalization, which is compatible with a clinical diagnosis of disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) [167, 168] . specifically, among 191 covid-19 patients seen at two hospitals in wuhan, d-dimer levels over 1 µg/l at admission predicted an 18-fold increase in odds of dying before discharge [14] . of note, when dic is caused by a systemic infection, it features an acute systemic over-inflammatory response, strictly linked to endothelial dysfunction [169] .most recently a case of a covid-19 patient with an increase of factor viii clotting activity and a massive elevation of von willebrand factor (vwf) has been reported [170] , further supporting our theory: indeed, vwf can be seen as a marker of endothelial damage, since it is normally stored in weibel-palade bodies within endothelial cells [171] . equally important, angiotensin ii level in the plasma of covid-19 patients was markedly elevated and linearly associated to viral load and lung injury [172] ; notably, angiotensin ii is known to increase microvascular permeability [173, 174] , to induce the transcription of tissue factor in endothelial cells [175] [176] [177] , and to activate platelets [178] [179] [180] . additionally, angiotensin ii can trigger the release of several components of the complement system from endothelial cells [181] [182] [183] [184] [185] [186] [187] , further corroborating the key role of endothelium in the pathogenesis of venous and arterial thrombosis in covid-19 patients [188, 189] .a dysregulated immune response, as observed in covid-19, especially in the late stages of the disease, plays a decisive role in endothelial dysfunction and thrombosis [190, 191] , and microvascular permeability is crucial in viral infections [192] . indeed, pulmonary endothelium represent a fundamental barrier between the blood and interstitium and have vital regulatory functions; specifically, endothelial cells represent one-third of the cell population of the lung [193] , and pulmonary endothelial damage is considered the hallmark of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [194] . animal models of coronavirus-induced severe ards have shown that reduced ace2 activity and loss of ace2 in the lungs is mirrored by enhanced vascular permeability, and exacerbated pulmonary edema [108] . the functional role of endothelium in pulmonary disease is also suggested by previous reports [195, 196] ; for instance, the h3n2 influenza virus has been shown to infect endothelial cells in vitro and to trigger endothelial cell apoptosis, which is known to enhance platelet adhesion [197] : endothelial cell death would cause exposure of the extracellular matrix to circulating blood, favoring platelet binding; similarly, the endothelium has been shown to contribute to the development of severe disease during h5n1 influenza infection [198] .deep vein thrombosis and/or pulmonary embolism have been previously described in patients with sars [199] [200] [201] [202] and cases of thrombosis complicating influenza-associated pneumonia have also been reported [203] [204] [205] . excessive activation of the immune system in response to pathogens can lead to pathological inflammatory consequences. in the case of highly virulent 1918 and avian h5n1 influenza virus infections, the recruitment of inflammatory leukocytes followed by excessive cytokine responses is considered to be the key contributor to morbidity and mortality of the infection [206, 207] .cytokine storm syndromes (css) are a group of disorders representing a variety of inflammatory etiologies with the final result of overwhelming systemic inflammation, hemodynamic instability, multiple organ dysfunction, and potentially death [208, 209] . specifically, macrophage activation syndrome [210] and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) [211] represent two clinically similar css with an unknown degree of etiopathogenic overlap [208] . the interaction between endothelial and immune cells could play a crucial role in covid-19, especially in severe cases and in the late stages of the disease [212] . for instance, the cytokine storm might lead to an abrupt deterioration of the inflammatory response and hyper-coagulation; the increased vulnerability of patients with cardiovascular diseases and/or diabetes might therefore simply reflect the impact of the underlying chronic inflammation and its response during sars-cov-2 infection. if this is the case, endothelial alterations could just be seen as an epiphenomenon.however, according to numerous investigators, the inflammatory response observed in covid-19 patients can be considered mild if compared to the one observed in typical ards and in cytokine-release syndrome [212] [213] [214] [215] : indeed, in ards patients, levels of interleukin-1β and interleukin-6 have been shown to be 10 to 60 fold higher than in covid-19 [216, 217] . therefore, other mechanisms have to be involved in order to explain the systemic manifestations reported in covid-19 patients, and endothelial cells, known orchestrators of cytokine amplification during viral infections [218] , seem to be one of the best candidates in this sense. further supporting our view, catecholamines are considered an essential component of the cytokine release syndrome [215] and we have demonstrated that endothelial cells are able to synthetize and release catecholamines [219] .acute pulmonary embolism, reported in covid-19 patients [20, [220] [221] [222] , has been shown to be a cause of clinical deterioration in viral pneumonias [205, 223] . endothelial dysfunction is known to be a key determinant in hypertension, thrombosis, and dic [72, [224] [225] [226] [227] . henceforth, it is important to select covid-19 patients at higher risk of pulmonary embolism, and practice computed tomography pulmonary angiography for the diagnosis of pulmonary thromboembolism especially in case of significant increase of d-dimer values. anticoagulation could be a necessary therapy to control and reduce pro-thrombotic events, as well as to prevent pulmonary embolism [228] .the clinical course of covid-19 consists of two main phases: viral infection and immune/ inflammatory response (figure 3 ), which require distinct therapeutic approaches. strikingly, several drugs suggested as a potential therapeutic strategy for covid-19 [229] [230] [231] have been shown to ameliorate endothelial function, including interleukin 6 (il-6) receptor antagonists (e.g., tocilizumab [232] ), colchicine [233] , azithromycin [234] , and famotidine [235] .even the antimalaric agents chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, initially proposed as a therapy for covid-19 based on anecdotal data [229, 236] , have been shown to improve endothelial function [237, 238] . if our theory is correct [239] , other drugs that might be effective in treating covid-19 patients through their beneficial effects on endothelial cells include α1 adrenergic receptor blockers (e.g., doxazosin) [240] , modulators of sigma receptors [241] [242] [243] , metformin [244] , indomethacin [245] , and endothelin receptor antagonists (e.g., bosentan) [246] . however, data from randomized trials confirming the actual efficacy of these drugs are not (yet) available.as discussed before, covid-19 infection could cause endothelial dysfunction and a hypercoagulation state. this condition is aggravated by hypoxia, which augments thrombosis by both increasing blood viscosity and hypoxia-inducible transcription factor-dependent signaling pathway [247] . consequently, these phenomena could result in pulmonary embolism with occlusion and micro-thrombosis in pulmonary small vessels, as observed in critical covid-19 patients [248] . apart from cases of pulmonary embolism, covid-19 can cause a sepsis-associated dic, which is defined as "sepsis-induced coagulopathy" (sic) [169] . thus, there is an increasing interest in anticoagulant therapy to treat covid-19 [249] .state. this condition is aggravated by hypoxia, which augments thrombosis by both increasing blood viscosity and hypoxia-inducible transcription factor-dependent signaling pathway [247] . consequently, these phenomena could result in pulmonary embolism with occlusion and micro-thrombosis in pulmonary small vessels, as observed in critical covid-19 patients [248] . apart from cases of pulmonary embolism, covid-19 can cause a sepsis-associated dic, which is defined as "sepsis-induced coagulopathy" (sic) [169] . thus, there is an increasing interest in anticoagulant therapy to treat covid-19 [249] . in a retrospective analysis conducted at tongji hospital of huazhong university of science and technology in wuhan, the authors examined 449 patients affected by severe covid-19 [228] . the diagnosis of severe covid-19 disease was made by evidence of respiratory rate ≥ 30 breaths/min, arterial oxygen saturation ≤ 93% at rest and pao 2 /fio 2 ≤ 300 mmhg [228] . in these patients, they reviewed and compared the parameters of coagulation tests and clinical characteristics between survivors and non-survivors to evaluate the effects of heparin therapy [228] : 94 patients received low molecular weight heparin (lmwh, 40-60 mg enoxaparin/day) and 5 received unfractionated heparin (ufh, 10000-15000 u/day), without other anti-coagulants [228] . heparin therapy significantly reduced mortality in patients with sic score ≥4 (40.0% vs. 64.2%, p < 0.05), but not in those with sic score < 4 (29.0% vs. 22.6%, p > 0.05) [228] . d-dimer, pt, and age were positively, while platelet count was negatively, correlated with 28-day mortality [228] . in addition, stratifying by d-dimer values the study population, the authors reported in heparin non-users a rise of mortality linked to the rising d-dimer, and 20% reduction of mortality for patients under heparin with d-dimer exceeding 3.0 µg/ml [228] . therefore, heparin treatment appears to be associated with better prognosis in severe covid-19 patients with coagulopathy. the beneficial effects of heparin-based therapies are also supported by the structural analogies between heparin and heparan-sulphate, which according to some investigators may confer heparin with antiviral properties [250] [251] [252] [253] [254] . in absence of contraindications, we suggest the use of enoxaparin 40 mg/day in all covid-19 patients, to be raised up to 1 mg/kg every 12 h in case of d-dimer > 3.0 µg/ml; apixaban (5 mg every 12 h) could represent a useful alternative.of course, the full clinical evaluation of patients with covid-19 infection cannot leave aside the analysis of laboratory and imaging data. we believe that pt/ptt, fibrinogen, and d-dimer should be monitored daily and anticoagulation therapy should be recommended for covid-19 patients when the d-dimer value is four times higher than the normal upper limit, except for patients with anticoagulant contraindications. the confirmed diagnosis of severe covid-19 disease in patients with hypercoagulation and organ failure could evidence an early stage of sepsis-induced dic. on the other hand, anticoagulant may not benefit unselected patients. consequently, further prospective studies are needed to confirm these findings in covid-19 patients, also testing other anti-aggregants and anti-coagulants (at different doses).author contributions: conceptualization, g.s.; data curation, c.s., j.g., m.b.m., x.w., r.m. and g.s. and s.r.; writing-original draft preparation, c.s., j.g. and g.s.; writing-review and editing, j.g., m.b.m. and g.s.; visualization, m.b.m. and g.s.; supervision, g.s.; funding acquisition, g.s. and j.g. a preprint version of the manuscript was sent to preprints.org by on 9 april 2020: preprints 2020, 2020040204 (doi:10.20944/preprints202004.0204.v1). all authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.funding: the santulli's lab is supported in part by the nih (r01-dk123259, r01-hl146691, r01-dk033823, and r00-dk107895 to g.s.) and by the american heart association (aha-20post35211151 to j.g.).y oung athletes, generally speaking, represent one of the healthiest and fittest groups in society. the resumption of sport and exercise will ultimately bring athletes into closer proximity than is recommended by current physical distancing practices, potentially increasing one's risk of infection. data are emerging that high-intensity exercise may increase aerosolization and transmissibility of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) from presymptomatic and mildly symptomatic individuals. 9 it is in this setting that medical providers have wondered how to best counsel athletes with medical conditions that may be associated with increased risk of severe coronavirus disease (covid-19), specifically, diabetes, asthma, sickle cell trait (sct), hypertension, and obesity. the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) guidance does not explicitly address young athletes returning to sport but recommends that high-risk individuals of any age take extra precautions, including those with chronic lung disease or moderate to severe asthma, chronic kidney disease being treated with dialysis, diabetes mellitus, hemoglobin disorders, liver disease, serious heart conditions, severe obesity (body mass index [bmi] ≥40 kg/m 2 ), or who are immunocompromised. 2 there is limited epidemiologic evidence to inform guidance for such individuals, especially in the high school and college age groups; however, young people in general are at low risk for poor outcomes including death, hospitalization, and severe disease. here, we offer our appraisal of the situation and provide information that may help frame discussions with athletes.the vast majority of deaths from coronavirus occur in those older than 25 years of age, with those aged 15 to 24 years representing only 0.1% of all deaths. 3 of those younger than 24 years of age who died from the virus, 4% had hypertension, 21% were obese, and 15% had diabetes. 3 prevalence of these conditions in the general adolescent population is similar for hypertension (4%) 8 and obesity (20.6%) 6 but is much lower for diabetes (0.25%). 1 while no conclusions can be drawn based on limited data, the outcomes in this age group are consistent with the poor outcomes seen in patients with diabetes who contract covid-19 in the general population; 1 study showed a 4-fold increased risk of severe/critical illness independent of other risk factors. 16 athletes with diabetes should be counseled regarding the potential for increased morbidity and mortality if infected with covid-19 and consider delaying return until sports reintegration is confirmed safe and the risk of acquiring a new infection is better understood.asthma affects 8.4% of the population from 0 to 17 years of age with about 5% experiencing 1 or more asthma attacks per year. 5 cdc guidelines suggest that only those with moderate to severe asthma are in the high-risk category, while mild, well-controlled asthma is not considered a risk for poor outcomes. 12 moderate asthma is characterized as having daily symptoms that cause some limitation of normal activities and a forced expiratory volume (fev) of 60% to 80%. 12 exerciseinduced bronchospasm is common among athletes, especially during the winter and in endurance sports, but is not known to confer a higher risk of poor outcomes with sars-cov-2 infection. athletes with asthma should be evaluated prior to participation in sports to confirm their treatment regimen is optimized and they are adherent to their medications. additionally, they should be advised to notify their medical team of any exacerbations of existing medical conditions or illness. participation should be avoided in any individual with worsening asthma control.sct is also common, with 9% of african american/black individuals carrying the gene. although generally considered benign, sct has been associated with an increased risk of exertional death in football athletes and military recruits, as well as increased risk of venous thromboembolism. 7, 13 although sickle cell disease and thalassemia are considered by the cdc as higher risk for adverse outcomes with covid-19 infection, sct is not. no additional precautions are recommended for returning athletes with sct; however, if an athlete with sct contracts sars-cov-2, treating physicians should be vigilant for issues related to hypercoagulability both during the acute illness and for several months into recovery. this includes allowing adequate acclimatization and reconditioning while optimizing hydration, minimizing heat stress, and avoiding blood flow restriction devices used for rehabilitation and strengthening.the prevalence of hypertension in athletes appears to be similar to that of the general adolescent population (4%); however, studies suggest that american football lineman with higher bmi are more likely to be affected. 4 studies of hypertension in athletes are limited and often rely on one-time blood pressure measurements rather than standard diagnostic criteria. the frequency with which covid-19 patients are hypertensive is not unexpected, given the age distribution of sars-cov-2 infection, and does not necessarily imply a causal relationship. however, concern remains that hypertension may be an independent risk factor for poor outcomes even though the cdc does not currently list hypertension as a predictor of severe illness. 2, 15 there was initial concern that treatment of hypertension with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) could increase the susceptibility to covid-19 infection or worsen its course; however, several large studies did not support these hypotheses, and the american heart association does not recommend stopping ace inhibitors or arbs in patients with covid-19. 11, 14 thus, athletes with controlled hypertension should maintain their current regimen when returning to participation. newly diagnosed hypertension should be treated as clinically appropriate. preparticipation screening should include accurate measurement of blood pressure with repeat measurements (if abnormal) and presenting an opportunity to engage the athlete in discussions regarding treatment.finally, although most athletes are fit, many sports recruit athletes with a larger build, particularly american football lineman. the cdc groups people with severe obesity (bmi ≥40 kg/m 2 ) as potentially at risk for severe illness, although the literature associated with covid-19 employs variable definitions of obesity, some including those with bmi ≥25 kg/m 2 . 2 bmi is intended to be a marker of excess fat but may not be a good measure in athletes, as lean muscle mass is typically increased with lower percentages of body fat. studies have shown an increased association of poor covid-19 outcomes with higher bmis. one study found this to be true especially in younger patients with bmis ≥30 kg/m 2 and even more so among those with bmi ≥35 kg/m 2 . 10 as in the general population, those with higher bmi are also more likely to have other comorbidities such as hypertension or diabetes. athletes with a high bmi, particularly those with a higher percentage of body fat, should be counseled on the overall adverse health effects of obesity and potential association with complications from covid-19 and should be supported in adopting a healthy lifestyle. lifestyle modifications in athletes who derive competitive advantage from higher bmi and are unwilling to consider weight reduction may be limited but should be addressed.preparticipation guidance for all athletes should include a discussion of risks of sars-cov-2. athletes with diabetes appear to be at higher risk for poor outcomes; however, there is no evidence that athletes with asthma, sct, and hypertension are at higher risk of poor outcomes, and it is unclear if obese athletes are at higher risk. all athletes should be engaged in a shared decision-making process that involves education, acknowledgement of uncertainty, and optimization of medical treatment. the risk of poor outcomes in those younger than 25 years of age remains low, and youth and high levels of fitness may effectively mitigate the risk of severe covid-19 outcomes in athletes with pre-existing risk factors. the collection of these data is critical to better understanding the interplay of these elements. exercise and sport are beneficial for both physical and mental health. we should attempt to mitigate risks for returning athletes by addressing potential risk factors, encouraging compliance with public health guidelines, and adjusting recommendations as the situation and evidence evolve.in the 2 months after the first report of 4 cases of atypical pneumonia in wuhan, china, on december 27, 2019,1 the cumulative number of confirmed cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in the city rose to 49 122, with 2195 deaths by the end of february 2020.2 on january 23, wuhan city shut down in response to the quickly evolving epidemic. all public transportation within, to, and from the city was suspended, and residents were barred from leaving. an estimated 9 million people remained in the city after the lockdown.3 strict social distancing measures were also implemented, including the compulsory wearing of face masks in public.during the early phase of the response in wuhan, the number of patients overwhelmed local fever clinics and hospitals designated to receive patients with covid-19. the media reported a significant shortage of hospital beds, intensive care unit (icu) beds, and other health care resources. by february 12, more than 18 000 health care workers had been sent to wuhan from other parts of china to help with the coronavirus response.4 a total of 48 hospitals (including 2 new hospitals built specifically for patients with covid-19) and more than 26 000 inpatient beds were designated for the isolation and treatment of patients with confirmed severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). quarantine centers with more than 13 000 total beds were also established to isolate confirmed patients with milder illness. by the end of february, the local government reported that “finally patients don’t need to wait for beds. now the beds are waiting for patients.”5with human-to-human transmission now established in other countries, mitigating the potential consequences of covid-19 on local health care systems is a top priority. a clinical study from china1 reported that 81% of patients in whom sars-cov-2 is detected experience mild disease, 14% experience severe disease, and 5% experience critical disease. however, questions still remain regarding the proportion of asymptomatic patients and the clinical course of the disease, preventing accurate prediction of hospitalization and icu needs with transmission models.here, we describe the icu and hospitalization needs for covid-19 in 2 cities in china, ie, wuhan, the epicenter of china’s outbreak, and guangzhou, a metropolis that experienced an early importation of cases. as in all cities in china, guangzhou implemented strict social distancing measures, contact tracing, and quarantine protocols in late january, which resulted in a much smaller outbreak size than in wuhan. describing and comparing the resource needs in both cities may create benchmarks to help other large metropolises prepare for potential outbreaks.we summed the total patient-days under critical and/or severe condition to estimate the total icu-days and serious inpatient–days. we plotted the raw number of patients in critical and severe condition and patients hospitalized on each day for wuhan and guangzhou and estimated the proportion of hospitalizations and icu admissions per 10 000 adults based on the assumption that there were 9 million people present in wuhan during the lockdown,3 of whom 88.16% were aged 15 years or older,9 and 14.9 million people present in guangzhou, of whom 82.82% were aged 15 years or above.10we then projected the number of patients who would have severe and critical covid-19 at the peak of a wuhan-like outbreak in the 30 most populous us cities by assuming that the associations of age and comorbidity with patient outcomes would be the same as their association with covid-19 mortality, as derived from case reports from china until february 11.11 specifically, we estimated the stratum-specific critical care rate in wuhan by assuming that the risk factor for being in critical care was the same as that for death (ie, for adults age 65 years or over, rate ratio, 7.2; for adults with hypertention, rate ratio, 6.9).11 we estimated the probability of being in critical condition at the peak of the epidemic in each age and hypertension stratum using the covid-19 mortality rate ratios for age and hypertension11 and the proportion of the wuhan population in each stratum. the hypertension prevalence in adults in wuhan was estimated as 25.7%,12 and the proportion of the population aged 65 years or older was estimated as 14.1%.13 we applied these stratum-specific critical care rates to population structures in us cities based on crude hypertension prevalence in adults in 201714 and the proportion of the adult population aged 65 years and older in these cities.15 the data on us icu beds,16 empty icu beds,17 inpatient beds,18 and population structure19 were used to estimate inpatient bed capacity per 10 000 adults. we used wuhan-like outbreak to describe an outbreak in a large metropolis where minimal disease control measures were implemented during the first 2 months of community spread of sars-cov-2, followed by city-level lockdown measures to suppress transmission. all analyses were conducted in r version 3.6.3 (r project for statistical computing), and no prespecified level of statistical significance was set.in wuhan, covid-19 accounted for a total of 32 486 icu-days and 176 136 serious inpatient–days between january 10 and february 29 (figure 1a and figure 1b), with a median (interquartile range) of 429 (25-1143) patients in the icu and 1521 (111-7202) inpatients with serious illness each day during that 51-day period. during the peak of the epidemic from mid to late february, a maximum of 19 425 patients (24.5 per 10 000 adults) were hospitalized, 9689 patients (12.2 per 10 000 adults) were considered in serious condition, and 2087 patients (2.6 per 10 000 adults) needed critical care per day.in guangzhou, covid-19 accounted for a total of 318 icu-days and 724 serious inpatient–days between january 24 and february 29 (figure 1c and figure 1d), with a median (interquartile range) of 9 (7-12) patients in the icu and 17 (15-26) inpatients with serious illness each day during that 37-day period. during the peak of the epidemic (early february), 15 patients were in critical condition, while 38 were hospitalized and classified as serious. unlike wuhan, where patients with mild covid-19 disease were isolated in quarantine centers and not in designated hospitals, all confirmed patients in guangzhou were hospitalized until recovery. the maximum number of hospitalizations in guangzhou on any day was 271 patients.at the peak of the epidemic, we estimated the critical care risk among adults younger than 65 years to be 1.2 patients per 10 000 adults; among adults aged 65 years or older, 8.0 patients per 10 000 adults; among adults without hypertension, 1.3 patients per 10 000 adults; and among adults with hypertension, 9.5 patients per 10 000 adults. in the 30 most populous cities in the us, 11.0% to 22.5% adults are aged 65 years or older15 and the crude hypertension prevalence ranges from 22.0% to 46.9%.14 the projected number of prevalent critically ill patients at the peak of a wuhan-like outbreak in us cities ranged from 2.2 to 3.2 patients per 10 000 adults, when the difference in age distribution was taken into account (figure 2a) and from 2.8 to 4.4 patients per 10 000 adults when the differences in hypertension prevalence was taken into account (figure 2b).this study has several limitations. we relied on officially reported statistics, which may not represent the change of actual case counts over time but rather reflect the capacity of testing and hospitalization. thus, the number of serious cases and hospitalizations in wuhan is not reflective of actual need but rather of the maximum capacity of the system of diagnosis and treatment. therefore, we are more confident regarding the hospitalization and serious case counts in wuhan after mid-february and in guangzhou, where capacities in diagnosis and treatment were not exceeded according to both official and unofficial sources. furthermore, we have only accounted for the differences in age and hypertension distribution between wuhan and us cities, but we did not account for other potential risk factors, such as diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and chronic respiratory diseases.11 because no mutually adjusted associations of these risk factors with covid-19 serious illness or death were available at the time of our analysis and because cardiometabolic risk factors likely coexist in the same population, we used hypertension adjustment as a proxy for adjusting other known comorbidities.in addition, our projection of the icu bed needs in us cities did not consider scenarios in which local transmission differs from that of wuhan. the contact rate in wuhan during the early phase of the epidemic may have been much higher than what we expect to occur in us cities because of the increased number of social contacts that occurred in wuhan because of the lunar new year celebrations. if social distancing measures are effectively implemented early in us cities, the growth of the epidemic may be delayed. but it is also possible that us cities may not be able to implement the extreme social distancing measures that were put in place later in wuhan. we further assumed that both settings had an equal (age- or hypertension-specific) incidence rate of severe and critical covid-19 cases, but we did not account for differences in contact patterns in vulnerable populations, such as in nursing homes. therefore, the actual number of hospital and icu beds that will be needed during the course of a covid-19 outbreak in a us city is impossible to estimate precisely. our estimated capacity needs based on a wuhan-like outbreak could be a benchmark for what health care systems would expect to see during the first 3 months of a local covid-19 epidemic if the same outbreak control measures were implemented as in wuhan.even after the lockdown of wuhan on january 23, 2020, the number of patients with serious covid-19 cases continued to rise, exceeding local hospitalization and icu capacities for at least a month. plans are urgently needed to mitigate the consequences of covid-19 outbreaks on local health care systems in us cities.(cvd), diabetes mellitus or hypertension, respectively [2] . italy has recorded 162,488 confirmed cases and 21,067 deaths (april 15, 2020) (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/). according to the last available age-related analysis of mortality, released by the italian "istituto superiore di sanità" (iss) on march 30, 2020, 8 .9% of the deceased patients were >90 years old, 39.7% were 80-89 years old, 35.5% were 70-79 years old, 11.2% were 60-69 years old and 0.9% were 40-49 years old. similar to chinese statistics, sars-cov-2 shows higher mortality rates in patients with one or more comorbidities. in italy, only 2.1% of deaths were represented by people with no documented comorbidity, whereas 21.3%, 25.9% and 50.7% regarded patients with one, two, three or more comorbidities, respectively. a tentative hypothesis explaining the epidemiologic findings is the high expression of the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which is activated by the viral spike protein in alveolar epithelial cells and myocardium [3] .ace2 is a membrane amino-peptide with the catalytic subunit pointed towards the extracellular space of pulmonary, cardiac, renal and intestinal tissues. it functions as an angiotensin ii-degrading enzyme which generates angiotensin (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) . this latter oligopeptide has vasodilatory, hypotensive and diuretic effects [4, 5] . so far, the binding of covid-19 spike protein to ace2 has been shown to downregulate ace2 and, in turn, to decrease angiotensin (1-7) production. this mechanism may be involved in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension and insufficiency caused by sars-cov-2 infection [6] . therefore, the different ace2 expression occurring in patients with hypertension, cvd or diabetes should be taken into account when the different mortality rate is considered in patients with these comorbidities.one of the most frequently reported epidemiologic data is sex-related covid-19 mortality. the evidence supports a higher predominance of men in several countries; thus, the male sex has been considered a poor prognostic factor by some authors [7] . male sex represents 73% of deaths in china [8] , 59% in south korea [9] and, in italy, iss reports a prevalence of 70% of men among deceased people. a recent scoping review on all the available epidemiological studies, collecting data from 59,254 patients from 11 different countries, has shown an association between male sex and higher mortality rate [10] . these findings suggest the presence of a male-related susceptibility. indeed, channappanavar and colleagues [11] have shown that male mice are more susceptible to sars-cov infection than age-matched females. this increased susceptibility was associated with high virus titers, increased vascular leakage and alveolar edema. these changes were accompanied by increased accumulation of inflammatory monocyte/macrophages and neutrophils in the lungs of male mice and the depletion of monocyte/macrophages partially protected these mice from lethal sars. in addition, the sex-specific differences were independent of t and b cell responses, due to the sex-related intrinsic difference in innate immunity [12] . finally, ovariectomy or treatment of female mice with an estrogen receptor antagonist increased the mortality rate; therefore, suggesting a protective effect for the estrogen receptor signaling pathway in sars-cov infected mice [11] . in this context, the analysis of a possible hormonal-dependency of the expression and/or activity of ace2 in the various tissues is of relevance to understand the pathologic mechanisms behind the epidemiologic findings.ace2 is expressed in both mouse and human adult leydig cells, but in a testosterone-independent manner. in these cells, the enzyme has been proposed to play a role in steroidogenesis [13] . ace2 has also been described in ovarian granulosa cells and its expression increases with a rise in luteinizing hormone (lh). indeed, stimulation with human chorionic gonadotropic (hcg) improves the ace2-angiotensin (1-7)-mas system [14] . this may represent a compensatory mechanism that could be useful for avoiding an increase in blood pressure in postmenopausal women [15] . in addition to gonadal expression, some studies have shown an expression and activity of ace2 influenced by sex hormones in the mouse adipose tissue, kidneys and myocardium [15] [16] [17] [18] . gupte and colleagues studied the contribution of ace2 in the pathogenesis of the sex-related difference of obesity-related hypertension. male mice fed with a high-fat diet showed a decreased ace2 expression in the kidney, resulting in reduced angiotensin (1-7) and increased angiotensin (1-8) levels. this caused blood hypertension that was reversed by the administration of losartan [14] . the same authors had previously shown a low expression of ace2 in the adipose tissue of male mice [15] . in contrast, high-fat-fed female mice have an increased expression of ace2 in the adipose tissue, which leads to high angiotensin (1-7) levels and no hypertension until angiotensin (1-7) receptor antagonists are administered. ovariectomy results in a decrease ace2 activity in the adipose tissue that leads to hypertension, which is restored by 17ß-estradiol administration [16] . in the myocardium, ace and ace2 expression, as well as cardiac hypertrophy, are significantly higher in spontaneously hypertensive male mice compared to female mice. after orchiectomy, a significant decrease in ace, ace2 expression and cardiac hypertrophy was found and, consequently an increased cardiac performance was observed. finally, ovariectomy causes an increase in ace2 expression and cardiac hypertrophy, which worsens the function of the heart pump [15] .taken together, these findings suggest a role of sex hormones in the sex-related expression/function of ace2. this may help the interpretation of epidemiologic data. more in detail, 17ß-estradiol may increase the expression/activity of ace2 in the adipose tissue and the kidney. as reported above, spontaneously hypertensive male mice showed higher ace2 expression than female mice [15] , which may provide a possible explanation for the higher mortality in men due to more severe cardiovascular damage that the viral infection is capable of causing. since the expression of ace2 in the myocardium appears to be modulated by androgen [15] , a role for androgen receptor (ar) gene polymorphisms cannot be excluded in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular adverse events and hypertension in covid-19-positive male patients.another aspect that needs to be highlighted is the increased cvd risk in patients with covid-19. the prevalence of venous thromboembolism (vte) in these patients has been reported as 25% and vte is associated with an unfavorable prognosis [19] . anticoagulant therapy, mainly with low molecular weight heparin, appears to be associated with a better prognosis in severe covid-19 patients who have sepsis-induced coagulopathy criteria or markedly elevated d-dimer levels [20] . the scientific debate regarding the risk of vte in patients treated with testosterone is very current. in a recent case-crossover study, 39,622 men were enrolled and 3110 of them (7.8%) had hypogonadism. in age-adjusted models, testosterone replacement therapy was associated with a higher risk of vte in men with (odds ratio 2.32) and without (odds ratio 2.02) hypogonadism [21] . among the various causes of hypogonadism, greater attention should be paid to those forms associated with a greater risk of vte, such as in patients with klinefelter syndrome [22] . the use of estrogen in women could expose them to the same risk, although in these cases the increased awareness of the risk of developing vte is often preceded by appropriate screening.another aspect that may explain sex-related susceptibility may relate to vitamin d. vitamin d deficiency has been shown to be independently associated with increased risk of viral acute respiratory infection (ari) in a number of observational studies. a meta-analysis of clinical trials on vitamin d supplementation to prevent ari onset has shown moderate protective effects [23] . respiratory monocytes/macrophages and epithelial cells constitutively express the vitamin d receptor (vdr) thereby protecting against respiratory infections. interestingly, 1,25oh 2 -vitamin d3 and other vdr agonists lower significantly the pro-inflammatory response to antigen challenge in cystic fibrosis airway epithelial cells in vitro. some studies suggest that low vitamin d levels may increase the risk or severity of respiratory viral infections, and interventional studies have shown that low levels are associated with increased expression and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. interestingly, vitamin d administration decreases the inflammatory response to viral infections in airway epithelium without jeopardizing viral clearance. this suggests that adequate vitamin d levels would contribute to reduced inflammation and less severe disease in respiratory syncytial virus-infected individuals [24] .it has been known for many years that vitamin d deficiency is not adequately evaluated in older men. deficiency [25(oh)d <20 ng/ml] has been estimated in 26%, and insufficiency (<30 ng/ml) in 72%. in particular, the deficiency is common among men during the winter and spring (especially in the northern communities) and in the oldest and more obese men [25] . therefore, we speculate that one of the factors involved in this sex-related different susceptibility may due to less vitamin supplementation in men in their sixties compared with age-matched women.in conclusion, the role of gonadal hormones and possible replacement therapy should be reconsidered in both sexes at this historic moment of sars-cov-2 pandemic. testosterone (or lh/hcg) administration could be temporarily discontinued or given at a lower posology in patients with hypogonadism. in contrast, estrogen replacement therapy may be fully considered in hypogonadal and postmenopausal women. furthermore, the involvement of the polymorphisms of ar activator and repressor proteins [26] as well as the role of selective androgen receptor modulators [27] as therapeutic agents in men could be deserving of investigation. however, this relationship is much more complex than it might seem at first glance. indeed, it should be taken into account that the viral infection itself worsens the function of leydig cells, as recently shown in [28] , and the consequent hypogonadism exposes the patient to an increased cardiovascular risk and a decreased vitamin d level [29, 30] . close monitoring of serum testosterone levels in these patients would, therefore, be helpful and should also be continued when the acute phase of the disease has ended. it would also be interesting to know the length of active disease for sars-cov-2 patients with or without hypogonadism, since hypogonadism can worsen the systemic inflammatory response, as demonstrated on peripheral blood leukocytes where testosterone inhibits immune stimuli-induced secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, such as tnf and ifnγ [31] . finally, vitamin d deficiency, regardless of testosterone levels, in elderly men may be worthy of further epidemiological evaluation to better understand the different susceptibility and lethality between sexes.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , a systemic disease caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), is quickly becoming one of the biggest challenges the global population has faced since world war ii [1] . as of may 12, 2020, 4,215,514 cases have been reported with 287,158 confirmed deaths, which represents an overall mortality rate of 6.81% [2••] . it is well known that these numbers are not precise due to the low availability of diagnostic tests needed to assess the true numbers infected [3] [4] [5] . in addition, many patients have minor symptoms and may not seek testing [3] [4] .recent reports [6] [7] describe several risk factors associated with major complications in covid-19 such as severe acute respiratory syndrome, mechanical ventilation, and death. among these risk factors (including older age and several comorbidities), the presence of hypertension has been consistently reported as a marker of worse prognosis in patients with covid-19 [6, 7] . this is a very alarming situation, considering that up to 46% of the adult population is classified as having hypertension [8] . hypertension was common in this article is part of the topical collection on resistant hypertension * luciano f. drager luciano.drager@incor.com.br patients infected in previous coronavirus and influenza outbreaks [9] , but the potential prognostic implications of having hypertension have never been highlighted as they are in the current coronavirus outbreak. however, most of this concern is not related to hypertension per se, but the pathophysiology and mechanism of infection of coronavirus in the cells.in this brief review, we will discuss three major topics highlighting the current knowledge and uncertainties around the potential role of hypertension in the covid-19 pandemic.does hypertension influence immunity or angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) expression favoring viral infections?growing evidence suggests the potential involvement of innate (natural killer cells and γ/δ t cells) and adaptive (b and t lymphocytes, as well as dendritic and monocyte/macrophages) immune responses in the pathogenesis of hypertension. vascular inflammation is the most common pathway, favoring arterial remodeling and increased blood pressure [10, 11] . once activated, the immune system seems to play a significant role in the end-organ damage associated with hypertension [12, 13] . overall, the contribution of the immune system, particularly t-lymphocytes, to hypertension is widely accepted, but the mechanistic processes preceding activation of immune cells are poorly understood [14] . one of the possible mechanisms is related to the increase of sympathetic activation in a complex scenario because sympathoexcitation may induce both suppression or excitatory effects of the tlymphocytes [14] . specifically, evidence suggests that increased sympathetic outflow may directly attenuate the ability of naive t-lymphocytes to become fully activated while also exacerbating the inflammatory effects of activated tlymphocytes [14] . however, the clinical relevance of these findings is still unclear. despite the use of lymphocytetargeted immunosuppressant drugs shown to attenuate both experimental [15] and human hypertension [16] , the lack of robust and consistent data prevents any current indications for treating hypertension with these therapies [8] .does the immunology of hypertension fuel a predisposition to infections? to the best of our knowledge, no large prospective cohorts have shown that patients with hypertension are more susceptible to infection diseases or unfavorable outcomes than observed in normotensive patients.another critical concern is related to ace2, a protein that facilitates the entrance of sars-cov-2 into cells [17, 18] . theoretically, increased ace2 expression may be potentially harmful for covid-19 infection. to date, there is no definitive evidence that hypertension is associated with increased ace2 expression and whether this expression may contribute to poor outcomes in covid-19 [19] . a recent publication found that ace2 expression was elevated in the lungs of patients with covid-19 that presented with comorbidities, such as hypertension, when compared with control participants [20] . however, due to the cross-sectional design, no cause-effect can be determined. while we acknowledge the need for additional research in this area, there is no evidence that hypertension per se predisposes patients with covid-19 to a poor prognosis.this question has gained a lot of attention in recent weeks because of the potential impact on the management of hypertension. recent publications reviewed the role of reninangiotensin system (ras) inhibitors in covid-19 infection [.21•, 22•,23] ace2, an enzyme with a physiological role in ras activity, plays a crucial role in covid-19 infection. a recent report postulated that the use of ras inhibitors, one of the most prescribed classes in hypertension, may alter ace2 expression and influence the virulence of covid-19 infection in china [24] . however, there is no definitive evidence indicating harmful effects of ras inhibitors. despite ras inhibitors being recommended as one of the first-line hypertension treatments [8] , the use of these drugs in china is quite low, and it was estimated that ras inhibitors were used in 25-30% of treated patients [25] . this flat rate may have implications for the study power of previous reports. animal and pre-clinical studies evaluating ace2 levels of expression in different tissues with the use of ras inhibitors have demonstrated conflicting data [ 21•, 22•,23] . angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (acei) do not inhibit ace2 (ace and ace2 are different enzymes), making the harmful effect of this class unlikely [22• ]. angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blockers (arb) have been shown to upregulate ace2 in experimental animals [26, 27] , but these findings do not seem to translate into clinical observations, including in the setting of covid-19. one of the first reports in humans evaluated 112 patients with covid-19 and previous cardiovascular diseases [28] . in this retrospective study from china, the use of ras inhibitors was not associated with higher morbidity and mortality [28] .more recently, 6 observational studies shed some light on this issue and called for more definitive research in this area [29•, 30, 31, 32 a retrospective multicenter analysis of 1128 patients with hypertension diagnosed with covid-19 compared patients taking an acei/arb (n = 188) with those not taking these drugs (n = 940) [29• ]. in the mixed-effect cox model, treating site as a random effect and after adjusting for age, sex, comorbidities, and in-hospital medications, the detected risk for all-cause mortality was lower in those taking an acei/arb group versus those not taking an acei/arb (fig. 1a) . the results of a propensity score matched analysis performed in a subgroup of patients indicated that use of acei/arbs, compared with other antihypertensive drugs, was also associated with decreased mortality (fig. 1b) . of note, the percentage of diuretics and betablockers used was higher in patients taking acei/arb, which may represent potential residual factors [29•] .a retrospective single-center study evaluated 126 patients with covid-19 patients and preexisting hypertension at hubei provincial hospital of traditional chinese medicine [30] . the patients were allocated to either the acei/arbs group (n = 43) or the non-acei/arbs group (n = 83) according to their antihypertensive medication. a total of 125 age-and sex-matched covid-19 patients without hypertension were randomly selected as non-hypertension controls. among patients with covid-19 and hypertension, those who received either acei/arbs or non-acei/arbs had comparable blood pressure. however, the acei/arb group had significantly lower concentrations of creactive protein and procalcitonin compared with the non-acei/ arb group, but there were no significant differences in the proportion of critical patients (9.3% vs. 22.9%; p = 0.061) or rates of death (4.7% vs. 13.3%; p = 0.216) [30] .a prospective single center study including 5700 hospitalized patients with covid-19 in the new york city area showed that the mortality rates for patients with hypertension not taking aceis or arbs, taking aceis, and taking arbs were similar: 26.7%, 32.7%, and 30.6%, respectively [30] . however, as noted by the authors, the results are unadjusted for known confounders, including age, sex, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status indicators, and comorbidities such as diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and heart failure [31] .using an observational database from 8910 patients admitted in 169 hospitals in asia, europe, and north america, mehran and colleagues [32••] confirmed previous observations suggesting that underlying cardiovascular disease (but not hypertension) was associated with an increased risk of in-hospital death in patients hospitalized with covid-19.no increased risk of in-hospital death was found to be associated with the use of ace inhibitors (2.1% vs. 6.1%; odds ratio, 0.33; 95% ci, 0.20 to 0.54) or the use of arbs (6.8% vs. 5.7%; odds ratio, 1.23; 95% ci, 0.87 to 1.74).in a population-based case-control study in the lombardy region of italy including 6272 case patients and 30,759 matched beneficiaries of the regional health service (controls) according to sex, age, and municipality of residence, the use of ace inhibitors and arbs was more frequent in patients with covid-19 than in controls because of their higher prevalence of cardiovascular disease. however, there was no evidence that ace inhibitors or arbs was associated with the increased risk of covid-19 [33••] .finally, reynolds and colleagues [34••] studied the relation between previous treatment with acei, arbs, beta-blockers, calcium-channel blockers, or thiazide diuretics and the likelihood of a covid-19 positive test result as well as the infection severity (defined as intensive care, mechanical ventilation, or death) in these patients. among 12,594 patients who were tested for covid-19, they found no significant association between five common classes of antihypertensive medications and a positive test for covid-19 or greater infection severity.collectively, the available clinical evidence points to a neutral or even beneficial effect on outcomes in patients with covid-19 receiving acei/arb, but the observational nature of these investigations prevents any definitive conclusion.as previously noted [6, 7] , elderly patients are at high risk for complications related to covid-19 and are a group for which social distancing has been identified as a top priority. aging is also a well-established risk factor for developing hypertension [8] . indeed, there is a progressive increase in the prevalence of hypertension in parallel to age stratification [35] . according to population statistics, the prevalence of hypertension may reach > 60% in the elderly [35] . in this scenario, it is reasonable to expect that hypertension will be a frequent "red flag warning" in the statistics about complications and deaths from covid-19 [7] .a recent national analysis from china that included 1590 hospitalized patients from 575 hospitals suggested a potential role of hypertension as an important comorbidity in covid-19 [36] . the authors evaluated the risk of serious adverse outcomes (the composite endpoint consisted of admission to intensive care unit, or invasive ventilation, or death) stratified by comorbidity status. after adjusting for age and smoking status, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, malignancy, and hypertension were risk factors for the composite endpoint. moreover, the number of comorbidities also predicted outcomes (fig. 2) . however, because comorbidities were self-reported by patients on admission [36] , these results should be interpreted with caution. it is conceivable that several patients are not aware of their hypertension status. supporting this concept, 269 patients reported a medical history of hypertension in this investigation [37] , which represents 16.9%, which is lower than indicated by the adult population in china [25] . indeed, for the mean age of patients in the study (48 years), the prevalence of hypertension in china is 29.6% [25] . therefore, reports to date have not rigorously accounted for age or other key factors that contribute to health as potential confounders in risk prediction [21• ].the relevance of discussing and investigating whether hypertension is or is not a prognostic marker in the covid-19 pandemic is clear. from the epidemiologic/economic perspective, it is crucial to stablish the real risk factors for priorities from social distancing regardless of their age even in several strategic areas including healthcare professionals. in this scenario, future investigations addressing the impact of hypertension on prognosis may have significant value when adopting a strict protocol to confirm the hypertension status, medications under chronic use, and associated comorbidities including overweight/obesity (reported by some investigations as a predictor of poor outcomes in covid-19) [28, 37] and chronic kidney and pulmonary disease. we share the opinion that not only age but also other relevant variables should be adjusted for to clarify the potential role of hypertension as an independent risk factor in the covid-19. from the treatment perspective, it is important to determine the role of hypertension treatments such as acei/arbs on the susceptibility to viral infections. particular attention should be devoted to the role of ace2 overexpression in these patients. in this sense, recombinant ace2, gene-delivery of ace2, angiotensin 1-7 analogs, and g-coupled protein receptor of angiotensin- [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] (mas receptor) agonists enhance ace2 action and may serve as potential target therapies, but relevant studies in humans are lacking [23] . we also need definitive evidence regarding the use of ras inhibitors during covid-19 infection. currently, there are 5 ongoing randomized trials registered with clinicaltrials.gov aiming to test the impact of acei and/or arbs in patients with covid-19 ( table 1) . four of them are focusing on the safety issues of these classes in the acute phase (3 studies) and in the chronic scenario (1 study). interestingly, the praetorian-covid trial is testing whether an arb (valsartan) may be protective in patients with severe covid-19 without hypertension. the rationale for this study is based on the assumption that during acute lung injury, the alveolar ace2 appears to be downregulated [38] . arbs would truly upregulate membrane-bound ace2, thereby supporting a protective rather than deleterious effect in covid-19.taken together, the evidence so far is unclear about whether hypertension or its treatment is a real risk factor in covid-19 infection. future investigations are necessary to clarify this complex and multifaceted puzzle.author contributions study concept and design: dr. drager.literature review, analysis, and interpretation of data: all authors. drafting of the manuscript: all authors. critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: all authors.conflict of interest the authors declare no conflicts of interest relevant to this manuscript.human and animal rights and informed consent this article does not contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of the authors.coronavirus disease (covid-19) is a recent pandemic infection caused by an enveloped, nonsegmented single-stranded ribonucleic acid (rna)-β coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). sars-cov-2 is the seventh member of the coronavirus 1 that can cause various symptoms ranging from a mild cold to severe respiratory diseases such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers) with mortality rates of 10% for sars and 37% for mers. 2 in recent years, two other coronary viral infections have spread and led to severe respiratory diseases: sars and mers.sars-cov first appeared 18 years ago. 3 during the sars epidemic in 2002, more than 8,000 infected patients of all ages and 744 deaths were documented in 26 countries on 5 continents. the main clinical manifestations were upper respiratory symptoms, rapid progression of pneumonia, and approximately 20 to 30% had to be admitted to intensive care. 4 in patients over 65 years of age, the mortality rate was over 50%. of the patients treated or dying in the intensive care unit, 11.4% developed disseminated intravascular coagulation.covid-19 is characterized by an exaggerated inflammatory response that can lead to severe complications, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and sepsis shortly after the onset of symptoms. 5 thrombotic events and coagulopathy have also been described in covid-19. 6 the transition from mild to severe in patients with covid-19 can be rapid without predicting symptoms, and older male and obese patients with comorbidities have a higher risk of developing severe symptoms. 7 keywords ► renin-angiotensin system ► angiotensin ► inflammation ► coagulopathy ► covid-19the activated renin-angiotensin system induces a prothrombotic state resulting from the imbalance between coagulation and fibrinolysis. angiotensin ii is the central effector molecule of the activated renin-angiotensin system and is degraded by the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 to angiotensin (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) . the novel coronavirus infection (classified as is caused by the new coronavirus sars-cov-2 and is characterized by an exaggerated inflammatory response that can lead to severe manifestations such as acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, and death in a proportion of patients, mostly elderly patients with preexisting comorbidities. sars-cov-2 uses the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor to enter the target cells, resulting in activation of the renin-angiotensin system. after downregulating the angiotensinconverting enzyme 2, the vasoconstrictor angiotensin ii is increasingly produced and its counterregulating molecules angiotensin (1-7) reduced. angiotensin ii increases thrombin formation and impairs fibrinolysis. elevated levels were strongly associated with viral load and lung injury in patients with severe covid-19. therefore, the complex clinical picture of patients with severe complications of covid-19 is triggered by the various effects of highly expressed angiotensin ii on vasculopathy, coagulopathy, and inflammation. future treatment options should focus on blocking the thrombogenic and inflammatory properties of angiotensin ii in covid-19 patients.acute lung failure is a pathology of many diseases, and a combination of antiviral and anti-inflammatory treatments is recommended for covid-19. 8 unfortunately, no specific drug or vaccine has yet been approved for the treatment of human coronavirus. therefore, the underlying pathomechanism of covid-19induced changes should be investigated to identify specific treatment options.of the total of 44,672 cases of covid-19 published by the chinese centre for disease control and prevention, 81% had mild symptoms, 14% severe, and 5% critical manifestations. 9 the case fatality rate was 2.3 and 14.8% in patients aged 80. older patients and patients with comorbidities and higher body mass index are more likely to have serious complications of covid-19. severe and critical cases suffer from sepsis and ards, and coagulopathy occurs in 50% of cases. 10 sepsis, cytokine storm, and viral bypassing of the cellular immune response have been described in connection with human coronavirus infections 11,12 associated with neutrophilia and pulmonary infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages in respiratory syndromes. 13, 14 pulmonary symptoms and pneumonia are predominant in covid-19. 15 pneumonia can be complicated by hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, which is a homeostatic reflex contraction of the pulmonary vascular smooth muscle in response to low regional oxygen partial pressure that redirects blood to more oxygenated lung segments. 16 in a study using remdesivir, a nucleoside analogue drug that inhibits viral rna polymerases there is a mortality rate of 18% in ventilated covid-19 patients. 17 sepsis is the most common cause of acute lung injury and ards. 18 ards is characterized by diffuse alveolar damage and is often complicated by pulmonary hypertension. 19 in patients with ards, a subgroup of ards survivors develop a fibropro-liferative response characterized by fibroblast accumulation and deposition of collagen and other extracellular matrix components in the lung. the development of severe fibroproliferative lung disease is associated with a poor prognosis with high mortality and/or prolonged ventilator dependence. 20 all patients with severe complications experienced extrapulmonary symptoms and organ injuries. in a multivariable analysis comparing clinical and laboratory parameters of 137 surviving patients from 54 nonsurvivors, death occurred median on the 18th day of hospital treatment after mechanical ventilation for 14.5 days. 10 in three patients an attempt was made to perform extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. all 54 deceased patients developed sepsis (100 vs. 42% of survivors), 53 patients suffered from respiratory failure (98 vs. 36%), 50 patients suffered from ards (93 vs. 7%), 28 patients suffered from heart failure (52 vs. 12%), and 38 patients suffered from septic shock (70 vs. 0%). the rate of patients with organ injury was significantly higher in patients with severe outcome. of 54 patients, 32 patients had a heart injury, 25 had heart failure, and 27 had a kidney injury.in china, several studies investigated the clinical course of covid-19, differentiating between severe and nonsevere outcome and collecting data on organ injury. in 6 studies, the clinical course of 1,841 patients was investigated, 21% of whom developed a severe manifestation of the disease. 7,10,12,21-23 median age ranged from 49 to 71.5 years and was up to 28.5 years older than in patients with nonsevere course. male patients were more affected by severe manifestations from 57.8 to 78%. all patients with severe manifestations had organ injuries, up to 55% heart injuries and up to 50% kidney injuries (►table 1).angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is critical for heart function. angiotensin ii (ang ii) infusions in mice resulted in increased blood pressure, myocardial hypertrophy, and fibrosis, whereas these effects could be counteracted with recombinant human ace2. 24 loss of ace2 can further exacerbate cardiac damage. 25 myocardial infarction appears to be an important complication of the disease, which, according to chen et al, was also found in the autopsy of a 53-year-old female patient. 5 in a meta-analysis, cardiac troponin i levels are significantly increased in patients with severe covid-19 infection compared with patients with milder forms of the disease. 26 cardiac injury has been shown in a cross-sectional study with 150 patients included, 126 mild and 24 severe cases 5 and has been confirmed as common condition among hospitalized patients associated with higher risk of in-hospital mortality. 27 of a total of 416 patients, 19.7% had cardiac injury and highly significant elevated levels of high-sensitive troponin i levels.the mortality of these patients was significantly higher with 51.2% than those without cardiac injury (4.5%).laboratory and imaging findings suggest an increased risk of thrombotic events in patients with covid-19 infection, but the incidence of thrombosis in patients with covid-19 has not been determined.coagulopathy has been described in up to 50% of severe manifestations of covid-19. it has been shown that increased d-dimers measured at hospital admission can predict the severe course of covid-19. 10 d-dimer derives from the cleavage of cross-linked fibrin and reflects both thrombin production and activation of fibrinolysis. besides the known variability in healthy subjects and its tendency to increase with age, there is an association of increased d-dimer levels and fibrin degradation products under all conditions with an activated coagulation system, such as thrombosis, infection, or malignancy. 28 a large study included 1,099 covid positive patients from 552 hospitals in china. d-dimer levels above the threshold of 0.5 μg/l were detected in 46.4% of patients; 60% among them developed severe manifestations. in these patients, ddimer levels were fourfold increased at 2.12 ug/ml (0.77-5.27) compared with nonsevere patients (0.61 ug/ml, 0.35-1.29). interestingly, none of the nonsevere patients had d-dimer levels increasing more than three times at admission. 7 in a study of 184 critically ill patients with covid-19 from 3 dutch hospitals, there was a 31% incidence of thrombosis instead of the use of standard doses of thromboprophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin. the majority of patients suffered from lung embolism, but stroke also occurred in three patients. 29 in addition, microthrombosis was described in a case series of four autopsies of covid-19 infected patients from new orleans with sudden respiratory decompensation. the autopsy findings showed small vessels with thromboembolism and small thrombi together with scattered areas of diffuse alveolar damage. these findings usually worsened the course of the disease and could hardly be diagnosed early. the d-dimers found at the time of death were elevated in only two patients, which shows that microthrombosis does not usually lead to generalized coagulation activation. 30the renin-angiotensin system (ras) was first described more than 40 years ago and has led to a broader understanding of cardiovascular pathophysiology. 31 the ras is known for its role in the regulation of blood pressure, electrolyte balance, and vascular remodeling. 32 continuous basic and clinical research has enabled significant advances in therapy and developed the treatment of hypertension and left ventricular dysfunction as well as severe heart failure.renin is released by the kidney in response to renal hypoperfusion, reduced sodium intake, and sympathetic activation. a cascade of proteolytic reactions leads to the formation of ang peptides with different functions. the ace is a zinc-dependent peptidase responsible for the conversion of ang i into vasoconstrictive ang ii. ace2 counteracts the activity of ace by reducing the amount of ang ii, increasing ang, 1-7 and cleaving ang i to ang 1-9 and thereby attenuating the effects of ang ii. the ras produces opposite effects and ang 1-7 directly antagonizes the effects of ang ii and mediates vasodilatory and antiproliferative effects because it induces the release of nitric oxide and prostaglandin i2 after stimulation of the endothelial at2 receptor. 33, 34 ace2 is expressed predominantly by vascular endothelial cells of the lung, but also of extrapulmonary tissue, heart, nervous system, intestine, kidneys, blood vessels, and muscles on cell surfaces. 35, 36 in addition, ace2 has functions that are independent of ras. in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that ace2 acts as a functional sars-cov-2 receptor as well as the transmembrane serine protease tmprss2, which is required for host cell entry and subsequent viral replication. 37 remarkably, the sars-cov-2 protein recognizes human ace2 with an even higher binding affinity than the spike of sars-cov. 38 preclinical studies have shown that after binding of sars-cov to its receptor, ace2 activates ras leading to downregulation of the expression of ace2, which in turn results in excessive production of ang ii. [39] [40] [41] [42] therefore, ace2 plays a dual role in covid-19: initially, it acts as a receptor for sars-cov-2 entry, then, in the context of sars-cov-2 infection, ace2 is downregulated, which increases ang ii.ang ii is the central effector molecule of activated ras. elevated levels of ang ii have been reported mostly in patients with hypertension and heart failure, indicating the benefit of ras inhibitors. 43 there are two ang ii receptors, type 1 and type 2, which indicate the effect of ras inhibitors. 43 most cardiovascular effects of ang ii are attributed to the type 1 receptor.notably, ang ii is one of the most potent vasopressors known when linked to its type 1 ang receptor. the vasopressor effects of ang ii were investigated in a multinational, double-blind, randomized controlled trial (athos-3) in 163 patients with vasodilatory shock. 44 ang ii effectively raised blood pressure in patients with vasodilatory shock who did not respond to high doses of conventional vasopressors. however, a high rate of thrombosis was observed in 12.9% of patients and the use of thromboprophylaxis was recommended. 45 interestingly, skin problems possibly caused by thrombosis of small vessels were also observed.there is evidence for the important role of ang ii in vascular cell growth and tissue remodeling after hypertension, vascular injury, heart failure, and atherosclerosis. 46, 47 recently, ang ii has been shown to stimulate the production of pulmonary fibroblast procollagen via the at1 receptor in lung injury. 48 in addition, ang ii promotes the growth of vascular smooth muscle cells (vsmcs), which induces cellular hypertrophy in the pathology of hypertension and atherosclerosis.ang ii contributes to endothelial dysfunction, the development of arteriosclerosis, and microvascular thrombosis. ang ii stimulates tissue factor (tf) expression both in vitro and in vivo. 49 tf is the physiological initiator of blood coagulation and as a consequence of its activation, tf becomes dominant over tf pathway inhibitor, resulting in prothrombotic endothelium. in addition, ang ii stimulates platelet-derived growth factor production and increases platelet aggregation. arterial thrombotic events such as stroke or myocardial infarction are associated with increased platelet aggregation. 50 in addition to that endothelial microparticles which are key players in the pathogenesis of vascular diseases, inflammation, coagulation, and angiogenesis are increased in many age-related vascular diseases such as coronary artery disease, but also stimulated by ang ii. 51 it has also been shown that ang ii infusion leads to abnormal inflammatory and thrombotic reactions in the microcirculation. in hypertensive rats, ang ii accelerates arterial thrombosis of the carotid artery via the at1 receptor. 52 the prothrombogenic effects are not restricted to large arteries. there is also accelerated microvascular thrombosis in arterioles and to a lesser extent in venules after ang ii infusions. 53 clinical data also support the role of ang ii in fibrinolysis. plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (pai-1) is the major inhibitor of the fibrinolytic system and elevated levels have been found to be associated with coronary artery disease, deep vein thrombosis, and malignancy. 54 mature fat cells are an important source of pai-1, and its expression correlates with visceral fat mass. in vitro and vivo studies have shown that ang ii stimulates the expression and release of pai-1. ang ii also stimulates the expression of pai-1 messenger rna (mrna) in endothelial cells and increases plasma pai-1 levels in a dose-dependent manner. the infusion of ang ii in healthy volunteers led to a significant increase in pai-1 concentrations. 55 in the heart study, pai-1 concentrations were significantly lower when administering both ramipril and captopril, 56 both of which can suppress the formation of ang ii in adipose tissue. 54 in addition, inhalation of plasminogen, whose conversion to plasmin is inhibited by pai-1, improves lung lesions and hypoxemia in patients with there is an association between activated ras, increased ang ii, and inflammatory cytokine expression and activation. ang ii has proinflammatory properties, including the increase of interleukin (il)-6, which was demonstrated after infusion of ang ii in healthy controls. 58 furthermore, ang ii has been shown to induce il-6 transcription in vsmc. 59 in vsmc, the expression of il-6 could be induced by ang ii, 60 which may explain the underlying mechanism in the progression of ang ii-induced atherosclerosis.il-6 is a multifunctional cytokine that mediates the proliferation of b-lymphocytes during antibody synthesis. ang ii stimulates the release of il-6, contributing to cytokine storm and poorer outcomes in patients with covid-19. 59 the function of ace2 has also been demonstrated in an ace2 knockout mouse model: the loss of ace2 expression preceded acute lung damage in various models. ace2 knockout mice showed more severe lung damage caused by increased hydrostatic pressure, reduced perfusion, and severe pulmonary edema. 41 administration of recombinant ace2 protects the lungs from severe lung damage. consequently, ang ii is directly associated with lung tissue damage and ace2 is inversely associated with lung tissue damage.organ damage to the lung, heart, and kidney is a major cause of severe clinical manifestations in covid patients. already in 2005, ace2 was shown to protect the mouse lungs from ards in ace2 knockout mice. in particular, the injection of sars-cov spikes into mice exacerbates acute lung failure in vivo, which can be attenuated by blocking the renin-angiotensin signaling pathway, suggesting that activation of pulmonary ras influences the pathogenesis of ards and sars. 39, 41 in autopsies of patients who died from sars, 35% of heart samples showed the presence of sars-cov associated with reduced ace2 expression. 61 remarkably, the unbalanced ras was found in covid-19 patients. in an investigation of epidemiological, clinical, laboratory chemical, and radiological characteristics and potential biomarkers to predict disease severity in 2019-ncov-infected patients in shenzhen, ang ii levels in the plasma sample of 2019-ncov-infected patients were shown to be significantly elevated and linearly associated with viral load and lung damage in critically ill patients. 62 ►table 2 summarizes the possible effects of ang ii on the clinical symptoms of covid-19 patients. the complex clinical picture of patients with severe complications of covid-19 is triggered by the different effects of highly expressed ang ii on vasculopathy, coagulopathy, and inflammation.it could be shown that patients with covid-19 have an unbalanced ras with highly expressed ang levels. in addition, the presence of comorbidities such as arterial hypertension is significantly associated with a worse outcome. of a total of 1,430 patients in 3 studies, hypertension was common in up to 48% of patients and there were significantly more severe manifestations in 36 to 48% of patients compared with severe manifestations in 14 to 24% of patients without hypertension (►table 3).the presence of hypertension is associated with significantly higher mortality. the odds ratio for mortality in hypertension is between 1.70 (0.92-3.13) 12 and 3.05 (1.6 -5.9). 10 however, the data were not adjusted to other risk th open vol. 4 no. 2/2020 factors and it became not clear from the studies whether the hypertension was previously known or was only diagnosed during the hospital stay and whether treatment, for example, with ras-inhibiting drugs, was administered.therefore, ras-inhibiting drugs, such as ace inhibitors (aceis) or angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs), may be used in covid-19-infected patients to treat hypertension and other ang ii-related complications. a preclinical study showed that arb drugs, especially losartan, are effective in relieving acute lung injury caused by sars-cov in mice. 62 however, acei and arb have shown an increase in ace2 expression (in heart tissue) in animal models. 63 there is concern that a possible higher expression of pulmonary membrane-bound ace2 (which has not been confirmed to date) may lead to easier entry of the virus into respiratory cells when ras-inhibiting drugs are taken.on the other hand, both acei (lisinopril) and arb (losartan) can upregulate cardiac ace2 mrna by a factor of 3 to 4. in an animal model, the acei enalapril attenuated the downregulation of cardiac ace2 after myocardial infarction. 64, 65 there is a clear benefit of acei and arb in reducing thrombotic effects in hypertensive patients. 66, 67 protection against severe lung damage could also be achieved by administering recombinant ace2. ace2 knockout mice showed more severe lung damage caused by increased hydrostatic pressure, reduced perfusion, and severe pulmonary edema. 41 administration of recombinant ace2 protects the lungs from severe lung damage. consequently, ang ii is directly associated with lung tissue damage and ace2 is inversely associated with lung tissue damage.recently, it could be shown that human recombinant soluble ace2 can block early stages of sars-cov-2 infections 68 and could in the future also be used to treat covid-19 patients, which is currently being tested in a phase 2 clinical trial.currently, numerous drugs are studied in clinical trials. a small cohort of critically ill patients was treated with remdesivir, a nucleoside analogue that inhibits viral rna polymerases, and a clinical improvement was observed in 36 of 53 patients (68%). 17 randomized controlled trials are ongoing and will soon provide more evidence of the safety and efficacy of remdesivir for covid-19.finally, considering covid-19 as a procoagulant disease, prophylactic anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin should be initiated as soon as possible to prevent thrombotic events and to counteract the proinflammatory influence of cytokines. 69the transition from mild to severe symptoms can occur rapidly in patients with covid-19 without predicting signals, and older male and obese patients with comorbidities have a higher risk of developing severe symptoms.the ras plays an important role in covid-19. ace2 acts as functional sars-cov-2 receptor, which leads to a downregulation of ace2 and a higher expression of ang ii. ace2 is abbreviations: ang ii, angiotensin ii; ards, acute respiratory distress syndrome; il-6, interleukin-6; pai-1, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1; pdgf, platelet-derived growth factor; tf, tissue factor.predominantly expressed by vascular endothelial cells of the lung, but also in extrapulmonary tissue, heart, nervous system, intestine, kidneys, blood vessels, and muscles on cell surfaces, which may explain the multiorgan dysfunction observed in patients with covid-19. the complex clinical picture of patients with severe complications of covid-19 includes pneumonia, ards, sepsis, coagulopathy, high rate of thrombosis, and organ damage and is triggered by various effects of highly expressed ang ii on vasculopathy, coagulopathy, and inflammation.the combination of numerous pathophysiological changes caused by ang ii in covid-19 could explain the rapid development of severe patients and why older and obese patients are particularly affected.future treatment options should focus on blocking the thrombogenic and inflammatory properties of ang ii in covid-19 patients.the novel coronavirus (cov) that emerged in wuhan, hubei province, china, in december 2019, and known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (sars-cov-2), rapidly spread throughout all chinese provinces and, subsequently, propagated across the globe, with more than 700,000 cases and ≈ 30,000 deaths in 202 countries (https://www.who. int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019 /situation-reports/). the world health organization (who) has therefore declared coronavirus disease 2019 as global pandemic on march 12, 2020. europe is now the world's covid-19 epicenter, with italy being the country with the highest number of reported cases and deaths. as of march 29, the italian institute of health (iss) reported 89,967 cases and 9200 dea th s in italy (https://www.epicentro.iss. it/coronavirus/), which overtook china as the country with most coronavirus-related casualties. the pandemic is now propagating across usa, where over 100,000 cases and 2000 deaths were reported as of march 29, 2020. currently, sars-cov-2 presents an estimated r0 ranging between 2 and 3, which means that any infected individual may transmit the disease to other 2-3 people in a susceptible population (madjid et al. 2020) , such as older adults (d'adamo et al. 2020 ) and those suffering from multiple comorbidities.sars-cov-2, an enveloped, positive-strand rna virus that belongs to the β-coronavirus (β-cov) family, presents > 80% nucleotide identity with the sars-like covzxc21 identified in bats and with human sars-cov, while nucleotide identity with mers-cov is reduced to ≈ 50% (chan et al. 2020; wan et al. 2020; lu et al. 2020) . sars-cov-2 mainly targets the respiratory tract of mammals, including humans, thereby inducing a wide spectrum of clinical features ranging from asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic forms to interstitial pneumonia or, upon progressive alveolar damage, severe acute respiratory failure, which may require advanced respiratory support and intensive care of two or more organ systems. in fact, covid-19 may progress towards adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and/or multiple organ acute failure (e.g., kidney, liver, and heart), and even death zhou et al. 2020b; wu et al. 2020a; wang et al. 2020d) . although covid-19 is a respiratory disease, one third of patients with more severe covid-19 had conjunctivitis (wu et al. 2020b ) and some patients showed gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea) (jin et al. 2020) . interestingly, epithelial cells of several body compartments, including oral and nasal mucosa (hamming et al. 2004) , respiratory tree and alveoli (hamming et al. 2004) , intestinal mucosa (hamming et al. 2004 ) as well as human aqueous humor (holappa et al. 2015) , show high levels of a metallopeptidase named angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which is the functional receptor for sars-cov2 (lan et al. 2020) . ace2 is also expressed in coronary and intrarenal endothelial cells and in renal tubular epithelial cells (donoghue et al. 2000) . since ace2 catalyzes the cleavage of angiotensin ii, a vasoconstrictor, into angiotensin (1-7) (ang 1-7), a vasodilator, its extra-respiratory localization has supported hypotheses on the relationship of sars-cov-2 infection with the cardiovascular (cv) system. indeed, adult patients affected by cvds, arterial hypertension, diabetes, and/or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) show worse clinical outcome following contraction of the viral illness with fatality rate attaining 10.5% (the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team and novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team 2020). in patients with covid-19 pneumonia who developed ards, acute cardiac injury, shock, and arrhythmia represent the most common life-threatening complications along with acute kidney injury (chen et al. 2020b; huang et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020a ).it has long been known that acute respiratory infections, including flu and pneumonias, may trigger severe cv disease (cvd) events and vice versa (madjid et al. 2020) . although experimental evidence on this topic is still at its infancy, we will hypothesize and discuss more suggestive cellular and molecular mechanisms whereby sars-cov-2 may lead to detrimental consequences to the cv system. we will focus on aging, cytokine storm, nlrp3/inflammasome, hypoxemia, and air pollution, which is an emerging cv risk factor associated with rapid urbanization and globalization. we will finally discuss the impact of clinically available cv drugs on the clinical course of covid-19 patients. understanding the role played by sars-cov2 on the cv system is indeed mandatory to get further insights into covid-19 pathogenesis and to design a therapeutic strategy of cardio-protection for frail patients (zheng et al. 2020 ).sars-cov-2 and the cardiovascular system: a suggestive relationship first reports describing the clinical features of patients affected by covid-19 hinted at a relationship between sars-cov-2-mediated infection and the cv system mainly due to the high inflammatory burden affecting myocardium and vessels (table 1 ) (zheng et al. 2020; madjid et al. 2020) . although it is a suggestive causal relationship, more translational research should be carefully performed in order to avoid confounding factors and hasty conclusions. in order to support it, we will mention the clinical evidences as they emerged.to best of our knowledge, the prevalence and risk of death of severe covid-19 is higher in elderly patients with chronic comorbidities, such as arterial hypertension, type 2 diabetes, cardiac and cerebrovascular disorders, and copd . of note, diagnosis of major cardiac complications (i.e., acute myocardial injury and lethal arrhythmias) recently emerged from analysis of initial representative populations of covid-19 patients. the first report analyzed a cohort of 41 patients (median table 1 demographics, baseline characteristics and major complications in patients infected with sars-cov-2: summary of the major studies huang et al. (2020) chen et al. (2020b) wang et al. (2020a) zhou et al. (2020a) guan et al. (2020) ards acute respiratory distress syndrome, copd chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cvd cardiovascular disease age = 49 years; 73% men), the majority of whom (n = 27, 66%) were exposed to huanan seafood and live-animal market , the original epicenter of covid-19 outbreak. underlying comorbidities were reported in 32% of the patients, including diabetes (n = 8, 20%), cvd (n = 6, 15%), and hypertension (n = 6, 15%) . moreover, increased blood levels of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i (ctni) were reported in 5 patients (12%) . this initial finding cautiously suggests the onset of acute cardiac ischemic injury in covid-19 patients, yet measurements of ctni levels should be always associated to electrocardiogram (ecg) or imaging findings of myocardial ischemia (giannitsis and katus 2013) to make a diagnosis. intriguingly, rising levels of ctni are also independent predictors of mortality in critically ill patients hospitalized with severe pneumonia without evidence of acute coronary syndrome (lee et al. 2015) . in this regard, we cannot exclude the onset of transient myopericarditis mimicking acute myocardial infarction in severe covid-19 patients due to cytokine storm (inciardi et al. 2020 ) as previously observed in severe ards patients . in fact, an increased serum level of proinflammatory cytokines, for instance interleukin-1β (il-1β), interferon γ (ifnγ) and mcp1, was reported in both icu-patients and non-icu patients. this observation is consistent with the development of a cytokine storm syndrome, as previously reported in sars (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) infections (de wit et al. 2016) . a second report analyzed a cohort of 99 patients (median age = 55.5; 67% men), the half of which (n = 49, 49%) was also exposed to huanan seafood market (chen et al. lancet 2020b) . a large percentage of these subjects (n = 40, 40%, each) suffered of cvd and cerebrovascular disorders, which represent the most common chronic comorbidities in this cohort (chen et al. 2020b) . cardiac injury was diagnosed by measuring changes in myocardial zymogram, which evaluates the activity of metalloproteinases. myocardial zymogram results, however, are at risk of being over-interpreted since the assay is a timp (tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases) free environment (lindsey 2018 ). since it is not considered a gold standard assay to diagnose acute cardiac injury in hospital setting, other established cardiac specific biomarkers should be tested. in fact, the authors have also reported high circulating levels of creatine kinase and lactate dehydrogenase in 13 (13%) and 75 (76%) patients, respectively (chen et al. 2020b) , which are biomarkers generally used to perform early diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction. yet, since these enzymes are also present in other tissues than the myocardium, their diagnostic specificity is limited, and their diagnostic sensitivity also suffers from the presence of a sizeable baseline enzyme concentration in the circulation without any cardiac pathology (bodor 2016) . false-positive results, indeed, may occur in renal failure, muscle fatigue, vitamin d deficiency, pneumonia, asthma, malignancies, pulmonary embolism, hypoxia, and smokers. in particular, 2 of the dead patients presented a long history of tobacco smoke exposure (chen et al. 2020b) , which enhances the risk of respiratory and cardiovascular disease as well.a third report analyzed a cohort of 138 patients (median age = 56; 54.3% men) with hypertension (n = 43, 31.2%), cvd (n = 20, 14.5%), diabetes (n = 14, 10.1%), and cancer (n = 10, 7.2%) as more common coexisting underlying comorbidities , while a small fraction of subjects (n = 7, 5.1%) was suffering from cerebrovascular disease . of note, the admission rate to icu (n = 36, 26.1%) was remarkably increased among patients of the same age displaying hypertension (n = 21, 58.3%), cvd (n = 9, 25%) and cerebrovascular disease (n = 6, 16.7%) as underlying comorbidities ). finally, arrhythmias (n = 23, 16.7%) and acute cardiac injury (n = 10, 7.2%), defined as increased blood levels of hypersensitive ctni, were the most common complications arising in icu patients affected by ards (n = 27, 19.6%) and acute kidney injury (n = 5, 3.6%) .a fourth single-center study analyzed the epidemiological and clinical features of 140 hospitalized covid-19 patients (median age = 57; 50.7% men), none of whom was exposed to huanan market. ninety patients (64.3%) suffered from at least 1 underlying comorbidity, the most common being hypertension (n = 42; 30%) followed by diabetes (n = 17; 12.1%). of note, a lower fraction of severe covid-19 patients suffered from preexisting arrhythmia (n = 5; 3.6%) and coronary heart disease (n = 7; 5%) .finally, a single-center large study conducted on 1099 patients affected by covid-19 from 552 hospitals in 30 chinese provinces (median age = 47; 58.1% men) confirmed that 23.7% subjects had pre-existing comorbidities (guan et al. 2020) , such as hypertension (n = 165, 15%), diabetes (n = 81, 7.4%), coronary heart disease (n = 27, 2.5%), and cerebrovascular disease (n = 15, 1.4%) (guan et al. 2020) . in this study, acute cardiac injury was defined by the increase in circulating levels of creatine kinase and lactate dehydrogenase in 13.7% and 41.0% of the patients, respectively (guan et al. 2020) . no additional features of acute myocardial infarction were considered.among different clinical reports, a retrospective, multicenter cohort study, including 191 adult covid-19 patients (median age = 56; 62% men), confirmed preexisting comorbidities in almost half of the individuals (n = 91; 48%), such as hypertension (n = 58; 30%), diabetes (n = 36; 19%), and coronary heart disease (n = 15; 8%) (zhou et al. 2020a) . likewise, non-survivors displayed a higher rate of comorbidities as compared to survivors, including hypertension (48% vs. 23%), diabetes (31% vs. 14%), and coronary heart disease (24% vs. 1%) (zhou et al. 2020a ). in addition to sepsis (n = 112; 59%), respiratory failure (n = 103; 54%), ards (n = 59; 31%), and acute kidney injury (n = 28; 15%), the most common secondary outcomes in this cohort of patients were the onset of acute heart failure (n = 44; 23%) and acute cardiac injury (n = 33; 17%) (zhou et al. 2020a) . of note, non-survivors presented higher rates of acute heart failure (52% vs. 12%) and acute cardiac injury (59% vs. 1%) as compared to survivors. moreover, laboratory findings showed high levels of nonspecific biomarkers as lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, and hypersensitive ctni, which has an amino acid sequence similar to skeletal troponin c (xu et al. 2013) , and pro-inflammatory biomarkers, e.g., interleukin-6 (il-6) and serum ferritin (zhou et al. 2020a) . again, since measurement of circulating biomarkers is not enough to diagnose acute cardiac injury caused by sars-cov2 with certainty, further clinical investigations based on multimodal approach should be encouraged. similarly, a retrospective multicenter study, conducted on a smaller cohort (n = 150) of covid-19 patients, confirmed that risk of death was greater in the presence of cvd. of note, isolated myocardial injury resulted to be one of the main causes of death in some patients (7%) in the presence of high levels of il-6 and c-reactive protein.the relationship between sars-cov-2 infection and cvd has been further corroborated by a recent descriptive analysis of all the 44,672 covid-19 cases diagnosed in china as of february 11, 2020 (the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team and novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team 2020). this study confirmed that a fraction of patients was affected by cvd (14.2%) including arterial hypertension (12.8%). although retrospective studies cannot be helpful to made a causal association, it further confirmed that the mortality rate was increased by cvd (+ 10.5%), diabetes (+ 7.3%), chronic respiratory disease (+ 6.3%), and arterial hypertension (+ 6%) (the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team and novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team 2020; madjid et al. 2020) .do these cvds really make a difference in the worse prognosis of covid-19 patients? although italy is the european country with the highest percentage of the population aged 80 or over and with the mortality rate due to covid-19 among the highest in the world (madjid et al. 2020) , it is still unknown whether greater vulnerability to illness depends on higher percentage of older patients. meanwhile, the iss recently listed the most common comorbidities observed in deceased patients in italy as of march 26, 2020 (table 2 ). only 1.6% of screened patients had no comorbidities, while majority of patients presented one (23.5%), two (26.6%), three, or more (48.6%) comorbidities. finally, we can assume that clinical outcome of covid-19 has progressively worsened in most italian elderly patients due to the combined impact of multiple comorbidities and frailty. since cardiometabolic disease is most common in people over 50 and risk of developing it increases as people get older, it is conceivable that underlying cv and metabolic comorbidities, i.e., hypertension, ischemic heart disease, atrial fibrillation, stroke, and diabetes, contribute to unfavorable prognosis in older covid-19 patients. in addition, 10.1% patients died because of acute myocardial injury (https://www.epicentro.iss. it/coronavirus/sars-cov-2-decessi-italia).these first independent analyses suggest that, besides arising more frequently in individuals suffering from underlying cv comorbidities, sars-cov-2 may cause severe myocardial injury even in the absence of ards or multiple organ dysfunctions often leading to death. besides local ischemia, fatal myocardial damage in covid-19 patients may be due to acute myocarditis unresponsive to conventional therapy. recently, the autopsy of a male covid-19 patient revealed myocardial infiltration by interstitial mononuclear inflammatory cells (xu et al. 2020b) . evidence for severe myocarditis associated to low cardiac output syndrome was even observed in some covid-19 patients in both italy (inciardi et al. 2020) and china ). these findings are consistent with the reported upregulation of il-6 in the serum of covid-19 patients, as chronic il-6 production during viral infection has long been known to boost myocarditis (fontes et al. 2015) . however, further investigation about underlying mechanisms is required.although well-known epidemic viruses, i.e., sars-cov, mers-cov, and flu viruses (influenza a or b virus), may lead to arrhythmia, myocardial infarction, and acute heart failure through aberrant systemic release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, we cannot exclude that other factors activated by sars-cov2 exacerbate the cardiac injury characterizing covid-19. herein, we will analyze the potential role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) pathway, nlrp3/inflammasome, hypoxemia, aging, and air pollution.the role of renin-angiotensin system and ace2 in sars-cov-2-induced cardiac injuryto the best of our knowledge, the critical initial step underlying sars-cov2 entry into target cells is the binding between the receptor binding domain (rbd) of the viral spike (s) protein and the ace2 receptor, it follows s protein priming by ser proteases tmprss2 and furin (hoffmann et al. 2020; lan et al. 2020) . since the binding affinity between s protein and ace2 receptor is a major determinant of viral replication rates and disease severity (li et al. 2005) , the cleavage of spike protein plays a critical role.covid-19 is an airborne viral illness; therefore, the first ace2-rich cells encountered by sars-cov2 delivered by particle droplets are those of the upper respiratory tract and in particular goblets and ciliated cells of the nasal epithelium (sungnak et al. 2020) . however, ace2 is expressed and active in many other human tissues. preliminary evidence indicated that ace2 of cardiomyocytes and coronary pericytes could play a potential role in the myocardial vulnerability to sars-cov-2 infection and the onset of acute cardiac injury ). ace2 is one of the major player of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) and acts in balance with angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) (tikellis et al. 2011 ). contrary to ace, which converts angiotensin i (ang i) to angiotensin ii (ang ii), ace2 is mainly involved in the degradation of ang ii, thereby resulting in the formation of ang 1-7 tikellis et al. 2011) . while ang ii induces vasoconstrictive, proinflammatory and pro-oxidative effects by increasing the expression on endothelial von willebrand factor and by activating the endothelial ang ii receptor type 1 (at1) (dushpanova et al. 2016) , ang 1-7 mediates anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidative and vasodilatory effects through binding mas receptor (masr), thus exerting a beneficial effect in several pathological conditions, such as hypertension, diabetes, and cvd (tikellis et al. 2011 and reference therein) . in order to maintain homeostasis, ace2 opposes the actions of ang ii and negatively regulates ras.the physiological mechanisms that shift the balance towards a prevalence of the effects of ace or ace2 are not yet clear. ace2 is a carboxypeptidase that removes single amino acids from the c-terminus of peptides, while ace is a peptidyl dipeptidase that removes cterminal dipeptides (pagliaro and penna 2005) . in addition, ace2 is considered to be an important enzyme outside of classical ras, as it hydrolyzes apelin, ghrelin, des-arg bradykinin, des-arg, neurotensin, and dynorphin a1-13, as well as other peptide substrates (pagliaro and penna 2005) . however, the precise interaction between tissue ace, ace2, their substrates, and by-products is not yet clear.in humans, ace2 gene is located in the x chromosome region (xp22). it is well known that local ace2 gene polymorphisms were associated with hypertension and cvd as well (yagil et al. 1999; donoghue et al. 2000; komatsu et al. 2002; crackower et al. 2002; harmer et al. 2002; warner et al. 2004; fan et al. 2019 ) and with lower risk of fatal cv events in females (vangjeli et al. 2011 ). this evidence is really important since women seem to be more protected against sars-cov2 infection, which preferentially targets elderly men. although the mechanisms underlie gender-based tolerance are still unknown, the localization of ace2 on the x chromosomes may be pivotal. it is conceivable that the second x chromosome could protect women from fatal polymorphisms that make the infection more aggressive in males, e.g., by favoring viral binding. even hormonal changes may be responsible as estrogen-induced ace2 expression is reduced in postmenopausal women (hilliard et al. 2013) , which would make them less amenable to sars-cov-2 infection compared to age-matched men and more prone to systemic toxic effects due to higher ang ii levels. despite the scarcity of data in humans, this suggestion supports recent hypothesis supporting the view that worse outcome in older covid-19 italian patients is due to upregulation of ang ii proinflammatory pathways throughout the body in the presence of lower ace2 levels (alghatrif et al. 2020). as mentioned above, ace2 is largely expressed in lungs, kidney, heart, small intestine, colon & rectum and endothelium (donoghue et al. 2000; turner et al. 2004) , which represent the main organs that are targeted and damaged by sars-cov-2. herein, we first recall how ace2 regulates respiratory and kidneys functions and we focus our attention on how ace2 could contribute to acute myocardial injury in covid-19 patients.ace2 in the lungs ras activity is known to be elevated in lung tissues. in fact, the endothelium of the pulmonary vessels is an important site of ace and is therefore one of the main sources of systemic ang ii. ace2 is also strongly expressed in the lung and upper airway. pulmonary ace2 may play a role in regulating the balance of circulating levels of ang ii/ang 1-7. of note, ang ii contributes to pulmonary vasoconstriction in response to hypoxia, an important pathophysiological mechanism useful to prevent shunt in patients with lung injury or pneumonia. however, the local increase in ang ii levels increases vascular permeability thus promoting the onset of pulmonary edema. in ards, ras appears crucial in maintaining oxygenation (lionetti et al. 2005) . ace2 knockout mice showed more severe symptoms than wild-type mice (kiely et al. 1997; imai et al. 2005) , while overexpression appears protective. a correlation between an ace polymorphism and ards severity has been described in humans (matsuda et al. 2012) . in acute lung injury, ace, ang ii, and the at1 receptor function as factors that promote lung injury (oudit et al. 2009 ). despite having normal lung structure and function, ace2 knockout mice show a very serious pathology in case of ards/acute lung damage compared to wild-type mice since ace2 plays an important anti-inflammatory role. ace2 knockout mice are characterized by increased vascular permeability, pulmonary edema, and neutrophil accumulation. in some recent studies, ace2 protects against pulmonary vasoconstriction, chronic pulmonary lesions, and fibrosis. moreover, ace2 inhibits neutrophil infiltration and lung inflammation by limiting il-17 signaling and by reducing the activity of the stat3 pathway in response to bacterial infection in rats (sodhi et al. 2019 ). therefore, ace2 has been proposed as a new therapeutic target for acute lung injury, chronic lung disease, and bacterial pneumonia as well. indeed, the efficacy of recombinant soluble human ace2 protein on acute respiratory failure is currently being studied in humans in a phase ii clinical trial (kuba et al. 2013 ). in addition, some drugs have been developed to increase pulmonary ace2 expression, such as anti-diabetic glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor (glp-1r) agonist liraglutide, in order to improve lung function by normalizing expression of surfactant protein a and b (romaní-pérez et al. 2015) , which is reduced in patients with severe viral pneumonia (kerr and paton 1999) .ace2 in the kidney ace and ace2 are highly expressed in the adult kidney even if in different areas. ace2 is mainly expressed in the proximal tubule on the edge of the brush, while ace seems to be evenly distributed on the apical and the basolateral membrane of the polarized cells of the tubules. interestingly, both renal development and kidney function are normal in the ace2 knockout mouse (crackower et al. 2002) . however, angiotensinogen, ace, and at1 receptor lack results in a series of alterations in kidney morphology. therefore, ace2 has a marginal role in regulating renal function, at least in the healthy state. however, the action of ace2 is critical during ras activation. in fact, ang 1-7 exerts very limited renal effects in the healthy state but it plays profound beneficial effects in diabetic patients and in other states associated with renal damage. for instance, ace2 deficiency in mouse models is associated to increased age-related glomerulosclerosis and enhanced ang ii-induced renal oxidative stress, leading to greater renal injury. in particular, downregulation of tubular ace2 is associated with albuminuria or tubular injury in the diabetic kidney, where further inhibition of ace2 results in augmented renal damage (doan et al. 2001; li et al. 2005; oudit et al. 2006; wong et al. 2007; soler et al. 2007) . hence, ace2 is proving to be a protective molecule against kidney disease especially in the context of a negative regulation of classical ras axis. deletion of ace2 leads to spontaneous late-onset nephrotic glomerulosclerosis and accelerates diabetic kidney injury. indeed, glomerular disease and albuminuria occur after pharmacological inhibition of ace2 (soler et al. 2013) .note that in several forms of chronic kidney disease, and especially in diabetes, it has been found that tubular ace2 expression is reduced. however, other studies showed that glomerular expression of ace2 increases in acute kidney injury. it is likely that differential expression pattern of tubular and glomerular ace2 may be an important determinant for determining the progression of kidney disease (kuba et al. 2013 ).in some cardiac resident cells, i.e., endothelial cells, pericytes and cardiomyocytes, ace2 is the main enzyme involved in the local clearance of ang ii. previous experimental evidences indicate that ace2 is an essential regulator of cardiac function and is involved in the response of various cardiac cells to multiple injuries, especially those associated with overactivation of classical ras pathway (imai et al. 2005) . in different experimental models, indeed, ace2 deficiency induces progressive cardiac fibrosis with aging and/or pressure overload. moreover, ace2 deficiency accelerates postinfarct adverse ventricular remodeling and causes early cardiac hypertrophy in mice. these detrimental effects may be prevented or reversed following treatment with ace inhibitors or at1 receptor blockers (or sartans). on the other hand, ang1-7 peptide treatment can hamper cardiac remodeling and improve myocardial performance and even survival in rodent heart failure models (schindler et al. 2007 ). furthermore, the use of mas receptor selective ligands, such as ave-0991, exerts cardioprotective effects similar to ang1-7 in ischemia/reperfusion (i/r) injury, myocardial infarction (zeng et al. 2012) , or hypertension-induced cardiomyopathy models (ferreira et al. 2007 ). these observations suggest that the altered balance between ace and ace2 in the cv system is a critical driver for progressive heart disease, which can be reverted by inhibiting classical ace or upregulating ace2 pathway. however, it is still unknown how myocardial ace2 may worsen covid-19 clinical scenario or contribute to vulnerability to sars-cov2 infection at least.the role of cardiac ace2 in sars-cov-2-induced myocardial injury: facts and hypotheses patients with cvds are at higher risk for severe covid-19 and show a worse prognosis in the presence of a systemic inflammatory response and immune system deregulation (zheng et al. 2020; madjid et al. 2020) . so far, it is unclear whether cardiac ace2 signaling may play a role in cardiac injury, yet the following clinical evidences will be helpful to support next focused investigations.firstly, since epithelial ace2 is the gateway of sars-cov-2 entry into cells, the attractive hypothesis that sars-cov-2 may directly affect myocardial tissue through ace2 of endothelial cells, pericytes or cardiomyocytes cannot be discounted a priori. in agreement with this hypothesis, preliminary reports provided evidence of symptoms of myocarditis in covid-19 patients (xu et al. 2020b; ruan et al. 2020b; hu et al. 2020; inciardi et al. 2020) , which is also consistent with the rise of hypersensitive ctni levels even if reports lack histological detection of myocardial inflammation. while the myocardial localization of sars-cov-2 remains to be confirmed with certainty, we cannot ignore that other viruses, such as seasonal flu and parvovirus b-19, cause myocarditis (fung et al. 2016 ). however, the detection of sars-cov viral rna in 35% of cardiac biopsies performed in patients during the sars outbreak in toronto (2003) is suggestive to support the hypothesis of coronavirus cardiotropism. furthermore, pulmonary infection with the human sars-cov led to ace2-dependent myocarditis in mice (oudit et al. 2009 ). it is, therefore, conceivable that sars-cov-2 also infects cardiomyocytes.secondly, the loss of ace2 is associated to increased susceptibility to heart failure, while augmented ace2 levels prevent and reverse the heart failure phenotype, emerging as a key protective pathway in the heart pathology (patel et al. 2016) . accordingly, cvd is associated with decreased baseline levels of ace2 expression (chamsi-pasha et al. 2014) . during its replication, sars-cov is able to progressively downregulate ace2 protein expression (dijkman et al. 2012 ). it has, therefore, been hypothesized that the loss of ace2 function may also occur during sars-cov-2 infection (garami 2020; henry et al. 2020) . in particular, the binding of sars-cov-2 to ace2 might reduce the residual ace2 activity, thereby altering the ace/ ace2 balance and generating a ras dysregulation with higher ace and/or lower ace2, a combination of phenomena that can result in co-occurrence of lung, heart and renal acute failure (garami 2020; henry et al. 2020) . the predominance of the ace/ang ii/ at1 axis function compared to the ace2/ang1-7/ mas counterpart could be responsible of the typical vasoconstrictive, pro-inflammatory and pro-oxidative effects of ang ii occurring in these conditions, that could ultimately evolve to acute heart failure and ards (zhang and baker 2017; henry et al. 2020 ). accordingly, the ace2 production is dramatically impaired during ards, resulting in dominant ace activity (wösten-van asperen et al. 2011). considering that peripheral ang ii levels were found to be significantly higher in covid-19 patients with respect to healthy subjects and that positively correlated with the viral load and lung injury (liu et al. 2020b) , the hypothesis of the ras pathway dysregulation in both lung and cardiac injury during sars-cov-2 infection should be investigated (garami 2020; henry et al. 2020) .third, the sars-cov-2-dependent ace2 downregulation could trigger monocyte/macrophage activation and induce severe lung inflammation, contributing to the pathogenesis of acute lung injury up to the onset of respiratory failure (sodhi et al. 2018; garami 2020) . the hypoxemia consequent to severe interstitial pneumonia can stimulate renin secretion and renin gene expression (kramer et al. 1998) , thereby leading to a vicious circle (garami 2020 ) that could enhance cardiac damage in covid-19 patients. notably, high ang ii levels were associated with hypertension, heart failure (packer and mcmurray 2017) , and diabetes (hao et al. 2013) , which both represent the most common underlying comorbidities in patients more vulnerable to sars-cov-2 infection. of course, the relationship between virus load, onset and magnitude of covid-19, and ace2 downregulation-dependent ras dysregulation in lungs and heart requires a lot more compelling evidence. moreover, additional studies are mandatory to investigate whether the acute myocardial injury due to sars-cov-2 infection might be related to ace2 expression rather than activity.is there a role for ace inhibitors or arbs in the development of sars-cov-2 infection?inhibiting the classical ras pathway with ace inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blocker (arb) represents a first-line pharmacological strategy to treat arterial hypertension (paz ocaranza et al. 2020) , which is usually associated with reduced lung function (schnabel et al. 2011b) . intriguingly, ace2 expression in humans is enhanced by these treatments (thomson 2020) , whereas the arbs, losartan and olmesartan, were found to increase by threefold cardiac ace2 expression in a rat model of acute myocardial infarction (ami) (gurwitz 2020) . this observation led some investigators to speculate about a mechanistic link between the preexisting use of these drugs and predisposition to sars-cov-2 infection (thomson 2020; kuster et al. 2020; esler and esler 2020) . as described in the "ace2 in the heart" section, however, ace2 confers protection against both lung and cardiac injury, so that it has also been proposed to use ace inhibitors or arb as therapeutics for treating covid-19 patients prior to ards development (gurwitz 2020) . although ace inhibitors provide imperfect renoprotection in advanced type 2 diabetes and cv risk remains elevated (zoja et al. 2011) , preliminary evidence from a limited cohort of patients (n = 187) demonstrated that there was no difference in fatality rate between covid-19 patients pretreated or not with ace inhibitors or arb (guo et al. 2020a ). moreover, inhibition of classical ras pathway proved to exert a beneficial outcome in patients affected by viral pneumonia, by likely reducing the respiratory inflammatory burden and cytokine storm induced by virus infection because of increased ace2 expression (henry et al. 2018) . the effect of these drugs on ace2 levels in the lungs is still unknown and larger clinical studies are required to assess the impact of ace inhibitors and arb on severity of sars-cov-2 infection. a recent joint statement of the american heart association, american college of cardiology and heart failure society of american recommended not interrupting these medications in covid-19 patients affected by chronic arterial hypertension, unless otherwise required by changes in patients' conditions (madjid et al. 2020) . indeed, these life-saving drugs are difficult to replace, since other common antihypertensive drugs such as beta-blockers, cause bronchoconstriction aggravating lung function in general population (schnabel et al. 2011a ) and common calcium-channel blockers may cause cardiac conduction defects, impair myocardial contractility and cause peripheral edema.while the involvement of ace2 in sars-cov-2induced acute myocardial injury remains controversial, there is no doubt that the cytokine storm associated to virus infection is highly detrimental to the heart. acute respiratory infections, such as those characterizing interstitial pneumonia by sars-cov and mers-cov, have long been known to result in major acute cardiac complications, which may lead to a 60% increase in short-term fatality rate (corrales-medina et al. 2013) . cardiac complications associated to viral pneumonia include malignant arrhythmias, ami and heart failure, which likely result from the increased myocardial workload during infections that accelerate myocardial injury or infarction (bonow et al. 2020 ). in addition, sars-cov-2 has been shown to trigger an exaggerated systemic inflammatory response that, besides acute lung injury and ards, may ultimately lead to multiple cv complications (zheng et al. 2020) , including ami, unstable angina, tachycardia, heart failure, and stroke (gorla et al. 2018) . interestingly, sars-cov-2 promotes an aberrant release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines by alveolar epithelial cells, vascular endothelial cells, activated monocytes and lymphocytes, which express ace2 on their cells surface. furthermore, sars-cov-2 could also induce lymphocyte death through pyroptosis, which would explain why covid-19 patients undergo lymphopenia, thereby further contributing to exacerbate organ injury. the "cytokine hypothesis" for cardiac damage postulates that the deleterious effects of chronic cytokine release on myocardium and vascular endothelium may facilitate the onset of ami or heart failure. for instance, pro-inflammatory cytokines, i.e., interleukin-1 (il-1), il-6, and tnfα, exert a negative inotropic effect on cardiac contractility. likewise, the sustained activation of inflammatory signaling, e.g., through tnfα and il-1β, may induce massive cardiomyocyte apoptosis and lead to adverse left ventricular remodeling, which favors the onset of acute heart failure. additionally, the cytokine storm stimulates monocytes/macrophages to release matrix metalloproteinases (mmps), which boost atherosclerotic plaque growth and rupture, favor the secretion of pro-coagulant factors and induce hemodynamic changes, thereby increasing the probability for ami to occur (mann 2015; newby 2016; toldo and abbate 2018) . indeed, while short-term il-6 release exerts a cardioprotective effect, chronic activation of il-6 signaling leads to autoimmune myocarditis (fontes et al. 2015) . in this scenario, underlying cvds are predicted to worsen the outcome of patients with viral infections on the heart, as already established for pneumonia and seasonal flu.several observations support the contribution of deregulated inflammatory signaling in sars-cov-2induced myocardial injury (zheng et al. 2020) . for instance, huang et al. observed that plasma levels of inflammatory mediators, including il-1β, ifnγ, ip10 (cxcl10), and mcp1 (ccl2), were upregulated in covid-19 patients; interestingly, this study also showed that cytokine levels were remarkably higher in critically ill patients. in particular, the serum levels of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (g-csf), ip10, mcp1, mip1a (ccl3), and tnfα were higher in icu-patients than those that did not require icu admission, thereby suggesting that the cytokine storm is a clinical predictor of mortality . as ifnγ is the signature cytokine of the t-helper-1 (th1) response (rose 2011) , these findings suggest that the balance between the pro-inflammatory th1 response and the anti-inflammatory t-helper-2 (th2) response is tipped in favor of the former (zheng et al. 2020) . in line with these observations, zhu et al. reported that hypersensitive ctnt and inflammatory biomarkers (e.g., serum ferritin and il-6) were significantly higher in non-survivors covid-19 patients (zhou et al. 2020a ). the high inflammatory burden in severe covid-19 has been further confirmed by another independent study, which reported higher levels of serum ferritin, il-6 and c-reactive protein in patients who did not survive, likely because of fulminant myocarditis (ruan et al. 2020b ). of note, over-production of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines was common in sars-cov (wong et al. 2004 ) and mers-cov (mahallawi et al. 2018 ) patients, where acute lung injury was diagnosed.further investigations are required to elucidate the potential role of the cytokine storm in the pathogenesis of cv complications including cardiomyopathy, acute myocardial injury and myocarditis following sars-cov-2 infection and to understand the potential mechanistic relationships between cvd and covid-19 outcomes. as discussed in the next paragraph, the nlrp3/ inflammasome might play a triggering role in the cytokine storm induced by sars-cov-2.nlrp3/inflammasome: a common feature in viral infections, cvd and covid-19both innate and acquired immune systems represent a crucial defense against pathogens. indeed, it is conceivable that viral antigens firstly enroll innate immunity by activating pattern recognition receptors (prrs) to suppress viral replication and modulate the adaptive immune responses through the expression of type i interferon and pro-inflammatory cytokines (bowie and unterholzner 2008) . during the last decades, the nlrp3/inflammasome pathway emerged as an important mediator of virus-induced inflammation.the mechanisms of nlrp3/inflammasome activation nlrp3 is a prr belonging to the nod (nucleotide oligomerization domain)-like receptors (nlrs) able to recognize both damage-associated molecular patterns (damps) and pathogen-associated molecular patterns (pamps) (schroder and tschopp 2010) , such as specific virus molecules, stimulating downstream pathways that contribute to the systemic immune response (farag et al. 2020) . nlrp3 inflammasome is a multi-protein platform made up of a sensor protein (nlrp3), the adaptor protein asc, and a cysteine protease precursor procaspase-1 (schroder and tschopp 2010; zhou et al. 2011) . activated nlrp3 induces the inflammasome assembly interacting with asc that, in turn, triggers the conversion of the zymogen procaspase-1 into the active caspase-1 (franchi and núñez 2012) . lastly, caspase-1, an established inflammatory caspase (martinon and tschopp 2007) , converts the inactive pro-il-1β and pro-il-18 into active pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as il-1β and il-18 (epstein and dinarello 1984) . finally, il-1β stimulates the release of tnfα and il-6, whereas il-18 increases circulating levels of ifn-γ, il-13, il-4, il-8, thereby contributing to the immune inflammatory responses. both il-1β and il-18 represent key factors of the host defense (davis et al. 2011 ).the role of the nlrp3/inflammasome in covid-19 viral infection has been always associated with inflammation (farag et al. 2020 ) and viroporins seem to play a triggering role rather than viral pamps. viroporins are a new class of virus proteins composed of 15-20 amino acids that homo-oligomerize forming hydrophilic pores across the organelle membranes, thereby increasing the permeability to monovalent and divalent cations (i.e., na + , k + , and ca 2+ ) (wang et al. 2011; nieva et al. 2012 ). these structures appear to play a crucial role in the virus infection/life cycle, genome replication, and assembly (farag et al. 2020) , paving the way to consider the possibility to target viroporins with antiviral strategies (scott and griffin 2015) . an increase in intracellular ca 2+ concentration, as well as a reduction in cytosolic k + , are regarded among the most suitable triggering signals for nlrp3/inflammasome activation of note, viroporins mediate nlrp3/inflammasome activation and excessive production of il-1β (guo et al. 2015; farag et al. 2020) . to date, nlrp3/ inflammasome activation following a viral infection has been reported for influenza a virus (iav), hepatitis c virus (hcv), encephalomyocarditis virus (emcv), and sars-cov (liu et al. 2004; ichinohe et al. 2010; farag et al. 2017 ). the reported increase in proinflammatory cytokines levels, such as il-18 and il-1β, not only in the plasma, but also in lungs and lymphoid tissues of patients affected by sars, mers, and, more recently, by covid-19, is potentially consistent with nlrp3/inflammasome activation (chen et al. 2019; huang et al. 2020) . it is well known that all coronaviruses encode for viroproteins e and 3a, which are responsible at least for replication, virulence, and nlrp3/inflammasome activation (i.e., sars-cov) (castaño-rodriguez et al. 2018; chen et al. 2019; farag et al. 2020 ). sars-cov proteins e and 3a ic differ for intracellular distribution and biophysical properties. protein e locates in the endoplasmic reticulum (er)-golgi intermediate compartment, its functionality is strictly dependent on the lipid environment composition (nieto-torres et al. 2015) , and induces ca 2+ efflux during sars-cov-2 infection, which activates the inflammasome complex, leading to the acute proinflammatory response associated with virus pathogenicity. on the other hand, the detailed targeting of protein 3a remains still elusive (castaño-rodriguez et al. 2018; chen et al. 2019; farag et al. 2020 ).in addition, in vitro studies revealed that also the sars-cov open reading frame 3a (orf3a) accessory protein, which is a strong inducer of the nlrp3/ inflammasome (siu et al. 2019) , may serve as a viroprotein (chen et al. 2011) . therefore, it is plausible that sars-cov-2 may use the same mechanism of action to induce the nlrp3-dependent storm of cytokines and the resulting severe systemic inflammation that often causes fatal outcome. it is not surprising that inhibition of the nlrp3/inflammasome has recently been put forward as a promising strategy to treat or prevent acute cardiac injury, such as i/r injury (liu et al. 2018; toldo and abbate 2018; pasqua et al. 2018) . likewise, targeting nlrp3/inflammasome may represent an attractive therapeutic strategy in the treatment of virus-associated diseases, such as cvd (liu et al. 2018; pasqua et al. 2018) . for instance, it has been demonstrated that nlrp3/inflammasome activation by hypertension induces a "sterile inflammation" that results in a chronic low-grade inflammation characterized by an increased activity of nf-κb (zhu et al. 2017; bullón et al. 2017) . sustained nf-κb signaling, in turn, leads to increased tissue and/or circulating levels of proinflammatory mediators, such as il-1β and il-18, that induces the activation of immune cells and their consequent detrimental effects on both respiratory tract and heart (dalekos et al. 1997; rabkin 2009; krishnan et al. 2014 ). based upon these evidences, it is reasonable to refer to nlrp3/inflammasome as a common pathogenic mechanism included in a vicious cycle that triggers and supports both covid-19 and its most common cv comorbidities, such as arterial hypertension. in this context, targeting nlrp3/inflammasome might serve as a therapeutic tool in counteracting the severe systemic inflammation following sars-cov-2 infection, while at same time also mitigating the underlying cvd and reducing the mortality rate of hospitalized patients. in this regard, promising data were provided by a drug recently acquired by novartis, namely ifm-2427, which is already under clinical trial (mullard 2019) .in agreement with other pulmonary diseases, covid-19 poses a remarkable challenge to health because of hurdled blood oxygenation and oxygen delivery to tissues. when the oxygen supply to tissues becomes insufficient to sustain normal function, a situation called hypoxia ensues. whereas some organs/tissues can survive short in response to non-severe hypoxia periods, for other organs/tissues hypoxia represents an intolerable hit that may lead to lethal outcomes. as myocardium and cerebral tissues are the most endangered, heart and brain represent the primary targets of acute respiratory failure.there are several criteria that recommend the transfer of patients to icu. one of these is arterial blood oxygen saturation < 90% and pao2 < 60 mmhg (smith and nielsen 1999) . as the covid-19 pathology mainly concerns lung dysfunction, most of these patients may face severe hypoxia for several days, and most treatments aim at correcting hypoxia by oxygen therapy and mechanical ventilation. there are several concerns related to the effects of prolonged hypoxia on the cv system.first, the hypoxia-driven hyperventilation response, mediated by the carotid bodies and aimed at restoring normal oxygenation, necessarily implies excessive washout of carbon dioxide, which shifts the acid-base balance towards alkalosis. such response has been found in healthy subjects even at moderate altitude for periods of time ranging from few days (samaja et al. 1997) to several months (porcelli et al. 2017) . although often partially compensated by metabolic acidosis, alkalosis of either origin represents a common finding in critically ill patients (maehle et al. 2014; kreü et al. 2017) .although not yet documented, alkalosis is expected to damage brain and pulmonary tissue as it enhances oxidant-induced apoptosis in several cell lineages (auer 2004; ando et al. 2007 ).second, chronic hypoxia weakens the myocardial resistance against stress (milano et al. 2010) . acute hypoxia-induced pulmonary vasoconstriction at last induces histological changes in the right ventricular (rv) myocardium (netzer et al. 2017) , contributing to increase rv systolic pressure and hypertrophy, common features of pulmonary hypertension (mclaughlin and mcgoon 2006) . in addition to the effects elicited by acute hypoxia, chronic hypoxia leads to pulmonary remodeling, which include increased pulmonary vessel density, increased frequency of small (< 50 μm wall thickness) vessels and increased thickness of pulmonary lamina (nydegger et al. 2018 (nydegger et al. , 2019 , all changes imputable to excessive stimulation of bone marrow-derived progenitor cells (favre et al. 2017 ). chronic hypoxia is well known to contribute significantly to pulmonary hypertension (ramchandran et al. 2012 ) and is associated with many pulmonary hypertension-related diseases, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cystic fibrosis, diffuse interstitial fibrosis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, infiltrative lung tumors, congenital hearts defects, and ischemic events.third, at odds with what happens in healthy subjects exposed to altitude hypoxia, which is well known to stimulate erythropoiesis (piperno et al. 2011; goetze et al. 2013) , systemic hypoxia represses erythropoiesis in ards patients and these often develop severe anemia (< 8 g/dl), which correlates with a poor prognosis, and may require blood transfusion (silver 2005; jenq et al. 2018) . this clinical scenario is common in icu patients (nguyen et al. 2003) and it may be attributable to anemia of inflammation, whose etiology is scarcely known. the physiological response to hypoxia, with compensatory increase in hemoglobin, requires an increase in iron transport and use. in fact, it demands stabilization of ferroportin, the transmembrane protein that enables iron release from the cells with increased intestinal absorption. the degradation of ferroportin is mediated by hepcidin (hep) that decreases in healthy subjects thereby enabling the compensatory response to hypoxia (gassmann and muckenthaler 2015) . however, hep levels increase in ards patients (galesloot et al. 2011) , despite their hypoxic condition. the consequent loss of hep regulation may limit the efficacy of ironreplacement therapies (lasocki et al. 2010) . this mechanism may be relevant in ards and covid-19 patients because iron release into the circulation and deregulated uptake by tissues that use iron may saturate transferrin, increase the non-transferrin-bound aliquot of iron, with possibly triggering of unspecific oxidative stress injury.fourth, although the correction of hypoxia with oxygen therapy remains the major life-saving concern in icu patients, excess oxygen delivery or hyperoxia may cause considerable harm (ottolenghi et al. 2020) . in facts, hyperoxia caused by breathing mixtures with > 40% oxygen markedly elevates reactive oxygen species (ros) release in the circulation and contributes to tissue injury by oxidative stress (nagatomo et al. 2012) . hyperoxia-induced injury may occur even in patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery breathing mixtures containing 40% to 80% oxygen (ottolenghi et al. 2019) . hyperoxia-driven oxidative stress is expected to alter the expression of genes that regulate pathways underlying different responses to oxidative stress (terraneo and samaja 2017) . intuitively, the direction of the alterations driven by hyperoxia is opposite to those elicited by hypoxia. however, there is evidence that this is not the case in many instances, for example the regulation of gene transcription by the hypoxiainducible factors (hifs). hifs are well known to respond to hypoxia by acting as transcriptional factors for an array of genes that participate in various cell processes as angiogenesis, metabolism, cell proliferation, control of ros-induced damage, and many others (giordano 2005) , including apoptosis and autophagy (ziello et al. 2007; gui et al. 2016) . but recent studies show that hif-1α and hif-2α are indeed up-regulated in the response to hyperoxia as well, at least in brain (benderro et al. 2012; , some types of cancer (terraneo et al. 2010 (terraneo et al. , 2014 , and hepatocytes (wikenheiser et al. 2009; marconi et al. 2014 ), but not in heart (gyongyosi et al. 2018) . although the injury led by hyperoxia has not yet been studied as that led by hypoxia, it is established that hyperoxia reduces the expression of angiogenic vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf) signaling and capillary density (benderro et al. 2012) , reduces the anti-apoptotic defense by increasing the expression of the proapoptotic proteins bax and bad and decreasing the activation of anti-apoptotic proteins bcl-2 and bclxl (brutus et al. 2009 ), increases neuronal apoptosis concomitantly with decreased protective p-akt and erythropoietin signaling , accumulates oxidized lipids and prot eins ( ta t a r k o v a e t a l . 2 0 11 ) , d o w n -r e g u l a t e s neurotrophins that provide tropic support to developing neurons (felderhoff-mueser et al. 2004) , and stimulates ferroptosis, a newly discovered irondependent form of cell death thereby contributing to brain damage (li et al. 2017 ).a striking feature of covid-19 pandemics is the high incidence of fatalities in elderly patients (guan et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020a; zhou et al. 2020a) . a recent analysis by the italian institute of health revealed that the overall-case fatality rate increased with aging in both china and italy; however, the fatality rate in italy was remarkable higher as compared to china (7.2% vs. 2.3%) because of the higher death tolls in italy among subjects aged > 70 years (12.8% vs. 8.0%) and among those older than 79 (20.2% vs. 14.8%). this increase in covid-19-related mortality rate in italy may be ascribed to the demographic characteristics of this country, where 23% of the population was aged > 65 years in 2019 (onder et al. 2020) . of note, aging represents one of the most detrimental risk factors for the cv system (obas and vasan 2018) . this addresses the issue of frailty in older population as a critical parameter to be accounted for in the control of covid-19 pandemics.frailty, which was labeled as "the most problematic expression of population ageing" (clegg et al. 2013) , is often confounded with disability or co-morbidity. but frailty is assuming separate distinguished features, which highlight the presence of a well-defined phenotype that characterizes elders. many elders have multiorgan dysfunction, with frailty representing a "unifying notion in the care of elderly patients that directs attention away from organ-specific diagnoses" (clegg et al. 2013) . the concept of frailty is now universally defined as an individual's state of increased vulnerability and susceptibility to adverse health outcomes or death when exposed to a stressor, in this case the pulmonary diseases arising from sars-cov-2 infection in the presence of an age-dependent excess of ros and reactive nitrogen species (rns).frailty may be viewed as the result of the disruption of the organism's homeostatic balance that leads to heterogeneous clinical manifestations when the individual is exposed to endogenous or exogenous stressors. only a minor but non negligible number of people > 65 years old is considered frail: the prevalence of physical frailty ranges from 4 to 17% (mean 9.9%), with a higher prevalence in persons > 80 years old, among patients with multiple comorbidities (collard et al. 2012 ).in the absence of pandemics, the prevalence of frailty and cvd increase with age, making their coexistence common. epidemiological studies suggest that frailty may represent an important prognostic marker for patients with several types of cvds, including coronary artery disease, heart failure, as well as older people undergoing surgical and transcatheter interventions (afilalo et al. 2014) . despite unclear biological underpinnings of frailty and unexplored interaction with heart failure, it appears that frailty and cvd share common pathophysiological pathways (bellumkonda et al. 2017 ). among cvds, ami is a major cause of death, morbidity and loss of quality of life in industrialized countries, accounting for more than 7 million deaths per year worldwide (steg et al. 2012) . aging is classically regarded to as the greatest risk factor for ami. indeed, endothelial cell senescence due to increased ros production and dysfunction of nuclear factor-erythroid-2related factor 2 (nrf2)-mediated antioxidant response pathway may compromise endothelial nitric oxide (no) bioavailability, exacerbate inflammatory response and pathogenesis of age-related vascular diseases (i.e., ami and stroke) in older patients (fulop et al. 2018; ungvari et al. 2019 ). an excess of ros and rns is central in many pathways leading to cardiac hypertrophy and failure (tocchetti et al. 2015) . accordingly, the incidence of ami and the case-fatality mortality rate are markedly higher in elderly patients, who are also more prone to develop post-ami heart failure (afilalo et al. 2014) . when compared to younger subjects, aged patients are less amenable to receive percutaneous coronary intervention, while they are less sensitive to fibrinolytics (carro et al. 2011) . therefore, the impaired resilience of the cardiovascular cells to oxidative stressors in the presence of deficiency of relevant antioxidant mechanisms (i.e., nrf2-related pathway) may lead to sars-cov-2 detrimental consequences to the aged heart and vasculature. moreover, the correct finetuning of the nitroso-redox balance is fundamental for the function of the main components of the excitationcontraction coupling machinery (tocchetti et al. 2015) .despite the predominance of older patients with cvd among the population, randomized clinical trials have generally focused into young subjects without co-morbidities, thereby generating data that cannot be extended to elderly patients. this feature has been related to the higher case fatality rate in older vs. younger subjects hospitalized with ami. individuals aged ≥ 75 years old do not benefit from the same pharmacological interventions established for their younger counterparts after ami (fleg et al. 2011) . the lower sensitivity to cv drugs in the elderly depends on age-associated physiological changes in pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics, together with intrinsic deficits in the signaling pathways to protection.the reasons for the higher incidence/severity of ami in elderly subjects are multifactorial and not easy to reconcile with a single triggering event. endothelial dysfunction has been regarded as an early mechanism among those leading to the mismatch between oxygen supply and demand that finally culminates in ami (moccia et al. 2018 ). in addition, aged endothelial cells lose their capability to proliferate and to replace neighboring damaged cells, thereby aggravating the impact of coronary endothelium dysfunction (moccia et al. 2018) . consequently, aged subjects are more susceptible to develop coronary artery disease since the aging endothelial cells of coronary microcirculation are unable to express cytoprotective (pro-survival, antioxidant, macromolecular damage repair, and anti-inflammatory) genes due to deregulation of relevant transcription factors pathways, such as nrf2 signaling. oxidative damage is quite remarkable in microvascular endothelial cells affected by nad + depletion and sirtuin 1 dysregulation (kiss et al. 2019) , dampening their angiogenic activity and thus leading to microvascular rarefaction, which is an established hallmark of aging (valcarcel-ares et al. 2012) . likewise, nrf2 signaling is disrupted during aging also in cardiac myocytes (silva-palacios et al. 2016 ) and fibroblasts (nacarelli et al. 2018) , thereby contributing to enhance cardiac vulnerability to oxidative stress. it thus appears that the impairment of nrf2 transcriptional activity is key to increase cv risk during aging and could, therefore, worsen cv damage in older covid-19 patients. this scenario could be even worsened when oxygen therapy is required, as hyperoxiainduced ros release is postulated to exert a stronger cytotoxic effect on aged vasculature due to its lower resilience to oxidative stress. in agreement with these hypotheses, a recent study demonstrated that genetic depletion of nrf2 worsened age-related impairment of endothelial no bioavailability and of endothelial monolayer integrity. in addition, genetic silencing of nrf2 resulted in a dramatic increase in the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines (fulop et al. 2018) , also known as senescence-associated secretory phenotype (sasp). these cytokines include il-1β and tnfα (ungvari et al. 2018) , which are recently shown to mediate covid-19-induced cytokine storm. enhancing the pro-inflammatory phenotype might represent another mechanism whereby aging-dependent nrf2 dysfunction contributes to exacerbate the detrimental consequences of sars-cov-2 on the cv system.moreover, aging is associated to a significant perturbation of the ca 2+ signaling toolkit in cardiomyocytes, which leads to a dramatic impairment of heart muscle contraction (hamilton and terentyev 2019) . the higher mortality for ami in these individuals has further been linked to the age-related decline in the endogenous protective mechanism against myocardial i/r injury. indeed, pre-and post-conditioning are powerful interventions aimed to reduce the infarct size by eliciting endogenous cardioprotection in response to one or several brief cycles of sub-lethal myocardial i/r that precede or follow, respectively, a sustained potentially lethal ischemic insult. these conditioning protocols recruit a complex cascade of intracellular signaling pathways, mainly risk and safe, which converge on mitochondria and limit cell death (pagliaro et al. 2011) . although pharmacological conditioning recapitulates the endogenous mechanisms of cardioprotection induced by both pre-and post-conditioning and might be exploited in the therapy of ami, these conditioning protocols are barely effective in aged hearts, thereby exacerbating i/r injury. the loss of cardioprotection in elderly people is not irreversible and might be either rescued or preserved by alternative strategies, such exercise (boengler et al. 2009 ), which also promotes angiogenesis and increases vascular density in aging mouse models of ami (bei et al. 2015) .presently, there is no experimental evidence-based difference in the clinical management of young vs. elderly, presumably frail, subjects, at least for cvd; conversely, the sharp decrease in the endogenous mechanisms of cardioprotection and angiogenic repair during aging suggests that older subjects should undergo a distinct treatment as compared to younger individuals. older patients are left with few, if any, effective therapeutic methods to alleviate symptoms, restore distal perfusion and preserve tissue viability, calling for innovative approaches to restore the efficiency of cardioprotective mechanisms with aging, for example by pursuing alternative strategies to foster pre-conditioning, postconditioning, and endogenous protection (boengler et al. 2009 ). as a matter of facts, actual strategies and treatments for covid-19 patients are essentially the same for young and elder patients. but if cv patients respond differently depending on their age or frailty, why shouldn't this occur in covid-19 patients? one could, however, suggest that restoring endothelial function, e.g. at microvascular level, or improving vascular health during aging could represent an effective strategy to treat covid-19 in critical patients. for instance, activation of nrf2 by drugs (e.g., propofol during mechanical ventilation or oltipraz) (zhou et al. 2020c; ruan et al. 2020a) or by epigenetic compounds (e.g., nicotinamide mononucleotide, resveratrol, histone deacetylase inhibitors) (csiszár et al. 2015; pooladanda et al. 2019; kiss et al. 2019) could rescue, at least partially, stress resilience of both endothelial and cardiac cells in aging individuals affected by covid-19. otherwise, regular physical exercise and dietary intake of functional foods (lionetti et al. 2019) has also been shown to activate nrf2 in the myocardium, as well as across a variety of tissues, and could be advised to frail older people to reduce the risk to develop major cv complications in the case of sars-cov-2 infection (mcphee et al. 2016; done and traustadóttir 2016) .correlation between pm exposure, cvd and covid-19: just a conjecture?preliminary evidence has been provided in favor of a relationship between the number of days of exceeding the limits for particulate matter (pm) 10 (i.e., fine material with an airborne diameter < 10 μm) recorded in the control units of some cities, and the number of hospitalizations from covid-19 in northern italy (setti et al. 2020) , the area of this country which suffered the highest number of cases and fatalities. the pm is worldwide recognized as an important prompt for cvd, as the inhalation of pm is certainly a trigger for multiple cv disorders, such as ami, heart failure, and stroke, in urban communities (liang et al. 2020) . inhalation of smaller pm, such as pm 2.5 (i.e., fine material with an airborne diameter < 2.5 μm), leads to pulmonary inflammation and cardiotoxicity via secondary systemic effects (mills et al. 2009 ) as it can easily reach the alveolar space by irritating the alveolar wall up to onset of lung dysfunction (xing et al. 2016 ). cohen and colleagues have reported that more than four million deaths are attributable to pm 2.5, with nearly 60% of these due to cvds (cohen et al. 2017 ). this link is emphasized in the countries where air pollution concentration is continuing to rise (mills et al. 2009 ). the exposure to pm is still associated with the incidence of coronary events in europe even though the limit value was set at 50 μg/m 3 daily (cesaroni et al. 2014) . the scientific literature reports that air pollution and pm has been associated with a plethora of cv events such as angina, ami, arrhythmia and heart failure (dockery et al. 1993; samet et al. 2000; peters et al. 2001; mann et al. 2002; brook et al. 2003; bhatnagar 2006; mills et al. 2009 ). hence, any comorbidity with other pathologies as obesity and hypertension seems to impact the cvdassociated mortality in adults who are daily exposed to higher levels of pm (mazidi and speakman 2018) . a time-stratified case-crossover study design evaluated, in the milan area (lombardy region, italy) during the winter period 2016-2017, the independent short-term effect of flu outbreaks, air pollution and temperature (murtas and russo 2019) . they observed a statistically significant relationship between pm 10 levels and flu for cvd mortality and between flu and temperature for deaths by natural causes. in wuhan region (china), where air quality index is extremely low and the average daily pm concentration is 115.60 μg/m 3 , similar association between air pollution (mainly no2) and cvd mortality during 4-year period (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) has been observed, albeit no correlation was found directly among pm 10 and cvd (liu et al. 2015) . a positive relationship between pm 2.5 and influenza-like illness at the flu season, reported for the period january 2008-december 2014, was then observed via time-series analysis in beijing (feng et al. 2016) .both lombardy and wuhan areas are hitherto clusters of the worldwide pandemic of covid-19 with higher number of people deceased in contrast with the rest of the nations (italy and china) where the virus also spread but with less aggressiveness (as to march 27). chen at al. provided evidence that avian influenza h5n1 may be subjected to intercontinental transportation via saharian dust (chen et al. 2010) . thus, one wonders if air pollution has an impact upon covid-19 spread (ciencewicki and jaspers 2007) . a position paper of the italian society of environmental medicine proposed that pm could represent a factor that favors long-term persistence of viruses in the atmosphere ( h t t p : / / w w w . s i m a o n l u s . i t / w p s i m a / w p -content/uploads/2020/03/covid_19_position-paper_ eng.pdf). indeed, only for the lombardy region, the number of infected persons before quarantine and lockdown and the mean number of pm 10 exceedances/monitoring stations results in a r2 correlation of 0.974.the study concluded that there is a tangible risk that pm may serve as carrier for the viruses in the northern regions of italy, whereas further investigation and more solid data are necessary to disentangle this hypothesis. to strengthen this hypothesis, the exceedance in pm during the period february 10-29 2020 and the number of covid-19 cases reported as to march 26 from the italian national institute of health were visually correlated. it is clear from this analysis that, in the selected provinces in lombardy, piedmont, and emilia-romagna, where the majority of covid19 cases occurred so far, the pm 10 exceedances increment was higher. while these preliminary data hint at a correlation between air pollution, which represents an established risk factor, and covid-19, further in-depth retrospective cross-sectional investigations are required, keeping in mind the quarantine have drastically reduced the pm concentration in the aforementioned regions (https://www.eea.europa.eu/highlights/air-pollutiongoes-down-as).in search for an effective treatment: a proposal for repurposing of anti-hypertensive drugs to treat covid-19the covid-19 outbreak poses a complex challenge to the biomedical community: to design an immediate and effective therapy to reduce the high fatality rate among patients, especially those older and/or with comorbidities. at present, no specific antiviral drugs provided satisfactory outcomes in the treatment of the disease, whereas a suitable large-scale vaccine is still far from being available. in this regard, it is worth noticing that even sars-cov, a pandemic emerged about 20 years ago (2002) (2003) , still awaits specific antivirals and approved vaccines.conventional safety protocols, including quarantine of affected individuals, tracing of patients' contacts, social distancing, self-monitoring, use of masks and travel restriction, were adopted to mitigate the spread of covid-19. nevertheless, this approach will not be sufficient to constrain disease propagation when the basic reproduction number (r 0 ) is not lower than 1.5 and/or the percentage of identified contacts is not higher than 80% (mitjà and clotet 2020) . under this scenario, a growing number of patients throughout the globe require an effective treatment.repurposing of clinically available antivirals to treat covid-19as already described in the case of ebola and sars-cov outbreaks (kruse 2020) , repurposing of clinically approved drugs has been invocated to effectively treat patients who are at greater risk of death. for instance, the raising hope that lopinavir and ritonavir, which are employed as human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) protease inhibitors, could display clinical efficacy against covid-19, was recently dashed by the failure of a clinical trial in china . as reviewed in li and de clercq (li and de clercq 2020) , clinical trials were already launched in china and usa to evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of multiple food and drug administration (fda)-approved antiviral treatments, including the nucleoside analogues, favipiravir and ribavirin, and the experimental nucleoside analogue, remdesivir (nct04280705) (holshue et al. 2020 ). the list of antiviral agents that were proposed in the fight against covid-19 include oseltamivir, penciclovir/acyclovir, ganciclovir, sarilumab, galidesivir, nitazoxanide, rapamycin, recombinant interferons, and chlorpromazine (li and de clercq 2020; guo et al. 2020b) .of note, a randomized controlled clinical trial of sarilumab (nct04315298), a monoclonal antibody against the il-6 receptor, is currently assessing whether the modification of the inflammatory response induced by this treatment could provide benefit in reducing lung inflammation and improving lung function in covid-19 patients.blocking sars-cov-2 entry into the cytoplasm as a target for vaccines and plasma-derived therapy an alternative, but not mutually exclusive, strategy consists in the identification of a small molecule drug that could be repurposed to inhibit the interaction between virus and target cells (gunaratne et al. 2018b; kruse 2020) . as mentioned in section 3, sars-cov-2 entry requires priming of s protein by furin and tmprss2 (hoffmann et al. 2020; walls et al. 2020; coutard et al. 2020) . a promising report revealed that camostat mesylate, an fda-approved drug which blocks tmprss2 activity, effectively prevented sars-cov-2 spread in vitro (hoffmann et al. 2020 ). in addition, once fully surface-exposed, s glycoprotein represents a source of accessible epitopes for the production of neutralizing antibodies and thus a target for ongoing vaccine design efforts (walls et al. 2020) . in this line, the use of antibody-rich plasma donated by patients who fully recovered from covid-19 is under evaluation to determine if it could shorten the length, or lessen the severity, of the illness.blocking sars-cov-2 entry by targeting the endosomal compartment with chloroquine and ca 2+ antagonists this finding opens the way to the repurposing of clinically available drugs interfering with the endocytic pathway mediating sars-cov-2 entry into the target cell, e.g., through inhibition of ph-mediated endocytosis, bulk alkalinization of endolysosomal (el) vesicles, or blockade of el proteases. for instance, fda-approved cardiotonic steroids (ouabain and bufalin), known for their selective blockage on the na + /k + -atpase, can significantly impair mers-cov infection through the endocytic pathway (burkard et al. 2015) . remarkably, the lysosomotropic compound, chloroquine, a cheap and widely available anti-malarial drug, was shown to block sars-cov-2 infection in vitro at a clinically relevant concentration (wang et al. 2020c ) and, according to preliminary reports, proved to exert beneficial exerts in covid-19 patients (colson et al. 2020; mitjà and clotet 2020; gao et al. 2020; inciardi et al. 2020) . chloroquine could indeed accumulate within the acidic vesicles and interfere with the el vesicle trafficking (golden et al. 2015) . of note, chloroquine, which is also employed in autoimmune disorders, has the potential to counteract the cytokine storm associated with covid-19 severity (liu et al. 2020a) . obviously, the therapeutic efficacy of chloroquine in covid-19 patients' needs to be supported by randomized clinical trials conducted on large cohorts of patients since the margin between the effective therapeutic dose and toxic dose is narrow and chloroquine poisoning has been associated with serious cv disorders (frisk-holmberg et al. 1983 ). nevertheless, these preliminary evidences endorse the view that, the usage of a single compound potentially able to block viral-host cell interaction and attenuate the inflammatory response, could provide an effective weapon against the disease.in this view, a hint at an alternative therapy against covid-19 is suggested by the cv comorbidities affecting these patients. ca 2+ antagonists have long been used as first line anti-hypertensive drugs due to their ability to block l-type voltage-gated ca 2+ channels in vascular smooth muscle cells (godfraind 2017; oparil et al. 2018) . ca 2+ antagonists include dihydropyridines, e.g., nifedipine, nicardipine, and nimodipine, as well as phenylalkylamines, e.g., verapamil, and the benzothiazepine, diltiazem (godfraind 2017; rosenfeldt et al. 2018) . nifedipine, verapamil, and diltiazem, often used in combination with ace inhibitors or sartans, reduce arterial hypertension with quite tolerable side effects (godfraind 2017; rosenfeldt et al. 2018) . furthermore, nicardipine is strongly recommended as antihypertensive agent in stroke (rosenfeldt et al. 2018) , whereas verapamil is largely employed to treat both hypertension and ventricular arrhythmia (godfraind 2017 ). it has long been known that ca 2+ antagonists may block endolysosomal (el) two-pore channels 1-2 (tpc1-2) (genazzani et al. 1997; moccia et al. 2003) , which play a crucial role in el trafficking (patel 2015) , at the same concentrations as those reported to block l-type voltage-gated ca 2+ channels. tpcs are gated by multiple agonists, including nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate (naadp), sphingosine, and the el phospholipid, phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (galione 2019). tpcs-mediated ca 2+ release recruits el-located ca 2+sensitive decoders, including calmodulin, synaptotagmin vii, and arf6 (faris et al. 2018) , to regulate vesicular fusion and trafficking (galione 2019) . a screening campaign aiming at repurposing fda-approved drugs as novel antiviral compounds recently revealed that classical ca 2+ antagonists blocked ebola virus and mers-cov infections in vitro (sakurai et al. 2015; gunaratne et al. 2018a, b) . ebola virus entry into host cells occurs by macropinocytosis followed by relocation to the endosomal compartment. thereafter, the virus binds to the endosomal membrane protein npc1 to fuse with acidic late endosomes/lysosomes and release the capside into the cytoplasm (falzarano and feldmann 2015) . a recent series of investigations demonstrated that inhibiting tpcs-mediated el ca 2+ release with nifedipine, verapamil, nicardipine, and diltiazem prevented viral genome entry in the cytoplasm (sakurai et al. 2015; penny et al. 2019 ). subsequently, the same strategy was worked out to find clinically available tools to treat mers, which was first described in saudi arabia in 2012 (zaki et al. 2012 ) and subsequently reported to affect more than 1500 subjects (zumla et al. 2015) . as described above for sars-cov-2, the viral s protein mediates mers-cov entry upon binding to the host cell receptor, dipeptidyl peptidase 4, followed by proteolytic priming via tmprss2 (raj et al. 2013; park et al. 2016) . following clathrinmediated endocytosis, mers-cov is redirected through the el system where the s protein is proteolytically cleaved by lysosomal proteases, which results in vesicular fusion and capside release into the cytoplasm (millet and whittaker 2014; burkard et al. 2014) . notably, mers-cov pseudovirus translocation was also attenuated by blocking el tpcs with verapamil, nicardipine, and nimodipine (gunaratne et al. 2018b) . tpcs function as homodimers, in which each subunit comprises two homologous six-transmembrane domain motifs. therefore, they represent the molecular ancestors of the α (cav) subunits of voltage-gated na + and ca 2+ channels, with which they share the structural motifs within the pore regions (patel 2015) . in the same line, docking analysis and ca 2+ fluxes measurements confirmed that ca 2+ antagonists avidly bind to the tpc pore (rahman et al. 2014) .as a further support to the proposal to probe ca 2+ antagonists to treat covid-19, it is worth recalling that chloroquine inhibits sars-cov-2 virus entry by promoting the alkalinization of el vesicles (wang et al. 2020c; liu et al. 2020a ), which is a common strategy to perturb el membrane fusion. notably, elevating el ph would also result in a significant reduction in el ca 2+ concentration, usually around 500 μm, as el ca 2+ refilling is mainly driven by the h + gradient (morgan et al. 2011; faris et al. 2018) . for instance, the lysomotropic weak base nh 4 cl abrogates el ca 2+ storage (morgan et al. 2011 ) as well as mers-cov (gunaratne et al. 2018b) and sars-cov (yang et al. 2004; vincent et al. 2005) entry in the cytoplasm. furthermore, lysosomotropic agents also affected ace2 localization "in vitro"; the viral receptor remains trapped within perinuclear vacuoles upon pretreatment with chloroquine, nh4cl or bafilomycin a1 (wang et al. 2008) .besides supporting viral entry into the host cells, preliminary evidence suggested that tpcs contribute to deliver the el ca 2+ signal responsible for nlrp3 inflammasome activation (tseng et al. 2017) . it thus appears that blocking tpcs-mediated el ca 2+ release, with either chloroquine or ca 2+ antagonists, might represent a potential perspective to treat covid-19 patients by interfering with both sars-cov-2 infection and the subsequent inflammatory response. while this hypothesis remains to be probed by a devoted experimental pipeline, a clinical trial has been launched in china to evaluate the therapeutic outcome of tetrandrine on sars-cov-2infected subjects (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04308317). tetrandrine is an alkaloid isolated from the root of stephania tetrandra, a vine that grows in china and taiwan, and is widely employed in china to treat autoimmune diseases, cv disorders, hypertension, and cancer. tetrandrine targets multiple intracellular signaling pathways, including l-type voltage-gated ca 2+ channels, which could explain its beneficial effects on the cv system (yao and jiang 2002) . of note, tetrandrine was recently shown to inhibit tpcsmediated el ca 2+ release and to attenuate ebola (sakurai et al. 2015) and mers-cov-2 (gunaratne et al. 2018b ) entry into the host cells. these findings, however, may suggest the hypothesis that repurposing of ca 2+ antagonists could prove effective in treating sars-cov-2 infection while, at the same time, attenuating cv and respiratory dysfunction co-occurring in older covid-19 patients.the covid-19 pandemic has rapidly spread throughout the globe by preferentially affecting older individuals with underlying cv comorbidities. besides ards and acute kidney injury, cardiovascular complications also represent a common consequence of the disease and, at the same time, a cause for adverse outcome in covid-19 patients. although we cannot ignore emerging events of druginduced sudden cardiac death among treated covid-19 patients (chorin et al. 2020) , clinical reports well support careful evaluation of the pathogenic mechanisms that promote the onset of severe covid-19 due to cvd following sars-cov-2 infection. these include, for example, classical ras pathway and ace2, nlrp3/inflammasome, and hypoxemia (fig. 1) . furthermore, the prevalence and death toll of covid-19 increases with aging as well as frailty, and seems correlated with prolonged exposure to air pollution, both of which represent life-threatening cv risk factors. in our opinion, understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms that exacerbate the impact of covid-19 in patients with existing cv pathologies and lead to major cardiac complications is mandatory to design a truly cardioprotective therapy while waiting for the vaccine. fig. 1 simplified scheme showing the potential role and regulation of intracellular organelles as calcium stores involved in the activation of inflammasome and the following triggering of the cytokine storm. inset (top): the complex molecular mechanism at the plasma membrane level, underlying the different functional outcomes of covid-19 infection. vp viroporins, caa calcium antagonists, td tetrandrine, cc chloroquine, tpc two pore channels, tmprss2 serine protease, el endolysosomes, ace angiotensin-converting enzyme, at angiotensin ii receptor, ang angiotensin, apj apelin g protein coupled receptor, mas angiopoietin 1-7 receptor, e-vwf endothelial von willebrand factor, et1 endothelin 1, no nitric oxide . funding source had no such involvement in study design, in the collection, analysis, interpretation of data, in the writing of the report; and in the decision to submit the paper for publication.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.availability of data and material not applicable.code availability not applicable.consent for publication all the authors have read and approved the revised manuscript, and they are willing to publish it.purpose of review: there is increasing evidence indicating an association between several risk factors and worse prognosis in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), including older age, hypertension, heart failure, diabetes, and pulmonary disease. hypertension is of particular interest because it is common in adults and there are concerns related to the use of renin-angiotensin system (ras) inhibitors in patients with hypertension infected with covid-19. levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a protein that facilitates entry of coronavirus into cells, may increase in patients using ras inhibitors. thus, chronic use of ras inhibition could potentially lead to a more severe and fatal form of covid-19. in this review, we provide a critical review to the following questions: (1) does hypertension influence immunity or ace2 expression favoring viral infections? (2) are the risks of complications in hypertension mediated by its treatment? (3) is aging a major factor associated with worse prognosis in patients with covid-19 and hypertension? recent findings: despite the potential involvement of immune responses in the pathogenesis of hypertension, there is no evidence supporting that hypothesis that hypertension or ras inhibitors contributes to unfavorable outcomes in viral infections. future investigations adopting a strict protocol for confirming hypertension status as well as assessing associated comorbidities that may influence outcomes are necessary. from the therapeutic perspective, recombinant ace2 may serve as a potential therapy, but relevant studies in humans are lacking. definitive evidence regarding the use of ras inhibitors in patients with covid-19 is needed; 5 randomized trials examining this issue are currently underway. there is no current scientific support for claiming that hypertension or its treatment with ras inhibitors contribute to unfavorable outcomes in covid-19.is hypertension a real risk factor for poor prognosis in the covid-19 pandemic?since the first report of the new coronavirus pneumonia in wuhan, hubei, in december 2019 1 , the cumulative number of confirmed cases has exceeded 2 million worldwide. the cumulative death toll exceeded 100,000 by april 16, 2020, raising a serious global concern.according to previous reports, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is clinically manifested as, but not limited to, fever, cough, sputum, headache, fatigue, and diarrhea. most patients with covid-19 have comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and chronic liver disease 1-3 . the presence of comorbidities was shown to be related to high mortality among hospitalized patients with the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) infection [4] [5] [6] [7] . in patients with h7n9, comorbidities were considered as important factors for poor prognosis 8, 9 . similar conclusions have been reported in several clinical reports on patients with influenza 10, 11 or severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) 12 infections. the new coronavirus-19 is extremely contagious with an estimated basic reproduction number (ro) between 2 and 3 13, 14 , which is comparable to that of the sars-cov 15 . meanwhile, elderly people are more likely to be infected, and a considerable part of them carry up with chronic diseases 16 , while their own resistance to the disease is low, they are prone to develop into serious cases and have adverse outcomes 17, 18 . a large number of epidemiological studies have analyzed the proportion of comorbidities between the mild and severe groups, the proportion of comorbidities in the severe case group is higher than that in the mild [19] [20] [21] . however, clinical and epidemiological characteristics of patients with and without comorbidities have not been studied. further, the relationship between comorbidities and serious adverse outcomes of covid-19 remains unclear. in the present study, we analyzed different manifestations in patients with covid-19 based on the presence, type, and number of comorbidities, and assessed their relationship with the risk of serious adverse outcomes.in this large retrospective study, we collected the data of 856 patients diagnosed with covid-19 from january 17 to february 7, 2020, based on the chinese version of the covid-19 diagnosis and treatment program (6th edition) 22 . data on their clinical and epidemiological characteristics were collected by the health commission of zhejiang province, china. all patients were assigned to designated hospitals in the zhejiang province for diagnosis and treatment. the results of our analyses have been reported to the people's government of zhejiang province and will be shared with the world health organization. this study was approved by the clinical research ethics committee of the first affiliated hospital, college of medicine, zhejiang university (no. iit20200005c).epidemiology data, laboratory tests, clinical features, imaging data, treatment methods, and clinical outcomes of the patients were reported to the zhejiang health committee of china by the designated hospital.comorbidities were determined according to the patient's readme at the time of admission. the data were recorded in an electronic database by an independent researcher and verified by another experienced clinician. all patients underwent corresponding imaging examinations (chest radiograph/computed tomography) and conventional respiratory virus screening (including parainfluenza virus, avian influenza, adenovirus, sars, and mers) on admission. the clinical outcomes were followed up to february 7, 2020.comorbidity: the presence and the number of comorbidities were mainly depend on patients' self-report on admission, including hypertension, heart diseases, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), asthma, chronic liver disease, chronic kidney disease, malignant tumor, human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infection, hematologic disease, and other comorbidities that may have influence on the illness, including the use of immunosuppressants, tuberculosis,hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism，and cerebrovascular diseases.we divided covid-19 cases into severe and common groups. severe cases included severe and critically ill patients, while the common group included common types and patients with no pneumonia upon imaging on admission but confirmed by laboratory tests. the classification was based on the chinese version of the diagnosis and treatment of covid-19 (6th edition).the endpoint outcome comprised a composite endpoint, including admission to the icu owing to disease progression or failure of other organs and mechanical ventilation caused by respiratory failure, shock, and death.statistical analyses were performed using the spss software version 25.0. the normally distributed continuous measurement data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation, while non-normally distributed measurement data are expressed as median and quartile (q1-q3). categorical variables are expressed as number (%); t-test and chi-square test were used for comparisons between groups, while a non-parametric test was used as appropriate. statistical significance was defined by a two-sided α value of less than 0.05.to calculate survival time, the first time to reach the composite endpoint prevailed. the cox proportional hazard regression model was used to determine potential risk factors for reaching the composite endpoint. the results are expressed as hazard ratio (hr) and 95% confidence interval (ci). age and gender status were adjusted using the cox regression model.as of february 7, 2020, a total of 856 patients with covid-19 in the zhejiang province were included in this study. these patients comprised 417 (48.7%) female and 439 (51.3%) male; their median age was 46 (36-56) years. a total of 417 (48.7%) patients had a history of contact with the epidemic area, 366 (42.8%) had been in close contact with covid-19 patients, and 216 (25.2%) were family cluster cases. in total, 7.0% of the patients were current smokers. the most common symptoms on admission were fever (81.5%), cough (64.6%), and expectoration (33.9%). rare symptoms included fatigue (18%), sore throat (14.3%), muscle pain (11.2%), and headache (9.3%). the median time from disease onset to confirm the diagnosis was 4 (2-7) days. nearly 90% of the patients had changes in imaging on admission. severe cases accounted for 18% of the total patients, and 32 (3.7%) patients reached the composite endpoint during this study (table 1) . . patients with comorbidities were older than those without (55 ± 13.3 vs. 42.6 ± 14.6 years, p < 0.001). clinical manifestations, including hemoptysis (4.5% vs. 0.5%, p < 0.001), diarrhea (9.9% vs. 6.7%, p = 0.03), and shortness of breath (11.2% vs. 2.3%, p < 0.001), and imaging abnormalities (93.4% vs. 87.8%, p = 0.017) were more severe in the comorbidity group than those in the non-comorbidity group. ,82( 33.9%) cases are severe cases, while only 72(11.7%) in the group of non-comorbidity the differences were statistically significant. the rate of reaching the composite endpoint was significantly different between the comorbidity and non-comorbidity groups (9.1% vs. 1.6%, p < 0.001) ( table 1) .of the 242 patients with comorbidities, 90 had only one type of comorbidity, 97 had two comorbidities, and 55 had three or more comorbidities. the higher the number of comorbidities, the older were the patients (62.0  13.1 vs. 55.8  10.4 vs. 48.6  14.5 years for 3, 2, and 1 comorbidity, respectively, p < 0.001). the number of severe cases increased with the number of comorbidities (21.1% vs. 37.1% vs. 49.1%, p = 0.016),as well as the the number of patients reaching the composite endpoint (3.3%, 8.2%, and 20.0%, respectively). no significant difference was observed in the patients that reached the composite endpoints between the groups with one and two comorbidities (p = 0.154), while the number of patients with three or more comorbidities reaching the composite endpoints was significantly different from that reported in other two groups ( table  2) . we listed the clinical and epidemiological characteristics of some common comorbidities, including hypertension, diabetes, chronic hepatitis b, malignant tumors, heart disease, and chronic kidney disease. the incidence of severe disease was higher among patients with these comorbidities than in those without.severe covid-19 was detected in 59 (41.5%) and 95 (13.3%) patients with and without hypertension, 22 (34.4%) and 132 (16.7%) patients with and without diabetes, 7 (25.9%) and 147 (17.7%) with and without chronic hepatitis b, 5 (62.5%) and 149 (17.6%) with and without malignant tumor, 5 (38.5%) and 149 (17.7%)with and without heart disease, and 2 (28.6%) and 152 (17.9%) with and without chronic kidney disease (table 3) .during this study, 32 patients reached the composite endpoint., and all of them were admitted to the intensive care unit, 29 received invasive ventilation, 9 received extracorporeal membrane oxygenation( ecom), 2 received continuous renal replacement therapy(crrt), 4 experienced shock, and only 1 died. in comparison with the patients without comorbidities, those with comorbidities had a significantly higher risk of reaching the composite endpoint. as the number of comorbidities increased, the risk of reaching the composite endpoint also increased ( figure 1 ). after adjusting for age and gender status, we divided patients based on the type and number of comorbidities and performed a cox proportional hazard regression analysis ( figure 2 ). the results of the multivariate regression analysis showed that hypertension was the risk factor for the composite endpoint (hr 4.74, 95% ci: 2.22-10.09). we also divided the patients with hypertension into angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (acei)/angiotensin receptor blocker (arb) and non-acei/arb groups based on their medication and compared the epidemiology data, clinical characteristics, and prognosis. no significant difference was observed between the epidemiology data and clinical characteristics of these two groups (online supplement table e1 ). we used the cox regression analysis to explore the risk of reaching the composite endpoint in these two groups after adjusting for age and gender status, but no significant difference was found (online supplement table  e2 ). in comparison with the patients without comorbidities, those with two or more comorbidities had a higher risk of reaching the composite endpoint (hr 3.44, 95% ci: 1.31-9.08 for two comorbidities and hr 6.90, 95% ci: 2.69-17.69 for three or more comorbidities).this is a large multicenter retrospective study conducted on sars-cov-2 infection cases in zhejiang, well representing the epidemiological situation of covid-19 in central china. comorbidity has always been a risk factor for many diseases, including the pandemic sars 12 , mers 7 , h7n9 9 , or even common influenza 11 and community-acquired pneumonia 23 . patients with underlying diseases, in general, show worse outcomes than the otherwise healthy patients, and their resistance to most diseases is low. this situation promotes the progression of disease condition. in patients with covid-19, comorbidities are common. approximately 30%-50% of the patients were reported to have one or more comorbidities, the most common being hypertension (30%-50%), diabetes (8%-20%), cardiovascular disease (5%-20%), chronic liver disease (1%-5%), and chronic kidney disease (1%-4%) 3, 19, 24, 25 . patients with comorbidities have compromised immune status, decreased disease resistance, and are more likely to suffer from severe infection than those without comorbidities. our study describes the relationship between comorbidities and clinical outcomes of covid-19 that plays an important role in the clinical diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of covid-19. our results show that severe covid-19 is more common among patients with comorbidities than in those without any comorbidity, consistent with clinical manifestations, imaging findings and number of reaching the composite endpoint. differences were all statistically significant, corroborating the previous finding that comorbidity is a risk factor for patients with covid-19. further, many reports 16 have shown that advanced age is closely related to the severely poor prognosis of covid-19. those with comorbidities were generally older than patients without comorbidities (p < 0.001). this may be one of the factors contributing to the exacerbation of condition in patients with comorbidities.among the comorbidities evaluated in the present study, hypertension and diabetes were the most common and probably related to the high incidence of the disease in the entire population. we evaluated the relationship between different comorbidities and covid-19 outcomes using the cox regression analysis after adjusting for age and gender status. the results show that only hypertension (hr 4.74, 95% ci: 2.22-10.09), but not other comorbidities, was associated with covid-19 outcomes (p > 0.05). sars-cov-2 binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2. more and more scholars pay close attention to the effect in medications that act on the reninangiotensin aldosterone system to covid-19.we divided hypertension patients into acei/arb and non-acei/arb groups, and analyzed their epidemiology data, clinical characteristics, and prognosis. however, no significant difference was observed, consistent with the results of a previous report 26 . the impact of acei/arb drugs on covid-19 remains controversial 27,28 . given the relatively few cases except hypertension, the error may be related to the small sample size. further studies are warranted to determine the relationship between other comorbidities and serious adverse outcomes.we observed that the number of comorbidities was related to adverse outcomes of patients. the higher the number of comorbidities, the greater was the risk of adverse events (figure 1 ). the hr was 3.44 (95% ci: 1.31-9.08) for patients with two comorbidities and 6.90 (95% ci: 2.69-17.69) for those with three or more comorbidities; the p-value was less than 0.05. therefore, upon admission to a hospital, patients should be carefully interrogated about their existing comorbidities and then classified depending on the number of comorbidities. patients with many comorbidities had poor physical conditions and were at a high risk of adverse outcomes. therefore, more attention should be paid to the changes in the condition of covid-19 patients with underlying diseases. in particular, elderly patients with comorbidities should be more carefully monitored to prevent occurrence of serious adverse events.in summary, our report systematically describes the impact of the presence, type, and number of comorbidities on the clinical outcomes of patients with covid-19. the relationship between comorbidities and adverse outcomes was further clarified, which would be helpful for the prevention and treatment of the epidemic. this is the first comprehensive investigation on the comorbidities of patients with covid-19 in the zhejiang province and may represent the global scenario. our research has a few limitations, the most important being collection of information on comorbidities. considering the severity of the epidemic and the shortage of medical resources, some admitted patients (especially patients with mild infection) did not receive systemic imaging examination. the diagnosis rate of basic disease varied; hence, we mainly focused on the self-report of patients at the time of admission. however, some of the comorbidities were under-reported for various reasons such as economic conditions and lack of awareness on health. this may lower the significance of our statistics of comorbidities but not much from the actual situation because the proportion of comorbidities in our report is generally consistent with the existing literature in the country 3,25. additionally, our study was a retrospective analysis. since the error in data collection may slightly reduce some credibility, we need to consider prospective cohort studies to provide more reliable data in future. some patients continued to be hospitalized during this data is expressed as mean ± standard deviation, median with quartile (q1-q3), and number (%). data is expressed as mean ± standard deviation, median with quartile (q1-q3), and number (%).a) comparison of time-dependent risk of reaching the composite endpoints in patients with comorbidities (red curve) and without comorbidities (blue curve). b) comparison of time-dependent risk of reaching the composite endpoints among patients without comorbidity (blue curve), with 1comorbidity (red curve), 2 comorbidities (black curve) and with 3or more comorbidities (green curve).hypertensive disorders are the most common medical complications of pregnancy and a major cause of maternal and perinatal morbidity and death. 1 the detection of elevated blood pressure (bp) during pregnancy is one of the cardinal aspects of optimal antenatal care. routine prenatal visits have therefore traditionally involved assessment of weight, bp, urine protein by dipstick, and queries about symptoms suggestive of preeclampsia. with the outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) and the risk for person-to-person spread of the virus, there is a desire to minimize unnecessary visits to health care facilities. since bp measurement is an essential component of prenatal care, and given that hypertension-related issues affect a considerable proportion of pregnant women, it is critical to develop a safe approach to reducing frequency of prenatal visits, as well as develop approaches to address women who are at home or quarantined, who may have hypertension or signs and symptoms associated with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (hdp) that includes gestational hypertension (ghtn), preeclampsia, and superimposed preeclampsia.in planning the frequency of prenatal visits, it is important to appreciate the rate of ghtn and preeclampsia, as well as the likely timing of onset of these complications, in the obstetrical population. at the first prenatal visit, each woman should be classified as low risk or high risk for hdp. in general, healthy nulliparous women and multiparous women with no prior history of hdp with a singleton gestation are considered low risk with an overall rate of hdp of <10% (range: 2-5% for preeclampsia). 2 further, the onset of hdp in this group typically occurs at or beyond 37 weeks in approximately 75% of cases. in addition, the rate of hdp developing <34 weeks is <1%. 3 consequently, prenatal visits can be safely reduced in such women prior to 36 weeks of gestation.in contrast, women who are considered as high risk (those with previous history of hdp or with preexisting severe chronic hypertension) have a rate of hdp of 25 to 50%, and the onset of these complications typically occurs at <37 weeks in approximately 50% of cases. 4, 5 further, the rate of these complications developing at <34 weeks is approximately 10 to 15%. a review of conditions with a high risk for developing hypertensive disorders of pregnancy 5 are presented in ►table 1. consequently, prenatal visits, as well as obstetric provider contact, should be more frequent in such women.during this pandemic, all pregnant women should be encouraged to obtain a sphygmomanometer and bring the device to the office or clinic to ensure its accuracy. a device with an arm cuff is preferable; however, if these are unavailable, then a device with a wrist cuff is acceptable. if the patient cannot afford a sphygmomanometer or one is not provided by their insurance plan, then consideration can be given for bp determinations at the pharmacy. the important points for accurate clinical bp determination 6 as an outpatient are reviewed in ►table 2.it is important to make decisions based on clinical judgment and common sense. pregnant patients who are without known complications but have risk factors that require quarantine (recent travel to endemic areas or significant contact with an infected individual) and those with mild or asymptomatic covid-19 infection should delay antenatal visits for 14 days.the authors have previously reported that properly monitored outpatient management of nonsevere gestational hypertension/preeclampsia is associated with similar maternal and perinatal outcomes as compared with previously published results from inpatient management. 7, 8 hospitalization, however, is recommended for noncompliant patients or those who show worsening course as outpatients. pregnant women with suspected hdp due to hypertension and proteinuria or hypertension and signs and symptoms associated with the severe end of the disease spectrum (e.g., headaches, visual symptoms, epigastric pain, and pulmonary edema) should have an evaluation including complete blood count, serum creatinine level, and liver transaminases (aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase) 9, 10 further, if there is any evidence of disease progression or if • neither the patient nor the observer should talk during the measurement• the position of the arm can have a major influence on the measured bp• the patient should refrain from caffeine intake prior to bp measurements.• if the upper arm is below the level of the right atrium (when the arm is hanging down while in the sitting position), the readings will be falsely high (►fig. 1b)• if the arm is above the heart level, the blood pressure readings will be falsely low (►fig. 1b) note: adapted from pickering et al. 6 acute severe hypertension develops, prompt hospitalization is suggested. approximately 25% of women affected with hdp who develop one or more nonspecific symptoms that characterize the severe spectrum of the disease and signify the need for urgent evaluation and possible delivery, as described further.the mechanism for headache, as well as other cerebrovascular symptoms of preeclampsia, is poorly understood. the headache is usually of acute onset and described as being the worst headache ever. the headache may be temporal, frontal, occipital, or diffuse. although not pathognomonic, a feature that suggests preeclampsia-related headache rather than another type of headache is that it persists despite administration of over-the-counter analgesics such as acetaminophen in doses of 2 g/day. concerning signs and symptoms relating to headache in pregnancy and postpartum include worsening headaches in women with chronic headaches; headache characteristic (e.g., pain and pattern) different from usual headaches; and headache with altered mental status, seizures, papilledema, changes in vision, stiff neck, or focal neurological signs or symptoms. 11 visual abnormalities (scotomata, photophobia, and blurred vision) visual symptoms, when present, are also symptoms of the severe disease spectrum of preeclampsia. they are caused, at least in part, by retinal arteriolar spasm, macular edema, or vasogenic edema in occipital lobes.gastroesophageal reflux is common in pregnant women, especially at night. severe persistent right upper quadrant pain or epigastric pain unresponsive to medication and not accounted for by alternate diagnoses may be the presenting symptom of preeclampsia, particularly hellp (haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet count) syndrome. it is more significant when associated with abnormal liver enzymes.these include shortness of breath, retrosternal pressure or tightness in chest, dyspnea or orthopnea, and palpitations.patients monitored for hypertension as an outpatient should receive written instructions on the important signs and symptoms of disease progression and provided contact information to report the development of any concern for change in status. sample instructions for home management of patients with gestational hypertension/preeclampsia 12 are provided in ►table 3. home bp assessment should be discussed. methods by which bp measurements can be conveyed to the health care provider are provided in ►table 4. it is important to institute a process by which the appropriate provider is informed of the bp, particularly if outside a prespecified range, and that the information and interaction with the patient are documented in the medical record with suggestions for further bp determinations, timing of office visits, and confirmation that the patient remains a candidate for home management. the patient should be asked about the symptoms of severe preeclampsia at every encounter. it would be useful to have a check list that can be included in the record.• bp should be obtained thrice per day.& the first bp assessment should be made in the morning before breakfast (especially before any caffeinated beverages chronic hypertension affects up to 5% of pregnancies depending on the population studied, and its prevalence has risen over the past decade due to various factors including delayed childbearing, increasing prevalence of obesity, and increasing number of pregnancies with significant medical comorbidities such as pregestational diabetes, lupus, and renal disease. 1 as previously noted, each woman should be classified as low risk or high risk for hdp at the first prenatal visit. ►table 5 compares the risk of adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes between women with low-risk chronic hypertension versus those who are high risk. the decision to treat bp should consider the presence of maternal comorbidities, as well as level of maternal bp, at the time of initial visit. there is general agreement that women with comorbidities (diabetes mellitus, renal disease, or heart disease) and those with severe hypertension (systolic bp >160 mm hg or diastolic bp >105 mm hg) require antihypertensive therapy to keep maternal bp at a safe target range (systolic bp <140 mm hg and diastolic bp <90 mm hg). 1 in contrast, there is uncertainty regarding the optimal target goal bp to achieve in women with uncomplicated nonsevere hypertension during pregnancy. in general, the frequency of evaluation for women with low-risk chronic hypertension can be similar to those of normotensive pregnancies. this management may be table 4 methods by which blood pressure measurements can be conveyed to the health care provider• the patient may e-mail, text, video link, or phone the information to the office or clinic• the patient may take a cell phone picture of blood pressure recordings on an electronic sphygmomanometer and forward this to the office or clinic• information can be relayed directly to the office or clinic via a mobile application modified in instances where bp control requires medical intervention or fetal testing warrants closer follow-up. such circumstances include exacerbation of hypertension requiring treatment (systolic bp >160 mm hg and/or diastolic bp >105 mm hg), fetal growth restriction (estimated fetal weight <10th percentile for gestational age with abnormal umbilical artery doppler findings), or oligohydramnios (deepest vertical pocket <2 cm). 13 women with high-risk chronic hypertension require more intensive follow-up, given the increased risk in adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes and risk of further organ deterioration. in addition to the management of hypertension, any comorbid medical conditions should be adequately controlled, as pregnancy may aggravate preexisting condi-tions. liberal hospitalization to manage these morbidities may be needed. 13• blood pressure should be obtained twice per day & the first bp assessment should be performed at 8 to 9a.m. (especially before any caffeinated beverages).& the second bp assessment should be performed at 8 to 9 p.m.• follow blood pressure measurement guidelines as presented in ►table 2. • blood pressure measurements can be conveyed to the health care provider as outlined in ►table 4.instructions for response to blood pressure measurements are as above for patients with gestational hypertension/ preeclampsia. in the setting of chronic hypertension with the patient receiving antihypertensive therapy, however, consideration could be given to increasing the antihypertensive medication dose.given the limited information regarding the outcome of pregnancies complicated by covid-19 infection, it is important to continue to use clinical judgment in obstetrical management during this pandemic. if concerned, or believe that the patient needs closer follow-up, she should be scheduled accordingly. ►table 6 presents suggested antepartum and postpartum guidelines for the management of patients with concern for hdp. ►table 7 presents suggested timing of delivery during the covid-19 pandemic for patients with chronic hypertension, categorized by the classification of their chronic hypertension ultrasound is indicated to evaluate the amniotic fluid volume and estimate the fetal weight with the initial diagnosis of gestational hypertension or preeclampsia given the increased risk for oligohydramnios and fetal growth restriction in these patients. this is particularly true for preeclampsia that develops remote from term 14 due to reduced uteroplacental perfusion, but less likely in those patients with a diagnosis made near term the goal is to employ the maximum interval for follow up growth ultrasounds. further, an attempt should be made to combine imaging with a prenatal visit in the ultrasound suite to avoid waiting in a second waiting room and seeing another provider team, thereby reducing contact with the potentially infected individual there are no data from randomized trials on which to base recommendations for the optimal type and frequency of antepartum fetal monitoring. however, daily fetal movement counts seem prudent. weekly nonstress testing plus assessment of amniotic fluid volume, or weekly biophysical profiles should be performed at the time of diagnosis of ghtn/preeclampsia and continue until delivery. fetal testing should promptly be performed if there is an abrupt change in maternal conditionthe main objective of the management of severe preeclampsia must always be the safety of the mother and the fetus. although delivery is always appropriate for the mother, it might not be best for a very premature fetus. the decision between delivery and expectant treatment should take into consideration fetal gestational age, fetal status, and severity of maternal condition at the time of assessment including criteria used to make the diagnosis. the presence of severe preeclampsia mandates immediate hospitalization in the labor and delivery unit. 9 after initial clinical and laboratory evaluation, a decision must be made for immediate delivery vs expectant treatment. current guidelines from acog and smfm for management of severe preeclampsia suggest delivery after 34.0 weeks gestation. with the outbreak of covid-19, however adjustments to this algorithm should be considered including delivery by 30 0/7 weeks of gestation in the setting of severe preeclampsia (►fig. 2)magnesium sulfate is a widely used medication in labor and delivery. it is recommended for seizure prophylaxis in patients with severe features of preeclampsia. 10 however, magnesium sulfate therapy is not without risks. one major, albeit uncommon, side effect is respiratory depression. this can have serious implications for maternal outcomes, particularly for persons under investigation and known covid-19-positive patients with an already compromised respiratory status. for patients with preeclampsia or gestational hypertension without severe features, magnesium sulfate therapy should not to be administered. 1 in those with severe features, however, magnesium sulfate prophylaxis is indicated. as suggested by the results of the magpie trial, 15 an iv (intravenous) loading dose of 4 g magnesium sulfate over 15-20 min followed by an iv maintenance dose of 1 g/h could be used rather than a traditional higher loading (6 g) and maintenance doses (2 g/h). patients with severe features of preeclampsia and requiring ventilatory support given covid-19 infection should continue to receive intravenous magnesium sulfate for antiseizure prophylaxis as the respiratory rate can be adjusted with the settings of the mechanical ventilator.comprehensive counseling about the signs/symptoms of preeclampsia should be given on discharge following delivery with the outbreak of covid-19 and the risk for person-toperson spread of the virus, there is a desire to minimize unnecessary visits to health care facilities. pregnant patients who are without known complications but have known risk factors for covid 19 (recent travel to endemic areas or significant contact with an infected individual) and those with mild or asymptomatic covid-19 infection should delay antenatal visits for 14 days. women should be classified as low risk or high risk for hdp and adjustments can be accordingly made in the frequency of maternal and fetal surveillance. patient should be provided detailed instructions concerning their outpatient management but if there is any evidence of disease progression or if acute severe hypertension develop, then prompt hospitalization is suggested. (arbs) and direct renin inhibitors (dris). aceis enact their blood pressure-lowering effects by blocking the peptidyldipeptidase that hydrolyzes angiotensin i (a-i) to angiotensin ii (a-ii). in addition, it inactivates bradykinin, a vasodilating peptide promoting the release of nitrogen monoxide and prostacyclin. arbs have no effect on bradykinin metabolism and block the effects of a-ii more selectively than aceis. in detail, arbs determine their antihypertensive effect by preventing the binding of a-ii to the a-ii receptor type 1 (at 1 ). finally, dris exert blood pressure-lowering effects by decreasing plasma renin activity and inhibiting the conversion of angiotensinogen to a-i [5] .in vitro studies demonstrated that aceis and arbs can significantly increase the expression and activity of angiotensin-conversion enzyme 2 (ace2), highly expressed in the heart and lungs [6] . coincidentally, ace2 is the receptor-binding site for the spike protein of sars-cov-2 at the target cell [7] . hence, fang et al. [4] recently hypothesized in the lancet respiratory medicine that patients with cardiac diseases, hypertension, or diabetes mellitus treated with ace2-increasing drugs might be at higher risk for severe sars-cov-2 infection. accordingly, the authors suggested that calcium channel blockers (ccbs) may be a more suitable alternative antihypertensive treatment than arbs/ aceis because of their lack of increased ace2 expression or activity.on the other hand, recently published commentaries outlined the mechanisms by which raas inhibitors may be beneficial in patients with covid-19 and discussed the unclear effects of these drugs on ace2 levels and activity in humans, recommending against the suspension or withdrawal of raas blockers [8, 9] . we present here our contribution to the scientific debate, highlighting the importance of continuing acei/arb treatments and reporting several arguments against switching from aceis or arbs to other antihypertensive drugs and specifically to ccbs. italian society of pharmacology members are listed in acknowlegements.first, to date, there is no sound evidence from clinical studies that replacing aceis/arbs with other antihypertensive drugs, including ccbs, is associated with beneficial effects on either the prevention of covid-19 or the prognosis for infected patients. the scant available data are mostly derived from in vitro studies. for this reason, in nature cardiology, zheng et al. [2] reported, "whether patients with covid-19 and hypertension who are taking [an] ace inhibitor/arb should switch to another antihypertensive drug remains controversial, and further evidence is required" [2] .second, other studies carried out in sars-cov and probably generalizable to sars-cov-2 suggested, paradoxically, a protective effect of arbs against covid-19 [1] . the interaction of the coronavirus spike protein with ace2, its cellular-binding site, leads to ace2 downregulation. in turn, this results in excessive production of angiotensin by ace, whereas less ace2 is capable of converting it to angiotensin (1-7), an heptapeptide with vasodilator activity [1, 10] . it has been suggested that exaggerated stimulation of at 1 by a-ii determines increased pulmonary vascular permeability, thereby mediating increased lung pathology when the expression of ace2 is decreased [11, 12] . thus, higher ace2 expression following chronic treatment with arbs may protect patients infected with sars-cov-2 against acute lung injury rather than increasing the risk of developing covid-19.third, switching among different antihypertensive drugs in older patients with relevant comorbidities may put this very frail population at risk of developing adverse cardiovascular events such as uncontrolled hypertension/symptomatic hypotension or even deterioration of other chronic diseases. moreover, considering the proven effects of aceis and arbs in reducing mortality in cardiovascular diseases, the discontinuation of these therapies could increase the occurrence of negative outcomes in patients affected by cardiovascular diseases and covid-19 [13] .fourth, aceis and arbs are currently approved (with differences across various compounds) for the treatment of hypertension, heart failure and diabetic nephropathy and for secondary prevention after acute myocardial infarction, whereas ccbs and other antihypertensive drugs are not approved for all the same indications.finally, none of the drug regulatory agencies worldwide recommend switching from aceis/arbs to other antihypertensive drugs or vice versa during the covid-19 outbreak. instead, on 17 march 2020, the italian drug agency issued a warning against any change of antihypertensive therapies in patients with well-controlled hypertension, irrespective of the agents being used, because of the lack of clinical data [14] . ten days later, the european medicines agency advised that, since there is no clinical evidence that these drugs can worsen sars-cov-2 infections, it is important that patients do not discontinue their treatment with aceis or arbs and there is no need to switch to other medicines [15] . these recommendations are in line with the position statements of national/international scientific societies (e.g., european society of cardiology [16] , italian society of pharmacology [17], heart failure society of america, american college of cardiology and american heart association [18] , international society of hypertension [19] , european society of hypertension [20] ) that recommend continuing raas inhibitor therapy for patients who are currently prescribed such agents for indications for which it is known that these agents are safe and effective, such as acute and chronic heart failure [21] , acute myocardial infarction [22] and hypertension [23] .regarding the postulated protective effect, aceis/arbs should never be used in healthy people or patients who are not affected by diseases that are not approved indications as reported in the summary of product characteristics.no specific information has been described for dris. nevertheless, all the recommendations reported above can be extended to this class of raas inhibitors.in a scenario in which experimental clinical studies cannot rapidly shed light on the association between covid-19 and acei/arb use, real-world studies based on dedicated covid-19 patient registries, whenever available, or claims databases from countries with a high incidence of sars-cov-2 infection are urgently needed.in the absence of clinical evidence supporting any change in patients treated with aceis/arbs, clinicians should still follow the old principle "primum non nocere."pneumonia caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was first time reported on december 31, 2019. 1 since then, the covid-19 pandemic, disease caused by this virus, had spread around the world. until april 10, over 1.6 million confirmed cases in total and almost 100 000 deaths were identified worldwide. everything started from wuhan, hubei province, in china more than 4 months ago, and therefore practically, all relevant clinical data are coming from china. these findings are showing that arterial hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease are common comorbidities in patients with covid-19 (tables 1 and 2 ). even though the number of studies with follow-up is rather limited, these data are suggesting that hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease are underlying conditions associated with adverse outcome-admission in intensive care unit, mechanic ventilation, and death [6] [7] [8] [9] 13, 18 (table 3) . however, findings are inconsistent and data are more epidemiological than analytical. majority of studies did not analyze effect of many confounding factors, such as age, sex, and obesity, which could significantly change interaction between comorbidities and outcome. it is clear that sudden outbreak of covid-19 raised a great attention and forced rapid publication in order to explain epidemiology, therapeutic approach, and outcome. many parameters were not available, and inclusion of some risk factors, such as obesity, that would probably interfere with final results was not possible so far. therefore, one should be careful in interpretation of available data and indicating hypertension and diabetes as one of the most responsible risk factors, at least not in global population.the aim of this review was to summarize currently available data regarding the prevalence of diabetes in patients with covid-19 and its role in outcome in these patients. hence, a comprehensive systematic search was performed on pubmed, scopus, web of science, and google scholar, to find articles published until april 10, 2020.it is still unknown whether patients with diabetes have a higher susceptibility to covid-19, but there is an observation that the risk is higher for both infection and disease severity. however, the percentage of patients with diabetes varies from 3% to 21%. 16, 17 in two largest meta-analyses that included 46 248 and 76 993 covid-19 patients, respectively, diabetes was detected in 8.6% and 7.9%. 19, 20 however, it should be noted that large level of heterogeneity exists between published studies that differ in sample size, age of patients, severity of covid-19, hospital facilities, investigated comorbidities, therapeutic approach, and finally outcome.in one of the largest study published (n = 1099) so far, diabetes was present in 7.4% of covid-19 patients and it was significantly more prevalent in patients with severe form of disease and those who experienced primary outcome end point (admission to an intensive care unit, the use of mechanical ventilation, or death). 2 the same group of authors in a larger group of covid-19 patients (n = 1590) reported diabetes in 8.2%, and it was significantly more prevalent among covid-19 patients with severe form than in patients with non-severe form of disease (34.6% vs 14.3%). 11 the most recent study which included 1012 non-critically ill covid-19 patients reported diabetes in only 3% of patients. 17 even though the prevalence of diabetes was low, covid-19 patients with aggravation of illness during follow-up were more frequently diabetic in comparison with those who did not have complication during covid-19.lian et al 3 included 788 patients with covid-19 and divided patients into two groups: younger than 60 years and older than 60 years, thereby contributing to explain why diabetes is related to susceptibility and severity of covid-19. the authors showed that many comorbidities (hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), including diabetes, were more prevalent in patients older than 60 years than in patients younger than 60 years. 3 difference in age is probably one of the main reasons for risk that is ascribed to diabetes in patients with covid-19.studies that investigated cardiac injury in covid-19 patients, defined by increased cardio-specific enzymes, showed that diabetes was significantly more frequent among patients with cardiac injury than in patients without it. 4, 5 nevertheless, prevalence of hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, and chronic renal disease was significantly higher in patients who experienced cardiac injury, and it would be difficult to separate the effect of diabetes from other underlying diseases. moreover, there was a large difference in age between covid-19 patients with detected cardiac injury and those who did not have cardiac injury, which also could contribute to worse outcome and cardiac injury. 4, 5 the authors concluded that cardiac injury is common in covid-19 patients (20%-28%) and it is associated with significantly higher mortality in this population. 4, 5 guo et al 16 investigated the effect of diabetes on the progression and prognosis of patients with covid-19. in limited sample, it was found that serum levels of inflammation-related biomarkers such as il-6, c-reactive protein, serum ferritin and coagulation index, and d-dimer were significantly higher in patients with diabetes compared with those without, 16 which indicates that diabetic patients are predisposed to an hyper-inflammatory state that ultimately leads to prompt deterioration of covid-19. there was no significant difference in age between diabetics and non-diabetics, but diabetics had more frequently cardiovascular disease than their non-diabetic counterparts. 16 however, even when diabetic patients without other comorbidities were analyzed, the results remained the same-inflammatory and pro-coagulant factors were significantly higher in diabetic patients. among patients with diabetes, 29.2% were on insulin therapy and increased the dose of insulin after admission, whereas 37.5% were on oral antidiabetic therapy before admission and started insulin therapy after admission. 16 this means that patients had poor glycemic control during hospitalization.diabetes is hyper-inflammatory condition and seems that it may increase susceptibility for covid-19 independently of other underlying diseases. there are several possible mechanisms: (a) inflammation, (b) hyper-coagulable state, and (c) activation of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) and dysregulation of sympathetic nervous system. there is evidence that sars-cov, the novel coronavirus responsible for covid-19, uses ace2 on the surfaces of epithelial cells to bind and enter to infected cells. 24 ace2 is located in cardiac, kidney, lung, and intestinal tissues and converts angiotensin ii to angiotensin 1-7, which promotes vasodilation. the function of raas in diabetic patients is already significantly modified, 25 and acute change in activity of ace2 may be the final trigger for hyper-inflammatory and hyper-coagulable storm in covid-19.however, these are only hypotheses without reliable clinical evidence. some observations from the covid-19 pandemic indicated that raas inhibitors were more frequently taken by covid-19 patients with unfavorable outcome. 5 these raised large concerns about use of raas inhibitors, which are often prescribed to diabetic patients with or without concomitant hypertension, another frequent comorbidity in covid-19 patients. recent findings from covid-19 patients showed that raas inhibitors improve outcome in these patients, 26 and confirmed recent position statements from several societies who strongly recommended continuation of regular treatment with raas inhibitors.data regarding influence of diabetes on outcome in diabetic patients are still limited (table 3) predictors of mortality, whereas d-dimer >1 μg/ml was the only independent predictor from coagulable parameters. these findings are challenging the hypothesis that hyper-inflammation state in diabetic patients may be responsible for mortality of these patients in covid-19. nevertheless, the number of patients in this study is very limited (n = 51) and drawing conclusion is not an easy task.wu et al 18 compared covid-19 patients with and without acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and found that diabetes was a significant predictor of ards (hr 2.34; 95% ci: 1.35-4.05), but not of mortality (hr 1.58; 95% ci: 0.80-3.13). it should be underlined that multivariate analysis with adjustment for age, sex, and other possible confounding factors was not performed due to small sample size (n = 84).in meta-analysis that included 1558 patients with covid-19, it was found that diabetes, as well as hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, was associated with exacerbation and admission to intensive care unit. 23 in the only study that aimed to investigate the effect of diabetes on progression and prognosis of patients with covid-19 was reported significantly higher mortality among diabetic patients without other comorbidities (16.7% vs 0%). 16 however, diabetic patients were almost twice as old as non-diabetics (61 vs 32 years), which must be taken into consideration. the majority of inflammatory parameters (c-reactive protein, serum ferritin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and interleukin-6) and pro-coagulant factors (d-dimer and fibrinogen) were also significantly higher among diabetic patients without other comorbidities. 16 diabetic complications were more prevalent in patients who died, with borderline statistical significance. interestingly, ketoacidosis and infectious shock, conditions that would be assumed to be the most responsible for these findings, were not more prevalent among covid-19 patients with lethal outcome. 16 initiation of insulin after admission, which speaks in favor of poor glycemic regulation, was also not related to higher mortality. however, only 37 diabetic patients were included in this study and only 24 of them did not have other comorbidities, which is why this study may provide only directions for some future studies, but not conclusions. coronary artery disease, particularly asymptomatic form, which is frequently present in diabetic patients, could not be excluded as potential confounding factor, which is additional limitation.there are still many uncertainties whether diabetes interferes with sars-cov-2 and facilities the entrance of coronavirus in epi- there are a number of limitations in available data. the self-reporting of comorbidities on hospital admission, which was used in most of investigation, can cause significant under-reporting of comorbidities due to the lack of awareness and/or the lack of diagnostic testing, which could further interfere with the relationship between comorbidities and clinical outcome. furthermore, follow-up was short and some patients remained in the hospital when data were analyzed, meaning that actual outcome is unknown, which directly influenced the influence of diabetes on severity and outcome in covid-19 patients is not clear because of large gap in evidence. it is not known which antidiabetic therapy was used in diabetic patients, how many patients were untreated, and how many had uncontrolled diabetes.obesity, as one of the most important comorbidities in diabetic patients, has not been investigated at all. large studies with comprehensive analysis of all risk factors and longer follow-up are necessary to answer all questions that have been raised, and we should not be surprised if upcoming results from western countries that are currently affected by covid-19 will be different from currently available data. nevertheless, patients with diabetes and hypertension, particularly in advanced age, should have priority once the vaccine becomes available.no conflict of interest.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6235-5152the pandemic of covid-19 has been taking lives worldwide. it caused by a novel coronavirus which human being are lack of defensive function in whole population. it targets human's lung and causes serious damage of lungs. based on early reports, for people with underlying heart issues, the concerns are serious. it appears people over 65 with coronary heart diseases or hypertension is more likely to be infected and to develop more severe symptoms. in addition, some of hospitalized covid-19 patients had cardiovascular diseases in china. as characteristic analysis of covid-19 patients, hypertension and severe myocardial damage contribute to severity [1] and mortality of covid-19 patients [2] . therefore, to better understand the development of covid-19 and the impacts of cardiovascular diseases will add valuable measures to the management of covid-19 patients.the coronavirus is a kind of positive-chain single-stranded rna virus with a diameter of 80~120 nm, which can be classified as α, β, δ, γ type. coronavirus has the characteristics of various strains, wide distribution and cross species. the covid-19 belongs to the β genus and has a capsule on which mushroom-like protein spike make the virus crown-like, round or oval size, and are often pleomorphic and with a diameter of 60-140 nm. detection of viral genes showed that the nucleotide sequences of covid-19 genome share 86.9% identity with severe acute respiratory syndrome virus (sars-cov) genome [3] . current studies have shown that the covid-19 transmission route is bat-human, and intermediate host is to be studied; it was transmitted by mainly respiratory droplets, as well as transmitted through contact during human-human transmission [4] .2 potential mechanism of cardiovascular diseases induced by covid-19it has been confirmed that a portion of the region at the amino terminal of sars-cov spike protein could bind to human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2(ace2) to mediate the fusion of virus and host cell [4] . covid-19 are likely to have similar infection pathways to sars-cov, in other words, ace2 may also be the binding receptor of covid-19. ace2 are homologous enzymes of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace), both of which are important components of the renin-angiotensin system (ras).renin hydrolyzes angiotensinogen to angiotensin i (ang i), that then is converted to angiotensin ii (ang ii) by ace. the ang ii leads to vasoconstriction, elevated blood pressure and vascular remodeling by binding to angiotensin type ii 1 receptor (at1r). ace2 can act on ang i and generate ang (1-9), then they can generate ang (1-7) through dependent or independent ace2 pathways, or ace2 can directly hydrolyze ang ii to ang (1-7), in which ang (1-7) can bind to g protein-coupled mas receptors to mediate vasodilation, antioxidant stress; inhibit cell proliferation; protect vascular endothelium damage as well as other physiological functions, like delaying or reversing vascular remodeling and protecting the cardiovascular system. ace/ang ii/at1r axis and ace2/ang (1-7)/mas axis antagonize and balance each other to maintain the dynamic balance of human vascular system. ace2 is expressed in human alveolar epithelial cells, and i which is not only the gateway of virus invasion, but also mediates lung injury and lung failure caused by virus infection. clinical observations showed that plasma ang ii levels increased significantly in covid-19 patients [5] , which further suggests that covid-19 binding to ace2 leads to excessive release of ang ii through ras, which in turn burdens heart and vascular system, by increasing heart loading, eventually cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and high blood pressure.virus replicates in cells after its fusion with host cells, the invasion of lung surface cells directly causes lung inflammation; and the invasion of cardiomyocytes will lead to edema, degeneration and necrosis of cardiomyocytes. meanwhile pro-inflammatory cytokines are released following cell lysis, such as interleukin the lung injury caused by covid-19 leads to hyoxemia, the partial pressure of circulating oxygen and oxygen saturation decrease continuously, which lead to the accumulation of oxygen free radicals, lactic acid and other metabolites. again，by circulating around whole body, myocardial cell injury becomes inevitable.in order to ensure the supply of systemic cell metabolic energy demand, the heart pump blood is intensified, and prone to cardiac dysfunction and heart failure. in addition, hypoxemia is also one of the inducing factors of inflammatory response, which can promote the formation of inflammatory storm to a certain extent [8] .the first and most strong reaction of virus invasion is the activation the human immune and inflammatory responses. the interactions among tissues, organs and pathogens are a complex stress process, especially severe infection. at the same time, the emotional response of human like anxiety, fear et al also increases the stress of patients. in the process, catecholamine is released in large quantities, and plasma catecholamine content is related to blood pressure level, blood perfusion, coronary heart disease and sudden cardiac death. high catecholamine has direct myocardial toxicity, which can lead to microcirculation disturbance, vasospasm and arrhythmia [9] . 7 the first most important clinical observations pointed to that a few patients infected with covid-19 might have no sign of respiratory symptoms. patients complained with palpitation, chest tightness, shortness of breath after exercises et al.as soon as such patients were confirmed or suspected as covid-19, a sudden acute myocardial infarction, or heart failure will occur immediately. it is so important to early identify those patients with acquired quarantine measures.when covid-19 patients show increased respiratory rate, lower blood pressure and even shock, electrocardiogram (ecg) with prolonged qrs interval, the clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients showed that hypertension was closely related with the severity of covid-19 infection; 20%-30% in in-patients, 58.3% in the intensive care unit (icu) patients, and 60.9% in the death cases. it has been known that covid-19 infects human by combining the spike protein on its surface with the ace2 on the alveolar cell membrane, which in turn activates the immune system and releases cytokines and inflammatory factors. ace2 is an important protective protein in human body; covid-19 infection causes down-regulation of ace2 level in the body, but has no obvious effect on ace [9, 10] .the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (acei)/angiotensin receptor antagonist (arb) is associated with ras regulation. animal studies have shown that acei/arb drugs can significantly increase the expression level and ace2 biological activity in rat cardiomyocytes [11, 12] . it is unclear whether acei/arb application will up-regulate the expression and activity of ace2 in lung tissue. therefore, there is no evidence that acei/arb increases susceptibility to covid-19 or lung damage following infection.high blood pressure patients who are currently receiving acei/arb treatment or other antihypertensive drugs are advised not to change the treatment plan without 9 clear contraindications or serious adverse reactions, so as not to affect blood pressure homeostasis and increase the risk of hypertension emergencies. patients with both hypertension and covid-19, their treatments with acei/arb depend on their conditions. for patients with mild illness who have been given long-term medication of acei/arb, they may have to continue it, while for those who have severe or critical illness; the treatment plan should be decided after careful monitoring of vital signs, hemodynamics and damage to target organs. to avoid dry cough caused by acei, covid-19 infection patients are recommended that the use of the acei should be delayed.the american heart society (acc) published a clinical bulletin cardiac implications of novel wuhan coronavirus , and stated that covid-19 has potential effects on the heart, especially in patients with cardiovascular disease.among covid-19 patients, there were about 50% diagnosed with chronic diseases, 40% with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, and patients with chronic or potential diseases, such as obesity, hypertension, diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and chronic kidney disease, have a higher risk of complications or death after infection. virus infection can destroy the stability of atherosclerotic plaque and promote the occurrence of coronary atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease.some experts suggest that, during the outbreak, people with previous cardiovascular diseases should strictly accept tailored and optimized drug treatments to provide additional protection, including statins, β receptor blockers, acei drugs and aspirin, in accordance with doctor's advice and guidance [12] .people with basic cardiovascular disease are more likely to be infected with the virus and with poor prognosis, and the virus infection can also lead to the deterioration of basic heart disease. covid-19 patients who have been complicated with cardiovascular basic diseases, are recommended to give priority to treatment, meanwhile pay attention to vigilance against the recurrence or aggravation of the original basic diseases [8] [9] [10] .above all, although the pathogenic mechanism of covid-19 has not been fully elucidated, ace2 is currently found to be a key molecular target for covid-19 occurrence and progression, and the heart and lung tissues are both important target organs for covid-19. the hypoxemia, respiratory distress, inflammatory storms caused by covid-19 have adverse effects on the heart, and we should pay more attention to the cardiovascular damage induced by covid-19. early identification, timely and effective treatment, maintenance of hemodynamics and electrophysiological stability are of great significance to alleviate the disease, save lives, and ensure long-term prognosis.the 2019/2020 emergence of the novel covid-19 disease and its swift global expansion represents a health emergency for all of humanity. this novel virus, which causes severe acute respiratory disease, is believed to be a member of the same family of coronaviruses as the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [1] . unprecedented efforts are currently being made to identify the risk factors that increase the severity of the disease. the world health organisation (who) has suggested that patients with certain medical conditions and elderly people are at greatest risk of developing more severe disease [2] . as of june 13, 2020, over 7.6 million people have been infected and 425,800 have died from the disease. the majority of deaths are thought to have associations with the existence of one or more comorbidity. in general, it is believed that patients with compromised immune system are especially at high risk [3] . a number of researchers have examined the clinical/epidemiological characteristics of patients suffering covid-19, but there has been insufficient investigation regarding mortality risk factors [4] . the identification of the principal risk factors and employing appropriate clinical interventions to mitigate them could save numerous lives. numerous studies indicate that kidney disease, copd, coronary heart disease, liver disease, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension are amongst the most important risk factors for covid-109. this paper will undertake a systemic review of the literature to illuminate the way in which the impact of the covid-19 virus can be made more severe by the existence of such comorbidities and extant conditions.this research looked for all relevant published articles between the dates of december 1, 2019, and may 20, 2020, i.e. those that were related to comorbidity and its influence on the severity of covid-19. papers were excluded if they were related to the adult patients, if they were not written in english, if they had not been peer reviewed, or if they were not original (e.g. reviews, editorials, letters, commentaries, or duplications). papers mainly focused on severe vs nonsevere groups of patients were considered. severe group are those who develop severe illnesses. these cases are more likely to result in icu admission or death.a search was undertaken on the covid-19 open research dataset (cord- 19) , which is regularly updated [5] . this dataset contains more than 128,000 scholarly articles; 59,000 of these articles have full text that relates to coronavirus, sars-cov-2, and covid-19. a search engine running over the bm25 search index was created so that all articles in this dataset could be screened [6]. the bm25 retrieval function creates a document ranking for a dataset on the basis of whether or not searched terms appear in the documents, no matter how proximate they may be to each other. indexing of the papers occurs through simple application of preprocessing functions that clean and tokenize abstracts. having indexed all documents, document vectors were created through loading optimized cached json tokens and subsequent application of a document similarity index founded on annoy [7] . annoy is a c++ library that has python bindings for searching for documents within a space that make a close match to a specific query. this is an efficient and simple process as it creates substantial read-only file-based data structures used with memory mapping allowing several processes to work with identical data. more detail on this implantation can be found at http://github.com/dgunning/cord19.articles were then filtered employing questions and keywords such as "effects of diabetes on covid/normal coronavirus/sars-cov-2/ncov/covid-19 disease severity?" this search was undertaken for every comorbidity under consideration in this research ( figure 1 ). cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06. 18.20134478 doi: medrxiv preprint additionally, an independent search was undertaken by two researchers (nz and ea), who systematically examined the pubmed, europe pmc, and google scholar databases. these searches obtained information regarding name of author, year of publication, publication name, age, gender, severity/non-severity of the disease, and the presence of any clinical symptoms, i.e. chest tightness/pain, respiratory failure/ards, dyspnoea, myalgia/fatigue, diarrhea, cough, or fever. where either vital or non-vital information was absent, requirement for admission to icu was employed to indicate how severe the disease was.the articles that remained underwent independent screening once more by the two researchers (nz and ea). any disagreement was settled either by consensus or by the casting vote of a third researcher (si). research was completed on may 20 th , 2020; the stages of this systemic literature search are illustrated in figure 2 .meta-analysis was undertaken employing a python library "meta". odds ratios (ors) were employed for describing the risk factors of various comorbidities for patients with severe disease compared to those with mild disease. due to internal and external heterogeneities, random effect modeling was employed for estimation of average effects and their precision, offering a more cautious estimate regarding the 95% confidence intervals (cis). statistical heterogeneity was assessed using the i 2 statistic.machine learning techniques based on regression, e.g. support vector machine (svm) [8] , linear regression, multi-perceptron [9] , random forest [10] , and attribute selection techniques such as wrapper subset evaluator [11] , correlation ranking filter, and relieff ranking filter [12] as implemented in weka [13] were employed for determination of how useful and significant different elements were in terms of the prediction of levels of severe instances of covid-19. consideration was only given to the conditions kidney disease, coronary heart disease, copd, liver disease, cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes mellitus, and hypertension. clinical symptoms that were added to consideration as independent attributes were diarrhea, chest tightness/pain, respiratory failure, dyspnoea, fatigue, coughing, and fever, incubation period, current smoking status, and patient gender. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.18.20134478 doi: medrxiv preprint results 303 articles were found through the search of europe pmc, pubmed, and the covid-19 database; 110 of these were excised as they were duplicates. in total 74 text articles were examined to see if they were eligible once 125 articles had been removed due to the fact that they were not englishlanguage articles, did not have a full text, were duplicates, were editorials, were letters, were reviews, were irrelevant, or not peer-reviewed. ultimately, the meta-analysis group comprised 12 articles that met all quantitative and qualitative standards.as table 1 shows, the median age for severe cases was 58.8 years, and for non-severe cases 48.5 years; 53.55% of patients were male. the meta-analysis demonstrated that the highest levels of comorbidity were with hypertension (22.07%), diabetes (11.34%), cardiovascular disease (10.76%), liver disease (6.31%), coronary heart disease (5.52%), kidney disease (3.82%), and copd (2.53%). in terms of clinical symptoms, the most common were fever (74.52%), cough (62.15%), myalgia/fatigue (38.77%), dyspnoea (33.9%) respiratory failure/ards (20.6%), diarrhea (11.21%) and chest tightness/pain (16.82%). meta-analysis indicated that neither length of incubation period nor current smoking status had any associations with disease severity. 32 ], p = 0.0006; i2: 0%). no significant correlation was found between disease severity and kidney or liver disease. the i 2 test for heterogeneity ranged between nought percent and 62%, indicating a fair level of statistical heterogeneity. with copd and coronary heart disease, i 2 was equal to 0%, meaning no heterogeneity can be found, making this research adequately homogenous. . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 20, 2020. . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 20, 2020. fig. 3 . forest-plots indicate that the comorbidities diabetes mellitus, hypertension, coronary heart disease, and cardiovascular disease had associations with composite poor outcomes, severe covid-19, and icu care requirements. this is not true of cancer, liver disease, and kidney disease patients.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 20, 2020. for evaluation of publication bias in the article in the meta-analysis, we employed the r metapackage for visualization of the funnel plots. the outcomes of publication bias are shown in figs. 5 and 6.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.18.20134478 doi: medrxiv preprintcoronary heart disease cardiovascular disease this analysis employed the seven-machine learning/feature selection techniques outlined in the methodology section indicating that diabetes was listed in the top 10 crucial attributes for 6 techniques, and then heart (5/7), hypertension (4/7), and copd (4/7). clinical conditions like cough (6/7), fever (5/7), chest pain (4/7), and fatigue (4/7) are similarly listed in the top 10 important attributes.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.18.20134478 doi: medrxiv preprintthis research has offered a comprehensive vision review/meta-analysis regarding the influence of comorbidities, e.g. diabetes and hypertension, on the severity of covid-19. the meta-analysis employed data gathered from 12 studies covering the 4101 patients in chinese hospitals with a covid-19 diagnosis confirmed by laboratory. patients from the severe group were all higher age (median age 58.8) than the patients in the non-severe group (median age 48.5). there were more males than females in the study (2196 males, 1702 females). two of the studies (21 and 24) indicated a significant correlation between gender and disease severity. every study examined agreed that being female has no significant correlation with disease severity (or 0.74; 95% ci: 0.61-0.89); rather, as with sars-cov and mers-cov patients [26] , there is simply a greater likelihood of infection for males as they generally have higher exposure levels.meta-analysis of comorbidity found that diabetes mellitus (11.34%) and hypertension (22.07%) are two of the most prevalent conditions in this patient cohort; this almost exactly parallels the levels of hypertension and diabetes amongst the population of china as a whole (hypertension 23.2% [27] , diabetes mellitus 10.9% [28] [29] found that human pathogenic coronaviruses, e.g. sars-cov and sars-cov-2 achieve binding with target cells using angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which originates from epithelial cells in the blood vessels, kidneys, intestines, and lungs [30] . ace2 levels are considerably higher for patients suffering type i or type ii diabetes; because of this they are given treatment with ace inhibitors and/or angiotensin ii type-1 receptor blockers (arbs). these medications are also used in the treatment of hypertension, and this causes an upregulation of ace2 [31] . ace2 may also be increased using either ibuprofen or thiazolidinediones. higher levels of ace2 would therefore promote covid-19 infection. thus we agree with the hypothesis that treating hypertension or diabetes with ace2-stimulators could predispose patients to more severe covid-19. we thus concur with fang et al [29] that patients with diabetes, hypertension, or cardiac disease being medicated with ace2-increasing medication must be regarded as having a greater risk of developing severe covid-19 and so they should be closely monitored for the effects of self-medication.zhao q et al, in a recent review [32] found that extant copd makes it four times more likely that severe covid-19 will develop. these authors also examine the influence of smoking in covid-19 severity, coming to the conclusion that there is no significant correlation. this accords with the findings of this meta-analysis. there has always been an assumption that smoking may have an association with less favorable disease outcomes, as there is copious research regarding the detrimental effects of smoking on lung health and the causal correlation between it and many different forms of respiratory disease [33] . furthermore, smoking is injurious to the immune system and the body's ability to respond to infection, which means that smokers are more susceptible to contracting infections [34] . this accords with this paper's meta-analysis, although, as lippi g and henry bm [35] indicate, more research will be necessary as further evidence becomes available; from the limited data available at present, and while acknowledging that the findings above have not been adjusted for other elements that may influence the disease pathway, it seems probable that smoking has a correlation with more severe undesirable outcomes in covid-19 cases.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 20, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.18.20134478 doi: medrxiv preprint while patients exhibiting abnormal liver results are regarded as being significantly more likely to develop severe pneumonia, and employing ritonavir or lopinavir makes patients four times more likely to suffer liver injury [36] , this meta-analysis did not find a significant correlation between liver disease and negative outcomes. this accords with recent research from [37) , which stated that while it is common for covid-19 patients to exhibit abnormal liver function index, this is not a significant factor in covid-19 patients, and it may not be associated with serious negative clinical outcomes.the study by guan w et al [19] was the only one of the 12 articles under review that found a significant correlation between kidney disease and covid-19 severity; examining the articles in total, no significant correlation is found (p = 0.0476). the clinical symptoms that are most frequently exhibited are fever (74.52%), cough (62.15%), myalgia/fatigue (38.7%), dyspnoea (33.9%), respiratory failure/ards (20.6%), diarrhea (11.21%), and chest tightness/pain (16.82%). this accords with the majority of published research. in terms of heterogeneity, in the majority of cases zero or low heterogeneity was displayed by the i 2 , so there is relative homogeneity in the majority of cases examined for this research.this meta-analysis has certain limitations that could be mitigated in future research: firstly, only patients in chinese hospitals were included in the studies under review, and generalisability can only be assumed if research including other populations is incorporated; secondly, the presence of multiple comorbidities in single patients has not been considered (this is an element virtually every other review as overlooked also); finally, this meta-analysis does not encompass laboratory, radiographic, clinical, or demographic data.linked by different pathways to have the same physiological effect.this flexibility helps the body respond quickly and coordinately to specific stimuli, from the whole body to a local area and plays an essential role in maintaining homeostasis. this paper will specifically examine the organ protection of ace2 in the body and discuss its potential role for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19).ace2 is a homolog of ace and was discovered in 2000. 3 despite the similarities between ace and ace2, the functions of these two enzymes are entirely different. ace2 is active in most tissues and is widely distributed in the heart, kidney, lung, and testis. [3] [4] [5] [6] is widely present in human alveolar epithelial cells and small intestinal epithelial cells, as well as in arterial and venous endothelial cells and arterial smooth muscle cells. epidermal basal cell layer of skin and basal layer of the nonkeratinized squamous epithelium of nasal, oral mucosa, and nasopharynx have ace2 expression. ace2 is more strongly expressed in type ii epithelial cells. glomerular tubules show ace2 low, glomerular mesangial and glomerular endothelial cells do not express ace2, kupffer cells and hepatocytes, spleen, thymus, lymph nodes, bone marrow, and b and t lymphocytes and macrophages do not show ace2. 7,8 ace2 tissue activity is higher than its plasma activity. 9 its activity can not be inhibited by traditional angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis). 3 ace2 has a high affinity for ang ii, 10 and its catalytic efficiency for ang ii is 400 times greater than that for ang i. ace2 may show differences in different ages and sexes. 11, 12 3 | ace2 and acute lung injury, sars coronavirus lung tissue has high ras activity and is the leading site of ang ii synthesis. ang ii is an effective pulmonary vasoconstrictor.ras is activated during hypoxia. ang ii can not only promote the growth response of vascular smooth muscle cells but also directly promote vascular remodeling and prevent pneumonia and shunts related to lung injury. 13 however, ang ii can also promote the occurrence of pulmonary edema and impair lung function. 14 acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is the most severe form of acute lung injury. it is characterized mainly by increased pulmonary vascular permeability and pulmonary edema. it is often induced by sepsis, aspiration, and pneumonia (including that caused by sars coronavirus, bird flu, and human influenza viruses). it is a clinical, high-death-rate disease. ace2 is highly expressed in the lung, and imai et al 14 ace2 is also one of the primary receptors for sars-cov invasion into the human body. 15 what is puzzling is that sars-cov infection leads to highly lethal pneumonia compared with other common cold symptoms after other coronavirus infections. the researchers found that sars-cov-infected or recombinant sars-spike protein-treated wild-type mice exhibited significantly reduced ace2 expression in the lungs. these mice showed increased severity of pathological conditions in acute lung injury.treating ace2 ko mice with sars-spike protein did not aggravate ards symptoms. therefore, the downregulation of ace2 expression in sars-cov infection may play a causal role in the pathogenesis of sars, which provides a reasonable explanation for the progression of sars patients into ards. the recent outbreakcausing novel coronavirus pneumonia (covid-19) virus (2019-ncov, sars-cov-2) has also been shown to invade human alveolar epithelial cells through mainly ace2. 16 covid-19 ards patients and sars patients have typical ards pathology in the lung. 17 we believe that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov may share similar pathogenesis and pathological manifestations.f i g u r e 1 classical and counterregulatory ras. ace, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ace2, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2; ang 1-7, angiotensin 1-7; ang i, angiotensin i; ang ii, angiotensin ii; ang iii, angiotensin iii; at1r, type 1 angiotensin ii receptor; masr, mas proto-oncogene receptor; ras, renin-angiotensin system 4 | risk factors for covid-19 prognosis and ace2in the early outbreak of covid-19, epidemiological analyses of 99 patients 18 and 138 patients 19 showed that the average age of patients was close to 56 years and that the incidence of infections in men was higher than that of infections in women.nearly half of the cases were complicated by chronic underlying diseases (hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, etc). 24 studies have shown that the protective mechanism of ace2 against hypertension is most likely achieved by the degradation of ang ii. 25 studies by ferrario et al 26 and others showed that ace2 levels increased by 4.7 and 2.8 times when blood pressure decreased after applying aceis (lisinopril) and arbs (losartan) to rats. ace2 affects not only the development of hypertension but also potentially affects its response to treatment. in ras-blocked spontaneously hypertensive rats, inhibition of the vascular effects of ang 1-7 may reduce the antihypertensive response to these drugs. 24 animal experiments have found that ang 1-7 infusion treatment can significantly improve vascular endothelial function and inhibit atherosclerotic lesion development in ang 1-7 transgenic apolipoprotein e knockout (apoe ko) mice receiving atherogenic high-fat diets. 27 studies by thomas et al 28 provided direct evidence for the occurrence and development of ace2 in atherosclerotic plaques. it was also found that the ras blockade could prevent atherosclerosis in apoe/ace2 double knockout mice. this study provided the basis for acei combined with ace2 treatment to reduce atherosclerosis. ace2 can also antagonize cardiac fibrosis and ventricular remodeling caused by the long-term effects of ang ii. wysocki et al, 29 kassiri et al, 30 and others provided strong evidence for the direct roles of ace2 and ang 1-7 in ventricular remodeling expression and regulation. in diabetic nephropathy, downregulation of renal tubular ace2 is associated with proteinuria and tubular damage, 31 and further inhibition of ace2 aggravates renal damage. 32 rhace2 can reduce blood pressure while reducing renal damage. 33 as ace2 provides a pathway for sars-cov-2 to invade the body, it increases the chance of viral infection. however, aceis do not directly affect ace2 activity. the use of aceis to instead increase ace2 activity has been shown in animal experiments. this mixed-use enhances cardiovascular protection. therefore, we do not consider it appropriate for patients with covid-19 to discontinue long-term ras blockers. 34, 35 to determine whether acei/arb drugs can be used in patients who lack traditional indications, prospective controlled studies are needed to provide evidence.covid-19 prognosis is related to age and sex. the expression of ace2 decreases with increasing age. ace2 expression is higher in young people than in elderly individuals and higher in females than in males. 11, 12 this pattern does not match the characteristic of severely ill covid-19 patients being mostly elderly males. we believe that whether the level of ace2 expression is high or low is not a key factor affecting the prognosis of patients with covid-19. the relationship between sex and prognosis requires additional data to verify.the prognosis of severely ill patients with covid-19 may be related to the decrease in ace2 activity in elderly patients with chronic underlying diseases. sars-cov-2 infection reduces ace2 activity and receptor consumption, further exacerbating pathophysiological mechanisms, such as ang ii/ace2 regulation imbalance (showed in figure 2 ). there are several potential approaches to address ace2-mediated covid-19, such as spike protein-based vaccine (rely on the fact that ace2 is the covid-19 receptor), inhibition of transmembrane protease activity (essential for entry through interaction with ace2 receptor), blocking ace2 receptor, and delivering the soluble form of ace2. many studies have been conducted to explore the therapeutic potential of ace2. most likely the most clinically significant potential is the cardioprotective effect of rhace2 itself, which has been proven, as it can further enhance the vascular protective effect in patients using acei or arb drugs. 1, 36 forty-four patients 37 with ards were well tolerated after using rhace2, and they are most likely to represent the first clinical application in the field of ards.ace2 is an essential part of the ras, and it has extensive vascular and organ protection functions in hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and ards. similar to sars-cov, sars-cov-2 also invades the human body through ace2.according to existing research, men over 60 years old with chronic underlying diseases (hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, etc) and secondary ards carry risk factors affecting the prognosis of covid-19. there is currently no effective drug for the treatment of covid-19, and we speculate that ace2 spike protein-based vaccine and rhace2 may become one of the most promising approaches for future treatment and improve the prognosis of patients with covid-19.this study was supported by the national natural science foundation of china (#81870417 to yw) and 13th five-year national science and technology major project (#2018zx10302206-001-007 to yw, #2017zx10203202 to g-qw).the novel coronavirus covid-19 outbreak, first reported on 8 december 2019 in hubei province in china, was designated as a pandemic by the world health organization (who) on 11 march 2020. this disease, recognized as an infection with a new betacoronavirus by dr zhang jixian from hubei provincial hospital of integrated chinese and western medicine, has been spreading exponentially in almost all countries around the world. the epicentre shifted from china to europe in february/march 2020 and then to the usa in march/april 2020. current data presenting information on international case numbers and case fatality are provided by the johns hopkins university (jhu) coronavirus resource center (https://www.arcgis.com/apps/opsdash board/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6). 1, 2 there are several other web-based resources that provide informative graphics on the spread of the disease and the outcomes. the pandemic of covid-19 has multiple medical, psychological, and socio-economic consequences. covid-19 represents probably the greatest threat that societies will face in the 21st century. therefore, understanding its pathophysiology and clinical implications, and development of novel preventive and therapeutic strategies are of primary importance.based on reviewing the available data in the public databases, the risk of infection and mortality increases with advancing age and shows sexual dimorphism. male elderly individuals are at the highest risk of infection, as well as death.despite the tropism for the lungs where it causes interstitial pneumonitis, in the most severe cases multiorgan failure develops. the cardiovascular (cv) system appears to have complex interactions with covid- 19 . published reports, medrxiv, biorxiv, and personal communications and experience of the co-authors detail evidence of myocardial injury in 20-40% of hospitalized cases manifesting as cardiac chest pain, fulminant heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias, and cardiac death. indeed, symptoms of cardiac chest pain and palpitations are the presenting features in some patients. [3] [4] [5] [6] while covid-19 is non-discriminatory, involving both healthy persons and those with comorbid conditions, approximately half of those admitted to hospitals in huabei province with covid-19 had known comorbidities. the number of patients with comorbid conditions increased to about two-thirds in those requiring intensive care unit (icu) admission or those that did not survive. patients with preexisting cv conditions (hypertension in particular) had the highest morbidity (10.5%) following infection. 7, 8 non-cv comorbidities, including diabetes, lung diseases, and obesity, the latter identified in current italian and dutch cohorts, are also major predictors of poor clinical outcomes. similarly, in the recent analysis of 5700 patients hospitalized with covid-19 in the new york city area the most common comorbidities were hypertension (57%), obesity (42%), and diabetes (34%). 167 these aspects emphasize the importance of the need for multidisciplinary assessment and treatment, including cv evaluation and therapy, during the course of covid-19 to reduce mortality. in this rapid review, we summarize the state-of-the-art knowledge available currently, regarding covid-19, focusing on key mechanistic and clinical aspects.coronaviruses are single-stranded positive-sense rna viruses of between 26 and 32 kb in length within the family coronaviridae. there are four genera in the subfamily orthocoronavirinae, namely the alpha-, beta-, gamma-, and deltacoronaviruses. of these, alpha-and betacoronaviruses infect mammals while the gamma-and deltacoronaviruses infect birds. there are seven coronaviruses that infect humans: the alphacoronaviruses hcov-nl63 and 229e, which tend to cause a mild illness in adults; the betacoronaviruses middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) virus and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) virus, which cause a severe respiratory illness; and oc43 and hku1, which are associated with a mild illness. an example electron microscopy image of a betacoronavirus is shown in figure 1 . covid-19 is caused by a novel betacoronavirus, probably originating from bats following gain-of-function mutations within the receptor-binding domain (rbd) and the acquisition of a furinprotease cleavage site. it has been named by the who as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). 9 coronavirus receptor binding occurs via the spike protein (encoded by the structural s gene) which has two subunits. subunit s1 mediates . . binding and a trimeric s2 stalk mediates fusion to the infected cell. the s1 subunit is divided into two domains, the n-terminal domain (s1-ntd) and the c-terminal domain (s1-ctd). these regions mediate binding to a variety of cellular receptors containing carbohydrate or protein at their binding domains. sars-cov and sars-cov-2 (and the alphacoronavirus hcov-nl63) all bind via the s1-ctd to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor ( figure 2) . 9 sars-cov-2 has a higher affinity for binding to ace2 than sars-cov, and binding involves a larger number of interaction sites. 10, 11 a pre-requisite for binding of sars-cov-2 to ace2 is cleavage of the s protein of the virus by the transmembrane serine protease tmprss2 12 (figure 2) . replication occurs via the rnadependent rna polymerase and involves discontinuous transcription of subgenomic mrnas that encode six major open reading frames common to all coronaviruses and multiple accessory proteins.importantly, sars-cov-2 transmission occurs at a higher basic reproduction rate (r 0 = 2-2. 5 ) than sars-cov that caused an outbreak of severe respiratory infection in 2003 or than influenza. 13 it is associated with higher viral loads in infected people (up to a billion rna copies per milliltre of sputum) and long-term resistance on contaminated surfaces. sars-cov-2 is more stable on plastic and stainless steel than on copper and cardboard, and viable virus may be detected up to 72 h after application to these surfaces. 14 patients with severe covid-19 tend to have a high viral load and a long virus-shedding period. this finding suggests that the viral load of sars-cov-2 might be a useful marker for assessing disease severity and prognosis. 15 at the same time, pronounced nucleic acid shedding of sars-cov-2 was observed for 7 days in mild cases. 15 to better appreciate the links between cardiovascular disease (cvd) and covid-19, it is important to understand the underlying pathobiology of coronavirus infection. sars-cov-2 binds to the transmembrane ace2 protein (a homologue of ace) to enter type ii alveolar epithelial cells, macrophages, and other cell types 12 (figure 2) . the process requires priming of viral s protein by the cellular serine protease tmprss2. 12 thus, infection with sars-cov-2 requires co-expression of ace2 and tmprss2 in the same cell type, as proteolytic cleavage of viral s protein is essential for binding of the virus to ace2. exploitation of ace2 by coronavirus is important in predicting potential pathology as ace2 is particularly highly expressed in pericytes, in addition to type ii alveolar epithelial cells, according to the single-cell human heart atlas. 16 high expression of ace2 in pericytes could lead to development of microvascular dysfunction, 17 explaining greater propensity for acute coronary syndromes (acs). 5 moreover, ace2 expression is up-regulated in failing human hearts, suggesting a plausible explanation for a higher infectivity of virus and a higher mortality in patients with heart failure. 18 moreover, cellular entry of coronaviruses through ace2 has implications for vascular instability and hypotension as well as increased mortality of infected patients who have pre-existing hypertension, albeit the latter association is confounded by the older age of patients with comorbidities. in addition to pathogenicity and transmissibility of the virus, these findings also have therapeutic implications, as inhibition of the cellular serine protease tmprss2 and sera containing blocking antibodies against ace2 have the potential to block viral entry and hence prevent or attenuate covid-19 ( figure 2) . in a murine model, tmprss2 inhibition blocked viral entry and attenuated the severity of coronavirus infection with improved survival. 19, 20 two clinical trials have been started to test the efficacy of inhibition of tmprss2 by camostat mesilate for the treatment of patients with covid-19 (nct04321096 and nct04338906).our understanding of covid-19 pathomechanisms, natural clinical history, and possible therapies are evolving continuously. while in this review we have collated contemporary literature regarding this pandemic to enable a comprehensive overview, numerous methodological considerations need to be taken into account regarding study design and data collection. the sources used to generate this review are original articles published in pubmed, posted on medrxiv, biorxiv, or chinaxiv, or listed in clinical trial databases (clinicaltrial.gov and eudract). in addition, public databases such as world health organization, centers for disease control (crcs), and the jhu coronavirus resource center were utilized.the early studies in a pandemic might suffer from inclusion bias. baseline demographics and pre-morbid status of study populations are expected to reflect the characteristics of individuals who were exposed to the disease early in the outbreak. in addition, availability and access to upon the viral spike protein priming by the transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2), sars-cov-2 uses the host angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) to enter and infect the cell. inhibiting tmprss2 activity (by camostat mesylate) could be used to prevent proteolytic cleavage of the sars-cov-2 spike protein and protect the cell against virus-cell fusion (1). another approach could be neutralizing the virus from entering cells and keeping it in solution by activation of a disintegrin and metalloprotease 17 (adma17) which leads to shedding of the membrane-bound ace2 and release of the soluble extracellular domain of ace2 (2); with treatment with anti-ace2 antibodies leading to blockage of the interaction between virus and receptors (3) or administration of soluble recombinant human ace2 protein acting as a competitive interceptor for sars-cov-2 (4). alternatively, purified polyclonal antibodies targeting/neutralizing the viral spike protein may offer some protection against sars-cov-2 (5). interestingly, angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis), frequently used to treat hypertension, could alter ace2 expression and intensify the sars-cov-2 infection. diagnostic testing as well as a high threshold for diagnostic testing or hospital treatment or suitability for icu admission, because of finite resources, are expected to affect characteristics of the study populations and the clinical outcomes of the disease. for example, a large number of healthcare workers and inpatients were exposed to covid-19 in the hospital in the early, rather than the later phase in the pandemic in china. 21 the demographics of patients in the early studies from china were different from those reported later in the largest aggregate study of covid-19 patients by guan et al. in china 22 (table 1) . data on cardiac involvement are unfortunately not extensively presented in the study of guan et al. 22 the national health commission of the people's republic of china (prc) guidance 23 recommends the use of traditional chinese medicine alongside what is considered more conventional interventions. the published reports do not provide details of the traditional treatment regimens in patients with covid-19. therefore, different choices of therapy were made and any positive/negative impacts of such interventions, which may have influenced outcomes, might have introduced additional bias.finally, it is also difficult to assess the true prevalence, occurrence, mortality, and spectrum of the clinical course of disease since a proportion of inoculated individuals might be asymptomatic and therefore were never tested. some in silico modelling of the infection expansion as well as in initial reports from iceland and italy suggest that an asymptomatic group, perhaps as high as 50% of infected individuals (decode genetics, iceland), probably exists. this finding has considerable implications in estimating the prevalence and preventing spread of the disease. likewise, some reports show that up to 80% of infected individuals have mild symptoms and in theory represent a group that might not seek medical care-they might not, therefore, be tested or contribute to prevalence and case fatality rate (cfr) estimates. secondly, practically all countries experience shortage of the testing kits, therefore limiting the testing only to selected groups of individuals. moreover, some deaths caused by sars-cov-2 were not attributed to covid-19, due to the lag time when severe complications tend to develop even up to 2-3 weeks following the initial infection. 8 the incubation period between contact and the first set of symptoms is typically 1-14 days (but up to 24 days in individual cases). 23 the median time between registered exposure and first symptoms is 5.1 days with a mean of 6.1 days. 24 duration of viral nucleic acid shedding ranges between 8 and 34 days (median 20 days) after the initial symptoms ( figure 3) .the main clinical symptoms develop within 11.5 days [95% confidence interval (ci) 8.2- 15.6 days] and include fever, dry cough, fatigue, ageusia, anosmia, and headache. 24 other non-specific symptoms have also been reported, which included nasal congestion, rhinorrhea, sore throat, myalgia, poor appetite, and diarrhoea. 21 fever and cough typically appear concomitantly, followed by shortness of breath and severe fatigue, which appear around day 6-7 6 and are associated with development of severe bilateral (and occasional unilateral) pneumonia ( figure 4) .the most common radiological findings include multiple patchy shadows and interstitial changes in moderate disease, with consolidation, a ground glass appearance, in 56 .4% of cases, 22 and very occasional pleural effusions in severe cases. 23 in such severe cases, pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax have been described. 25, 26 pathological investigations of the lungs of deceased individuals indicate blockade of bronchi and bronchioles with large amounts of mucus plugs and bronchial epithelial cell damage. 23 lymphocyte and mononuclear cell infiltrates are present in alveolar septal spaces. fibrinous exudate and high hyaline membranes fill alveolar cavities. polynuclear giant cells are prominent. there is marked proliferation of type ii alveolar epithelial cells. such severe manifestations appear only in a fraction of patients. a recent study of covid-19 cases in china reported up to 28 january 2020 indicated that severe illness may occur in 16% of cases, 22 leading to an overall mortality rate estimated at 1.4% of the total reported cases 22 to 4.61% in the who reports (accessed on 28 march 2020). in some geographical regions, due to unexplained reasons, mortality may be higher (current estimates are 11.9% in italy, 9.0% in spain, and 7.9% in the uk according to the jhu coronavirus resource center, accessed on 2 april, 2020 2 ). it is important to note, however, that great care must be taken when calculating fatality rates based on currently available data, as these can be overestimated in relation to insufficient testing in the community or underestimated, due to long lag-time between test positivity and death or the fact that there are large differences in attributing covid-related mortality ('dying with' versus 'dying from' as well as differences in performing post-mortem testing). limitations of healthcare systems, abruptly overwhelmed by a surge of patients needing mechanical invasive ventilation, have also been considered a potential source of the differences. finally, these differences may result from population structure, as italian patients have been older than the average age reported in the chinese patients.the typical clinical course of disease is summarized in figure 3 . the heterogeneity of responses between individual patients is striking. this indicates that it is unlikely that covid-19 can be considered from the point of view of a single disease phenotype. rather, it seems most likely that host characteristics, which at the moment remain unknown, promote progression of the disease with a range of different presentarions, e.g. mild, severe multiorgan failure, and cytokine release storm.while clinical symptoms of the disease are predominantly respiratory and associated with severe pneumonia, both direct and indirect involvement of other organs is common, with the cv system being particularly affected. moreover, pre-existing conditions, largely linked to cvd, increase the risk of severe outcomes of the infection.a number of key comorbidities are associated with worse clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19 ( table 1) . association with age seems to dominate this relationship 22 and may affect the actual importance of other factors reported in univariate analyses. older patients (mean age 63 years old; range 53-71) are more likely to experience the composite endpoint of icu admission, mechanical ventilation, or death compared with younger patients (mean age 46 years old, range 35-57) 22 (table 1) . males seem to be more susceptible to covid-19-related complications, representing between 50% and 82% of the hospitalized patients in the four publications that report these data ( table 1 ) and the most recent report from italy. 27 table 1 summarizes key comorbidities identified by the major studies from china showing that the presence of pre-existing morbidities increases the severity of hospital-treated covid- 19 . notably, there is a large heterogeneity of reporting, with some studies comparing death with survival and others comparing icu with non-icu cases ( table 1) . however, regardless of the approach, pre-existing cv conditions seem to be particularly important predictors of covid-19 severity. 7 the investigators found that the fatality rate for patients with no comorbidities was 0.9%, whereas the cfr was much higher for patients with comorbidities. this included mortality of 10.5% for patients with cvd, 7.3% for those with diabetes, 6% for subjects with hypertension, 6 .3% for those with chronic respiratory disease, and 6.0% for those with cancer. [28] [29] [30] it was as high as 14 .8% for patients > _80 years of age. 7, 30 it is interesting that in italian and dutch cohorts, there are reports of higher severity in younger obese individuals as well. severe cases accounted for 13 .8%, and critical cases accounted for 4.7% of all cases. of significance, cvd occurrence affects the mortality rate to a larger extent than the presence of pre-existing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), which had not been the case in sars. 7 these observations are confirmed by a recent meta-analysis, based largely on these studies and an additional 44 672 patient data set reported by the china cdc. 28 in this large cohort, cvd was reported in 4.2% of the total population and in 22 .7% of those who died. 28 by extension, it is expected that comorbidities are associated with higher rates of hospitalization in patients with covid-19, but any effects that comorbidities may have on susceptibility to infection remain conjectural: accordingly, published frequencies of these comorbidities in china are included in table 1 . surprisingly, a history of smoking and of chronic pulmonary disease appear to be far less powerful determinants of severity in hospitalized patients than is the history of cvd. curiously, the prevalence of smoking in hospitalized covid-19 patients appears far lower than might be expected from assumed population prevalence and primary respiratory infectionit is not clear if hypertension is a risk factor for susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection-the available data show prevalence rates of 15-40%, largely in line with the rates of high blood pressure in the general population (30%). 22, 31 at first glance, hypertension is more prevalent in subjects with a more severe course of the disease. in a recent analysis from china, 22 it was present in 13.4% of subjects with non-severe disease and in 23 .7% of subjects with severe disease. this study also included a composite outcome, which was also associated with a higher prevalence of hypertension in those with a poor composite outcome (35.8% vs. 13 .7%). in the cohort of 44 672 patients reported by the china cdc, 28 hypertension prevalence was reported as 12.8% in the whole group of patients and as 39.7% in patients who eventually died. 28 these should be analysed in the context of recent european data which appeared after submission of this paper. 27 guan et al. present data based on disease severity at the time of assessment (using american thoracic society guidelines for community-acquired pneumonia) and according to composite endpoint status (ep: icu admission, ventilation, or death)..was reported to increase the odds ratio (or) for death by 3 .05 (95% ci 1.57-5.92 ) 32 in patients with covid- 19 . these associations may, however, be largely confounded by the higher prevalence of hypertension in older people, as older individuals have significantly worse outcomes, more severe course of the disease, and a higher mortality rate than the younger patients. 22 thus, in summary, while hypertension does appear to be associated with more severe disease, a higher risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and increased mortality in unadjusted analyses, there is no strong evidence to indicate increased susceptibility of patients with hypertension to covid-19, when the association is adjusted for other risk factors. 33 the mechanisms of this possible relationship and their clinical relevance have been reviewed in a recent statement of the european society of hypertension. 33 the putative relationship between figure 3 key symptoms, and biochemical and radiological features of the clinical course of covid- 19. hypertension and covid-19 may relate to the role of ace2. ace2 is a key element in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas), which is critically involved in the pathophysiology of hypertension. 34 experimental studies demonstrated that inhibition of the raas with ace inhibitors (aceis) or angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) may result in a compensatory increase in tissue levels of ace2, 35 leading to suggestions that these drugs may be detrimental in patients exposed to sars-cov-2. 36 it is important, however, to emphasize that there is no clear evidence that aceis or arbs lead to upregulation of ace2 in human tissues. 36 thus, currently there is no justification for stopping aceis or arbs in patients at risk of covid- 19 . 33 this has now been endorsed officially by many learned societies, including the european society of hypertension, the international society of hypertension, and the european society of cardiology. 33 it also appears that in experimental models some raas blockers may exert a potentially protective influence. 37 indeed, while angiotensin ii promoted the internalization and intracellular degradation of ace2, losartan reduced this effect, suggesting that arbs may offer protection against viral entry into cells. 36 the recent integrative antiviral drug repurposing analysis implicated another arb-irbesartan-as a potential repurposable medication for covid- 19. 10 in fact, the known effect of arbs on potassium metabolism may be seen as clinically advantageous in patients infected by covid-19 given that hypokalaemia was reported as a fairly common manifestation of covid-19 (possibly through increased kaliuresis rather than gastrointestinal loss). 38 hypokalaemia in covid-19 patients is difficult to manage, correlates with the severity of the disease, and has been suggested to be driven by activation of the raas. 38 aceis or arbs might offer some protection in this setting. it also needs to be emphasized that hypokalaemia has not been reported in other studies. for example, in a patient characterization by guan et al., 22 the median value of the potassium level reported was 3.8 mmol/l with the lower margin of the interquartile range (iqr) at 3.5 mmol/l. nevertheless, antihypertensive medications known to increase serum levels of potassium (including carvedilol and eplerenone) were implicated as potential drug repurposing opportunities for patients with covid-19 infection. 10 moreover, observations from icus in italy suggest that hypocalcaemia is a common metabolic abnormality in patients infected by covid-19, that could be linked due to reduced albumin levels, which are commonly seen, and/or ca 2þ consumption through excessive activation of the coagulation cascade.another mechanism linking hypertension and covid-19 is the immune system, which is dysregulated in hypertension and sars-cov-2 infection. 39, 40 poor control of blood pressure may contribute to further dysregulation of the immune system. for example, it has been shown that hypertension, in humans, is associated with circulating lymphocyte counts, 41 and cd8þ t cell dysfunction is observed in patients with hypertension 42 . such immunosenescent cd8þ t cells are unable to efficiently combat viral infections, and contribute to pathological overproduction of cytokines-a situation providing a possible link to covid-19. one may also postulate that aceis or arbs, by providing a better control of blood pressure, may restore, at least partially, the dysregulated immune system in hypertension.overall it is essential to ensure that blood pressure control in hypertensive patients during viral infections is optimized, unnecessary and uncontrolled changes to therapy are discouraged, and hypertensive patients should be carefully monitored for cv and other complications during covid-19 infection.severe covid-19 is associated with rapidly progressing systemic inflammation, a pro-inflammatory cytokine storm, and sepsis, leading to multiorgan failure and death ( figure 5) . selected evidence and manifestations of cv injury in covid-19 patients are summarized in table 2 . importantly, there is a delay between initiation of symptoms and myocardial damage in studies reported so far ( table 3) .viral infections are associated with metabolic dysfunction, myocardial inflammation, and activation of the sympathetic nervous system, all of which predispose to cardiac arrhythmia. in a recent report on 138 hospitalized covid-19 patients, 21 16 .7% of patients developed arrhythmias, which ranked only second among serious complications after ards. arrhythmia was observed in 7% of patients who did not require icu treatment and in 44% of subjects who were admitted to an icu. 18 further details of these manifestations remain elusive but included atrial fibrillation, conduction block, ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibrillation. these arrhythmias are also observed in viral myocarditis. interestingly, the report of the national health commission of china estimates that during the initial outbreak, some patients reported primarily cv symptoms, such as palpitations and chest tightness, rather than respiratory symptoms. 43 most reports indicate that almost all hospitalized covid-19 patients show elevated serum creatine kinase (ck) and lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) levels. 6, 43, 44 in addition, a number of studies indicate that cardiac complications, including fulminant myocarditis, are potential outcomes of sars-cov-2 infection. heart failure has been reported as an outcome in 23% of covid subjects in a recent report from in-hospital chinese subjects. approximately 52% of non-survivors had heart failure as compared with 12% of survivors. 32 evidence of myocardial injury, such as an increase in high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i (ctni) levels (>28 pg/ml) was detected in 5 of the first 41 patients diagnosed with covid-19 in to enter the host cells including type 2 pneumocytes, macrophages, endothelial cells, pericytes, and cardiac myocytes, leading to inflammation and multiorgan failure. in particular, the infection of endothelial cells or pericytes could lead to severe microvascular and macrovascular dysfunction. furthermore, in conjunction with the immune over-reactivity, it can potentially destabilize atherosclerotic plaques and explain the development of the acute coronary syndromes. infection of the respiratory tract, particularly of type 2 pneumocytes, by sars-cov-2 is manifested by the progression of systemic inflammation and immune cell overactivation, leading to a 'cytokine storm', which results in an elevated level of cytokines such as il-6, il-7, il-22, and cxcl10. subsequently, it is possible that activated t cells and macrophages may infiltrate infected myocardium, resulting in the development of fulminant myocarditis and severe cardiac damage. this process could be further intensified by the cytokine storm. similarly, the viral invasion could cause cardiac myocyte damage directly leading to myocardial dysfunction and contribute to the development of arrhythmia.wuhan. 6, 43, 44 more recent reports indicate that 7.2% 21 to 17% 32 of hospitalized covid-19 patients sustain acute myocardial injury. this may be in the form of acute myocarditis (see below) or injury secondary to an oxygen supply/demand mismatch [type 2 myocardial infarction (mi) ] .in an analysis of 68 fatal cases in wuhan, 36 patients (53%) died of respiratory failure, 5 (7%) patients with myocardial damage died from circulatory failure, and 22 patients (33%) died from both. 3 similarly, analysis of 120 covid-19 patients reported elevated levels of n-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide (nt-probnp) in 27.5% of the cases, and ctni in 10% of deceased patients, respectively, indicating that the effects of cv injury on systemic stability may be important and should not be ignored. in another report of 138 inpatients with covid-19 in wuhan, the levels of biomarkers of myocardial injury were significantly higher in patients treated in the icu as compared with those not requiring icu care (median ck-mb level 18 u/l vs. 14 u/l, p < 0.001; hs-ctni level 11 .0 pg/ml vs. 5 .1 pg/ml, p = 0.004). 21 . in a study of 191 patients, 32 ctni levels were strongly associated with increased mortality in the univariate analysis, but the association was not tested in a multivariate model. similar associations between ctni elevation and disease severity are shown when analysing cohorts on the basis of the need for icu care. 6 ,21 thus patient monitoring should include a number of laboratory tests, summarized in table 4 , based on current experience and studies.mechanisms underlying myocardial injury remain unknown and it is unclear whether they reflect systemic/local and/or ischaemic/inflammatory process. it is still not known whether acute injury is a primary infective phenomenon or secondary to lung disease. associations between ctni elevation and pre-existing cv conditions (and other pre-covid features ) have not yet been examined to detect evidence of causality, and no detailed analyses of patients with cv complications of covid- . . 19 have been published to date. as an elevated ctni level is associated with poorer outcomes in other (non-covid) systemic illnesses, 45 the reported association could simply reflect the severity of systemic illness (e.g. hypoxia or hypotension) rather than indicating a specific cardiac pathology. in this context, a 'cytokine storm' triggered by immunological dysregulation 43 may be a key mediator. plasma interleukin-6 (il-6) concentrations are elevated in covid-19 patients with cardiac injury, 46 and abnormalities in a variety of cytokines are prominent in patients with severe covid-19 disease.cardiac-specific mechanisms may also be important. since ace2 is expressed in the cv system, 47 direct cardiomyocyte infection by sars-cov-2 may be a possibility, as discussed below. moreover, therapies used in treatment of severe multiorgan dysfunction in covid-19 patients as well as antiviral drugs may result in cardiac toxicity.attempts to treat covid-19 cardiac injury have included the use of steroids, i.v. immunoglobins, hydroxychloroquine, and other antivirals, and active mechanical life support. 46 while it remains uncertain if these or other therapies successfully limit myocardial injury, the detection of cardiac damage in hospitalized covid-19 patients may help identify a subset of patients at greater risk of covid-19 complications.cardiac injury and acute myocarditis are well-recognized complications of acute viral infections. myocyte necrosis and mononuclear cell infiltrates are reported in cardiac muscle autopsy specimens in a recent report of the national health commission of the prc. 23 this finding, along with case reports 46,48 of fulminant myocarditis, suggests that myocarditis may be an important cause of the acute cardiac injury in covid-19 patients. however, the prevalence, clinical importance, and mechanism(s) of myocardial inflammation in covid-19 disease remain unclear. 6, 49 clinically, covid-19 myocarditis may manifest only as mild chest discomfort and palpitations, which may be impossible to distinguish from other causes in most patients. in some, however, myocarditis results in fulminant disease ( figure 6) . transient ecg changes are common and may help detect the presence and severity of myocardial injury. myocarditis may progress to conduction block, tachyarrhythmias, and impairment of left ventricular function.in other clinical settings, myocarditis is often suspected when cardiac injury is detected in the absence of an acs. the diagnosis can often be confirmed if cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (mri) detects typical acute myocardial injury signals. 50 endomyocardial biopsy (emb), long considered the gold standard diagnostic test, can directly demonstrate myocyte necrosis and mononuclear cell infiltrates. 51 emb will detect evidence of a viral cause in some cases, though in others an immunologically autoimmune-mediated cause of the myocarditis is suspected. 51 biopsy studies of patients with acute myocarditis in europe indicate that viral aetiology ranges between 37.8% and 77.4%. 52, 53 in covid-19, this evidence is at the moment sparse and based on individual case series, emphasizing the need for systematic assessment. while several reports emphasize that fulminant myocarditis may be an important clinical presentation of the disease, 46,48 the real prevalence of this complication remains unclear. cardiac mri and embs as diagnostic tools are likely to be inappropriate during the current covid-19 pandemic and associated healthcare crisis, but should be considered in the future ( table 5) .animal models of viral myocarditis suggest discrete pathological phases that begin with viral-mediated myocyte lysis. 54 this cardiac injury leads to activation of the innate immune response with release of proinflammatory cytokines. 54 proteins released through cell lysis might display epitopes similar to the viral antigens and be presented via the major histocompatibility complex (mhc). myosin heavy chain, a cardiac sarcomere protein, appears to be a prime example of 'molecular mimicry'. 55 at this stage, embs may show inflammatory changes but no detectable viral particles because of clearance of the virus by the innate immune response. an acquired immune response is the predominant feature evidenced by activation of antibodies and t lymphocytes. cd4þ t helper (th) cells and cytotoxic cd8þ t cells mediate their responses throughnt-pro bnp/bnp* conflicting data on nt-probnp. in a mers-cov cohort, nt-probnp was increased but it may be normal in covid-19-affected patients.higher nt-probnp levels in the chinese cohort are associated with a greater need for icu care. troponin* high-sensitivity troponin assay may be helpful for risk assessment in patients requiring icu care and to identify individuals with silent myocardial injury.reports from the initial outbreak in wuhan show a key relationship with a requirement for icu care and mortality. procalcitonina marker of bacterial infection; it is more likely to be raised in patients who will require icu care.low platelets associated with adverse outcome il-6where available; high concentrations are associated with adverse outcome.a marker of poor outcome; very significant changes reported in covid-19 patients.cardiac ct to be considered in uncertain cases of patients with elevated troponins with and without signs of obstructive coronary artery disease (eacvi position 166 )in mers-cov, the 12-lead ecg generally shows diffuse t wave inversion where there is myocardial involvement; this can be dynamic.changes in covid-19 were also described.may show global or regional myocardial systolic dysfunction with or without a pericardial effusion and vice versa. 54 in the final stage, there is either recovery or low levels of chronic inflammation with concomitant development of left ventricular dysfunction. 54 interestingly, myocarditis appears in covid-19 patients after a prolonged period (up to 10-15 days) after the onset of symptoms (table 3) . moreover, investigators in china point to a lack of viral particle identification on emb (personal communication). given these observations and the experimental context above, a question central to potential therapeutic options is the extent to which myocardial injury results from viral replication (cytopathic), is immune mediated, or is due to other mechanisms. given that acute myocardial injury is said to begin 2 weeks after the onset of symptomatic covid-19, 32 adaptive t-cell-mediated immunity or dysregulated innate effector pathways are likely to play a pivotal in the development of myocardial inflammation. in this context, it is notable that an increase of highly proinflammatory ccr6þ th17 in cd4þ t cells, prominent inflammatory mediators of myocarditis, 56 has been reported in severe cases.together, the data suggest that a delay in myocardial inflammation is consistent with at least two pathogenic mechanisms: first, that the 'cytokine storm' unleashes a subclinical autoimmune myocarditis, and secondly that myocardial damage and/or molecular mimicry initiate a de novo autoimmune reaction.targeted therapeutic options remain elusive; as is the case for myocarditis in other settings, a management strategy that uses a broad range of supportive therapies remains key. a case report recently described effectiveness of the early application of steroids and i.v. immunoglobins, neuraminidase inhibitors, and active mechanical life support. 46 while little is known regarding the effects of covid-19 on acs, several pathways associated with viral diseases may contribute to destabilize plaques in covid-19 patients. 57 heart failure patients are at increased risk of acute events or exacerbation; viral illness can potentially destabilize atherosclerotic plaques through systemic inflammatory responses, 58 cytokine storm, as well as specific changes of immune cell polarization towards more unstable phenotypes. all of these have been observed in covid- 19. in the case of sars and mers, acute mi 59,60 has been reported in two out of the five deaths in early reports. 61 it is important to consider that type 2 mi is the most common subtype in viral conditions, thus the usefulness of invasive management with a view toward coronary revascularization (especially in type 2 mi) is limited. the decision for invasive vs. non-invasive management of patients with an acs and covid-19 illness should be carefully considered. moreover, a recent single-cell atlas of the human heart indicated that pericytes express particularly high levels of ace2 in the heart. 47 one of the implications of this finding is possible local microvascular inflammation during sars-cov-2 infection of the pericytes, leading to severe microvascular dysfunction, contributing to myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coronary arteries (minoca). this could explain recent reports of the clinical course of cases of mi during covid- 19 . in addition, the cytokine storm can contribute to development of endothelial dysfunction through well-characterized mechanisms. [62] [63] [64] [65] features of disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) and pulmonary embolism, characterized by increased d-dimer levels and fibrin degradation products, are highly prevalent in covid- 19 . dic has been observed in 71 .4% of non-survivors. 66 massive pulmonary embolism has been reported. 67 this might not be surprising given the critical condition of these subjects, although early appearance of dic features is often evident. notably, experience from china indicates that a d-dimer increase is highly predictive of adverse outcomes in covid- 19 . in a retrospective cohort study, elevated d-dimer levels (>1 g/l) were strongly associated with in-hospital mortality, and this relationship was maintained in multivariate analysis (or 18.4 , 95% ci 2. 6-128.6 ; p = 0.003). 32 moreover, chinese and italian experience emphasizes that more discrete changes in d-dimer levels are observed earlier in the course of disease preceding the rapid progression stage.after the lungs, immune organs are the second most affected system by covid- 19 . pathological investigations in covid-19 victims 23 have demonstrated splenic atrophy, with a very significant reduction in the number of lymphocytes and neutrophils, as well as necrosis and haemorrhages. similarly, lymphocytes are depleted in lymph nodes and the numbers of both cd4þ and cd8þ cells are decreased. 23 this corresponds to lymphopenia in peripheral blood observed in severe cases. interestingly, an increase in systemic il-2, il-6, il-7, granulocyte colonystimulating factor, c-x-c motif chemokine 10 (cxcl10), chemokine (c-c motif) ligand 2 (ccl2), and tumour necrosis factor-a (tnf-a) has been observed in subjects with covid-19, 6 which corresponds to the characteristics of a cytokine release syndrome (crs). 16, 68, 69 crs development in covid-19 is associated with covid-19 severity. crs has been characterized as a complication of immune targeted therapies in oncology, in particular in relation to severe chimeric antigen receptor (car) t-cell-induced crs. 70 it is also reminiscent of the cytokine profile noted in haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) syndromes. 71 resemblance to the latter brought considerations that covid-19 may be a cause of secondary hlh with cytopenias, significant haemophagocytosis in bone marrow, and low fibrinogen concentration. clinical classifications have been introduced to aid recognition of secondary hhl. 71 fluorescence-activated cell sorting (facs) analyses of covid-19 active cases have also shown hyperactivated t lymphocytes with large fractions of hla-drþ and cd38þ cd8þ/cd4þ t cells and ccr6þ th17 cd4þ cells. high concentrations of cytotoxic granules in cytotoxic t (cd8) cells have been observed. thus, uncontrolled overactivation of t cells may account for, in part, the severe immune injury, 16 similarly to atherosclerosis and other cv conditions. 72, 73 these aspects should also be considered in the light of sexual dimorphism related to susceptibility to cv inflammation. [74] [75] [76] high serum il-6 levels are a common feature in crs patients. indeed, in a recent retrospective multicentre analysis of 150 patients from wuhan, circulating il-6 levels were a clinical predictor of mortality in covid- 19. 3 il-6 is an important biomarker and possible target for cv morbidity and mortality linked to atherosclerosis. [77] [78] [79] this is important as therapeutic targeting of the il-6 receptor (il-6r) with tocilizumab is used in preventing and treating crs caused by cancer therapies and hlh. 70 tocilizumab is approved in >100 countries for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (ra), juvenile idiopathic arthritis (jia), 80 castleman's diseases, and giant cell or takayasu arteritis. 81 other il-6rtargeting agents, e.g. sarilumab, are similarly potentially of use. therefore, its possible use in covid-19 may be attractive to tackle crs. however, when considering immunomodulation, one has to bear in mind that the primary problem is an infectious disease rather than the complications of cancer therapy. therefore, its potentially utility must be carefully considered.during the initial outbreak in china, the use of tocilizumab to stop severe crs-associated organ failure and death in covid-19 patients was attempted. 71 twenty-one severe covid-19 cases were treated with tocilizumab in an initial pilot trial. nineteen of them were discharged 12-lead ecg on initial visit and periodically, as needed. serum high-sensitivity troponin, nt-probnp (according to index of clinical suspicion).echocardiography to assess for global and regional wall motion abnormalities and function.cardiac rhythm monitoring.cardiac mri, as clinically indicated. cardiac autoantibody titres may be helpful but not in the acute phase.from the hospital within 2 weeks, as reported by china's national health commission. the drug has now been approved in china to treat patients developing severe complications from covid-19 and showing elevated plasma levels of il-6. 82 . this multicentre, single-arm, openlabel, phase ii study will assess mortality at 1 month in 330 patients affected by covid-19 pneumonia. the inclusion criteria comprise patients showing signs of respiratory distress syndrome or who had been subject to tracheal intubation in the preceding 24 h. the study will be led by the instituto nazionale tumori irccs -fondazione pascale in naples. similarly, 30 participants will be enrolled in the marche region, in the interventional clinical trial 'tocilizumab (roactemra) as early treatment of patients affected by sars-cov-2 infection with severe multifocal interstitial pneumonia' (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04315480). in the usa, the 'evaluation of the efficacy and safety of sarilumab in hospitalized patients with covid-19' (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04315298) has just started, aiming to recruit 400 patients, and will be shortly followed by the 'tocilizumab to prevent clinical decompensation in hospitalized, non-critically ill patients with covid-19 pneumonitis (covidose)' (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04331795) trial, which is expected to start very soon. finally, the most recently registered trial recruiting 330 patients: a study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of tocilizumab in patients with severe covid-19 pneumonia (covacta) (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04 320615) is being initiated. similar trials have been registered in france, belgium, and denmark. it should be noted, however, that there are currently no published clinical trial data on il-6 targeting safety or efficacy against the virus. moreover, tocilizumab has not received approval from china's national medical product administration to be sold for covid-19 treatment.the cytokine storm and increase in il-6 signalling observed in some covid-19 patients could have profound cv consequences causing tachycardia, hypotension, and left ventricular dysfunction. crs-related cardiotoxicity has also been reported, mainly in the form of conduction abnormalities, atrial fibrillation, and elevation in bnp and ctnis. 83 in covid-19 patients, medium-to long-term cv consequences may be caused by increased il-6 signalling. experimental evidence supports an atherogenic role for il-6 and crs-related cytokines, 59,60,84-86 as well as its effects on cardiac fibrosis and failure. 87 the cytokine increases adhesion molecule expression in human endothelial cells in vitro; 88 at the same time, stimulation of human macrophages with oxidized ldls (oxldls) leads to increased release of il-6. 89 in experimental atherosclerosis, il-6 mrna is detectable in the aorta of hyperlipidaemic mice, 90 and administration of recombinant il-6 increased plaque formation. 91 similarly, reduced pathology has been observed in ldlr -/mice treated with a fusion protein of the il-6 trans-signalling inhibitor soluble glycoprotein 130 (sgp130). 92 plasma il-6 levels also have been associated with development and progression of abdominal aortic aneurysm, 93 and il-6 has been shown to influence lipid homeostasis in mice. 94 il-6 trans-signalling contributes to experimental cardiac fibrosis; 87 while the up-regulation of membrane-bound il-6r causes vascular remodelling in pulmonary arterial hypertension. 95 genetic variants leading to increased circulating levels of il-6r and, therefore, reduced il-6 cell signalling, have been shown to protect against coronary heart disease (chd). 96, 97 similarly, il-6 trans-signalling is associated with increased cv risk. 77 ,98 il-6 is routinely used as an inflammatory biomarker in cv disease. the canakinumab anti-inflammatory thrombosis outcomes study (cantos) trial demonstrated a stronger effect of il-1b inhibition in reducing secondary cv events in patients with higher circulating levels of il-6 and c-reactive protein (crp), indicative of residual inflammatory risk. 98 whether the observed cytokine storm and il-6 increase in covid-19 patients are transient or sustained remains unknown. accordingly, monitoring inflammatory biomarkers in these patients in the medium to long term is of major importance. similarly, cv risk should be closely evaluated during the acute phase response and in the following years.there are, however, likely to be a range of additional cytokine moieties that will emerge to have pathway-specific contributions in the severe spectrum of covid-19 syndrome. these include pathways driven by granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf), tnf-a, il-17, il-18, and ifn-c. moreover, the imminent prospect of single-cell and other immunological analyses will offer a more systematic insight into the immune dysregulation syndrome(s) that are emerging and especially the disease trajectory-in essence which pathways are directing covid-related crs and which are simply adding to the inflammatory tissue damage burden upon which the other comorbidities are operating. thus, we propose that a useful way of thinking about this would be that the inflammatory burden might be considered as a direct effector (i.e. crs-type), or a secondary amplificatory factor in terms of the contribution that pathways make to pathogenesis and clinical outcome.in 2002 a novel coronavirus, sars-cov, emerged from china, crossing from bats to humans, eventually leading to >8000 cases and the death of >700 people. sars utilized ace2 for cell attachment and infection through the viral envelope spike (s) protein 99 and a subsequent interaction with a cellular protease, tmprss2, which primes s protein for cell entry. 10 the closely related sars-cov-2, also thought to have originated in bats, 9 encodes an s protein with 76% amino acid similarity to that of sars-cov and, importantly, sars-cov-2, as already discussed, has also recently been demonstrated to use the same cellular entry pathway via ace2 and tmprss2, 12 as discussed above. both these novel coronaviruses are different from another recently emergent coronavirus, mers virus, which crossed from the dromedary camel to humans and also caused acute respiratory failure, although utilizing a different cell entry mechanism via the receptor dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4). 101 overall, this highlights the potential divergence of respiratory coronavirus infections in humans, but emphasizes the close relationship between sars-cov and sars-cov-2. so, what can we learn from knowledge of sars-cov and associated cv risk to help in the current battle against covid-19?during human sars-cov infection of the murine lung, ace2 is utilized and subsequently almost completely lost at the protein level. 102 .importantly, delivery of the viral s protein alone also led to downregulation of ace2 and decreased lung function in normal mice, and worsened lung pathology in an acid challenge model of acute lung failure. furthermore, disease pathology was reduced in the presence of the arb losartan. intriguingly, in acute lung disease triggered by acid respiration or sepsis, ace2 has also been shown to be directly protective, acting in partnership with the angiotensin type 2 receptor (at 2 r), and administration of recombinant ace2 in this model is protective. 103 taking together the evidence from multiple experimental studies, beneficial effects of aceis or arbs and also ace2 supplementation in various animal models of lung injury or sars have been shown and supported the concept that loss of ace2 expression promotes the disease in lung injury models (reviewed in kreutz et al., 2020 25 ) . ace2 is also directly regulated by cytokines. 104 decreased ace2 levels could be a direct consequence of viral infection and/or the subsequent inflammatory and immune responses that occur in the infected lung. interestingly, ace2 is also reported to be detectable in macrophages, 105 and its knockout in leucocytes promotes adipose inflammation, 106 highlighting a role for ace2 in the inflammatory response. patients suffering from sars have overwhelming immune and inflammatory responses and high mortality rates from acute respiratory failure, and furthermore they are also associated cardiac sequelae. for example, sars patients also suffer from systolic and diastolic dysfunction and arrythmias, leading to sudden death. 107, 108 in murine models, intranasal administration of human sars-cov results in ace2-mediated infection of the myocardium. 109 these observations support a role for sars-cov in direct myocardial infection and a possible causative role in cardiac disease subsequent to respiratory infection. in the murine heart, ace2 was also almost completely down-regulated at the protein level following infection. moreover, in autopsied cardiac tissue from sars patients with sars-cov-positive lung infection, viral rna was detected in the heart, combined with decreased cardiac ace2 protein levels and elevated cardiac macrophage infiltration. downregulation of ace2 without compensatory effects on ace may lead to the raas being tipped towards the detrimental ace-ang ii-at 1 r axis and away from the protective ace2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis.ace2 is also up-regulated after mi in rodents and humans in macrophages, endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, 110, 111 and cardiomyocytes, 112 and may play a role in restoring raas homeostasis in the heart post-mi. in fact, viral vector-mediated overexpression of ace2 in rodents also protects the heart from adverse cardiac remodelling and dysfunction post-mi. 113 overall, these findings highlight that ace2 has a key protective function in both the lung and the heart. therefore, sars-cov infection-mediated down-regulation of ace2, as a direct mechanistic consequence of viral infection and/or as a result of the subsequent inflammatory responses, may lead to an imbalance in raas signalling and consequent cv sequelae. the knowledge that systemic spread of sars from primary lung infection to other cv tissues, including the heart, is also important. given that ace2 functions as a receptor for virus entry into the cell, down-regulation of ace2 upon infectioin with sars-cov is expected to prevent further viral entry, serving as a negative regulatory mechanism. clearly additional investigations are needed to increase our understanding of the pathological mechanisms of acute disease and potential increased cv risk in covid-19 patients.managing covid-19 is challenging as there are no specific treatments for the sars-cov-2 virus. obtaining high-quality randomized clinical trial data during an outbreak is difficult. research and clinical efforts focus in parallel on development of new drugs against coronavirus as well as repurposing already approved drugs for the treatment of the disease. clinicaltrials.gov site lists >300 studies that are testing various interventions in covid-19 patients. this emphasis on trials as opposed to compassionate use and case reports is a major lesson from previous pandemics and it is good to see the community moving so robustly in this direction.meanwhile, public health measures rely mostly on social measures intended to prevent viral/disease spread, in order to avoid a massive surge of patients with healthcare facilities overload, and on supportive treatment for the patients, which can be considered the mainstay of management. available treatments once clinically evident can be classified as supportive, immune-suppressive, antiretroviral, and potential novel therapies. supportive treatment should be the mainstay of management coordinated by the relevant specialist-multidisciplinary team. the approaches have been provided by numerous scientific and clinical societies during the early stages of the european outbreak and are continuously being updated. this includes a concise but comprehensive guidelines of the società italiana di anestesia analgesia rianimazione e terapia intensiva. 114 when disease progresses to severe phenotype, supportive treatment includes use of oxygen therapy if spo2 is <92% on room air, 23 as well as haemodynamic support. early intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation are essential in those with progressive symptoms and increasing oxygen requirement. high flow nasal cannulae and non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (nippv) may play a role in some patients, especially where resources for mechanical ventilation are likely to be stretched. a lung-protective ventilation strategy is recommended by the who. conservative use of i.v. fluids aiming to maintain tissue perfusion but a negative fluid balance aids lung recovery. 23 extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) may be required in severe cases as per standard indications but should be considered early (veno-venous mode and could be initiated prior to intubation).as cardiac damage is highly prevalent, heart failure therapies should be initiated where appropriate. similarly, broad-spectrum antibiotics/antifungal treatments and treatment of arrhythmias are needed. finally, due to the growing evidence of dic as a cause of organ injury, anticoagulation should be considered. 23 approximately 75% of patients in the early chinese cohort received antiviral therapy. 6, 32, 43, 115 the italian recommendation is to commence treatment with antiviral therapy when covid-19 is confirmed in patients with mild symptoms but not in a high mortality risk category or with moderate/severe signs of infection. numerous antiviral therapies have been used to try and limit viral replication. these include protease inhibitors such as liponovir/ritonavir (used for the treatment of hiv). however, a recent rapid randomized non-placebo-controlled trial including 100 patients in each arm showed no difference in the outcome. 116 remdesivir is a nucleotide analogue and polymerase inhibitor that was previously used for the experimental treatment of ebola in a large phase iii study. 117 while it had an acceptable safety profile, the remdesivir (gs-5734) arm was halted due to a higher antiviral efficacy of monoclonal antibodies in the trial. finally chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine have been suggested as having antiviral activity against many rna viruses including sars and sars-cov-2, through an increase of the endosomal ph and interference with the glycosylation process. 118 however, it has never been shown conclusively to have an antiviral effect in vivo. in alphavirus infection, while demonstrating an antiviral effect in vitro, it was found not to be associated with clinical effects in a randomized clinical trial and may even be associated with prolonged viraemia in vivo. 119 while these observations cannot be directly translated to covid-19, large phase iii trials are underway with hydroxychloroquine, that will inform about the possible therapeutic value of this approach. this includes the recently initiated 'hydroxychloroquine chemo prophylaxis in healthcare personnel in contact with covid-19 patients (phydra trial)' (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04318015).as the cytokine storm appears to be a key pathogenetic process in patients exhibiting rapid deterioration, immune suppression and immune modulation approaches have been tried. this includes glucocorticoids, which are recommended by chinese guidelines, but not italian guidelines. patients with evidence of lung fibrosis or severe cardiac involvement in the icu may benefit from this approach. methylprednisolone was used in combination with i.v. immunoglobulins in the treatment of subjects with fulminant myocarditis. 118 immunomodulatory therapies used include monoclonal antibodies against il-6r, discussed above. ifnb, registered for treatment of multiple sclerosis, enhances suppressor t cell activity, reducing proinflammatory cytokine production. it may be also helpful in patients with myocarditis who develop left ventricular systolic dysfunction; however, current experience is limited to enteroviruses. 120 it is also being tried as an inhaled preparation. finally, 27% of patients in the early chinese cohort received i.v. immunoglobulins. this approach was based on the evidence of their beneficial effects in cases of myocarditis-induced dilated cardiomyopathy and is recommended in cases of viral myocarditis that are refractory to standard heart failure therapies. 121 a list of planned, ongoing, and completed clinical trials can be found at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?cond=covid-19&term=&cntry= &state=&city=&dist=in addition to the many ongoing clinical trials, a new trial in europe will investigate effects of apn01, the recombinant form of human ace2 (rhace2) (clinicaltrialsarena.com). hrace2 has a dual mode of action. first, it has the potential to block infection of host cells by sars-cov-2, and secondly it may reduce lung injury through the protective actions of endogenous ace2. the phase ii clinical trial will be conducted in germany, austria, and denmark.the potential therapies for covid-19 discussed above have important cv side effects and toxicities as well as comorbid conditions that require caution or avoidance of these drugs, as listed in table 6 . it should be noted that data for these side effects and toxicities come from patients that use these drugs chronically for the treatment of autoimmune diseases (chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine, rocilizumab), hepatitis (ribavarin, ifn-a), or hiv infection lopinivir/ritonivir). thus, the effect of short-term use of these medications for patients without these underlying conditions is not clear. remdesivir is an experimental drug used in the treatment of ebola. 117 thus, its cv effects and toxicities are unknown. the antimalarial drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have recently received considerable attention and interest for the treatment and possible prophylaxis of covid- 19. however , the data to date in support of these drugs are weak and cardiac toxicities are considerable. a systematic review of the literature performed on patients treated with these drugs, albeit for an extended period of time (median 7 years) and with a high cumulative dose, demonstrated conduction disorders as the main side effect (85%). 122 other adverse cardiac events included ventricular hypertrophy (22%), hypokinesia (9.4%), heart failure (26.8%), pulmonary arterial hypertension (3.9%), and valvular dysfunction (7.1%). cardiac function normalizes in a significant number of patients (44.9%) upon withdrawal of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine, while others continue to show irreversible damage (12.9%) or death (30.8%). 122 thus, careful consideration should be given to the use of these drugs, particularly without stronger data regarding their efficacy. of note, tocilizumab treatment has been shown to influence lipid metabolism in ra patients. following tocilizumab, total-, ldl-, and hdl-cholesterol were increased, while cv risk biomarkers such as hdl-saa, secretory phospholipase a2 iia, and lipoprotein(a) were significantly reduced. 123 very recently, the entrace clinical trial supported the cv safety of tocilizumab in ra patients; 124 however, to date, il-6 targeting has not been tested for secondary prevention in cvd.while there are currently no evidence-based recommendations, considering clinical presentation, it is reasonable to propose that patients who have had cardiac involvement initially should be seen every 1-3 months. periodic evaluation, in addition to detailed history taking and physical examination, should include a 12-lead ecg and 2d/doppler echocardiography 125 or, preferably, cardiac mri with late gadolinium enhancement. appropriate heart failure therapy should be initiated and maintained when required, and plans put in place to optimize doses. patients should be given standard advice regarding physical activity. as regards unknown long-term consequences of covid-19, regular cv risk assessment should be considered in all patients who survive covid-19.covid-19 brings unprecedented ethical problems and situations facing the medical profession around the world. in the light of the huge imbalance between therapeutic needs and resource availability of an unprecedented scale in our generation, the italian society of anesthesiology and intensive care (siaarti), 126 along with other national societies provided an ethical statement aimed to guarantee the correct psychological framework to physicians massively exposed to the need to apply hard triage rules while facing huge ethical dilemmas. 126 these are derived from the fact that the need for intensive care must be integrated with other elements of 'clinical suitability', thus including: the type and severity of the disease, the presence of comorbidities, the impairment of other organs and systems, and their reversibility. 126 clinicians are not, either deontologically or by training, accustomed to reasoning with criteria of maxi-emergency triage, as in the current exceptional situation. 126 impact of covid-19 on routine and emergency cardiovascular carein preparation for the covid-19 pandemic, many healthcare providers have had to scale down outpatient services and also defer elective cardiac procedures and surgeries. this in some instances has led to the positive integration of technology and development of virtual clinics. 127 however, uptake of virtual clinics has not been universal and has also been compromised by re-deployment of the workforce to help manage the pandemic. the long-term clinical impact of scaling down outpatient activity, reduced access to diagnostics, and deferral of routine procedures is likely to be significant and extend beyond the pandemic. similarly, the perceived risk of being exposed to covid-19 has led to adecline or a delay in presentation of acute cardiac emergencies which is likely to contribute to cardiac mortality and morbidity.covid-19 implications are wider than the effects of the disease on individual patients. practically all countries affected by the disease developed mitigation and containment strategies based on social distancing. cv consequences of social distancing may be profound. both experimental and clinical research has shown the effects of social isolation and loneliness on cognition and memory, 128-132 metabolic disorders, [133] [134] [135] [136] cancer, [137] [138] [139] and immune disorders. [139] [140] [141] in the context of cvds, the absence of positive relationships and the reduced chance of interaction with other people (social distancing) have been identified as major risk factors for cv mortality. [142] [143] [144] [145] [146] [147] [148] [149] [150] [151] a recent meta-analysis including a total of 181 006 participants 152 demonstrated that the risk for ischaemic heart disease and stroke increased by 29% and 32%, respectively, in lonely and socially isolated people. similar results were reported from a uk biobank analysis. 153 the mechanisms of detrimental effects of social isolation are multiple and are related to the activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (hpa) axis, [154] [155] [156] [157] changes in the sympathetic vascular tone, 148, 158, 159 elevated levels of cortisol, 156, 160, 161 and a reduced responsivity of the glucocorticoid receptor. [162] [163] [164] [165] the social distancing strategies used in covid-19 should consider these effects and aim to mitigate them using available technological advances.in this comprehensive review, we aimed to highlight the current state of the art information regarding covid-19 and cvd ( table 7) . our understanding of cv risk and consequences of covid-19 is developing continuously. however, there are many knowledge gaps and there are many unanswered questions. below we point out a few burning unknowns at the moment. what are the factors, genetic or otherwise, that influence interindividual variability in susceptibility to covid-19, its severity, or clinical outcomes? the mechanisms through which cvds worsen the prognosis in covid-19 are unknown. it remains to be addressed to what extent individual cvds are exacerbated by covid- 19 . do pre-existing hypertension and cvds increase infection risk and/or worsen the course of disease progression? is the severity of cvds related to high expression levels of ace2, the sars-cov-2 receptor, in the heart and blood vessels? what influence, if any, do inhibitors of the raas have on susceptibility to covid-19 and its clinical outcomes? what are the factors or therapies for cvds that may confer protective effects against covid-19 and its clinical outcomes? how does pre-existing cvd worsen cardiac involvement specifically? what transferable knowledge can be learned about this pathogen that would advance our understanding of cv risk for sars-cov-2, influenza, and other virus infections in the future? finally, probably the most important question remains, what are the determinants of heterogeneous host responses to sars-cov-2 infection? the answers will be found in integrated approaches by cv immunological id and other expertise coming together. the use of systems based on hypothesis-free in silico methodologies will be essential. this pandemic is unlike any other in arriving at the same time as humankind being in possession of remarkable molecular data science and informatic tools. this is a major test of our ability to harness such capacity for the greater good.these questions need to be answered with the highest quality science and clinical research since the current pandemic of coronavirus might not be the last. • cardiovascular patients are at increased risk of severe covid-19 and its complications. intensive preventive measures should be followed in this group in accordance with who and cdc guidelines. this should include wider use of telemedicine tools in day to day monitoring of the patients during the outbreak to limit their exposure.• the heterogeneity of responses between individual patients indicates that it unlikely that it can be considered as a single disease phenotype. host characteristics promotes more or less severe progression of the disease.• the most common cardiac complications include arrhythmia (af, ventricular tachyarrhythmia, and ventricular fibrillation), cardiac injury (elevated hs-ctni and ck), fulminant myocarditis, and heart failure.• cardiac complications often appear >15 days after initiation of the fever (symptoms) • evaluation of cardiac damage (particularly ctni levels) immediately after hospitalization for covid-19, as well as monitoring during the hospital stay, may help in identifying a subset of patients with possible cardiac injury and thereby predict the progression of covid-19 complications.• some of the medications used in covid-19 treatment may contribute to cardiac toxicity, while their effectiveness in treating covid-19 is unconfirmed.• hypertension is one of the most common risk-associated comorbidities, but this association is cofounded by age. it is not clear if hypertension is an ageindependent risk factor of covid-19-associated outcomes. as a precaution, it is essential that hypertension remains well controlled.• there is no evidence that aceis or arbs are associated with worse prognosis, and patients should not discontinue use of these medications.• based on experimental evidence in other conditions, particularly arbs and possibly also aceis might exert a potentially protective influence in the setting of covid- 19. • covid-19 may lead to plaque instability and mi, which has a common cause of death in sars/covid-19 patients. however, the evidence of effectiveness of primary pci for type 2 mi during acute viral disease is limited.• ace2 can be considered as a cinderella of cardiovascular medicine. a molecule which has been underappreciated in cardiovascular pathology is taking centre stage in understanding and potentially combating covid- 19. end-organ damage are in part mediated by activation of these infiltrated cells. 18 our lab showed that mice lacking cd8+ t cells are efficiently protected from hypertension-induced cardiac damage. cd8+ t cells thus can sense the hypertension independent of t cell receptor. 19 more importantly, cd8+ t cells are required for macrophage infiltration in myocardium and subsequent activation by cd8+ t cells secreted ifn-γ.how do cd8+ t cells respond to hypertension? one study suggests that mineralocorticoid receptor on cd8+ t cells directly sense blood pressure and promote inflammatory milieu through secreting ifn-γ. 20, 21 furthermore, hypertension can trigger oxidative modification of proteins in dc cells by highly reactive γ-ketoaldehydes (isoketals), which activate dc to produce il-6, il-1β, and il-23. activated dcs promote t cell, particularly cd8+ t cell, proliferation and production of ifn-γ and il-17a. 22 intriguingly, a secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, which associates with a massive cd8+ t cell and macrophage activation but decreased nk cell activity, has been noted for covid-19 patients in european icus. taken together, these results suggest that cd8+ t cells may function as a key hypertension effector that drives macrophage-mediated cardiac damage.severe covid-19 patients also showed increased il-6, il-1β, and ifn-γ. 23 it is worthy of studying whether blockade of il-6 or il-1β, which is currently under clinical trials, would reduce cardiac injury through inhibition of cd8 + t cell-macrophage infiltration and overactivation. the glucocorticoid treatment of icu patients shall also be closely monitored for potential beneficial or detrimental effect on cd8 + t cell activation. lastly, ccr5 is a major chemoattracting receptor in cd8 + t cells that involves in various pathogenic conditions, including viral infections. 24 the antiviral drugs, such as selzentry (maraviroc) and leronlimab (pro 140), have been successfully used for treatment of aids. 25 it is therefore of great interest to study whether these drugs can block cardiac infiltration of cd8 + t cells thereby reduce hypertensive cardiac injury of covid-19 patients.competing interests: the authors declare no competing interests.the coronavirus disease (covid-19) has spread all around the world in a very short period of time. recent data are showing significant prevalence of arterial hypertension and cardiovascular diseases (cvd) among patients with covid-19, which raised many questions about higher susceptibility of patients with these comorbidities to the novel coronavirus, as well as the role of hypertension and cvd in progression and the prognosis of covid-19 patients. there is a very limited amount of data, usually obtained from a small population, regarding the effect of the underlying disease on the outcome in patients with covid-19. the evaluation of the treatment of these comorbidities at baseline and during covid-19 is scarce and the results are conflicting. hypertension and cvd, after the adjustment for other clinical and demographic parameters, primarily age, did not remain independent predictors of the lethal outcome in covid-19 patients. some investigations speculated about the association between the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) and susceptibility to covid-19, as well as the relationship between raas inhibitors and the adverse outcome in these patients. withdrawing or switching raas inhibitors would have uncertain benefits, but it would definitely have many disadvantages such as uncontrolled hypertension, cardiac function deterioration and renal function impairment, which could potentially induce more complications in patients with covid-19 than the infection of coronavirus itself. the aim of this review article was to summarize the prevalence of hypertension and cvd in patients with covid-19, their influence on the outcome and the effect of treatment of hypertension and cvd in covid-19 patients.covid-19, hypertension and cardiovascular diseases: should we change the therapy?zhou et al. provided the first evidence that covid-19 is associated with a novel coronavirus strain [12]. they used next-generation sequencing and pan-cov polymerase chain reaction (pcr) primers to determine the cause of the disease in 7 patients with covid-19 in hubei, most of whom were seafood market sellers or deliverers [12]. their findings significantly strengthened the etiological association reported by investigators from india [13], switzerland [14] and other places in china [15], who had also isolated the novel coronavirus from patients with covid-19. these efforts, corroborated by statements from chinese authorities, conclusively led to identification of sars-cov-2 as the causative agent of the covid-19 outbreak [14].since its discovery, the sequence of the complete genome of sars-cov-2 has been determined [13, 16, 17]. it has ~29,000 nucleotides in length and like other covs, it contains at least six open reading frames (orfs) and several accessory genes [13]. according to chen et al. [15], the genome sequence of sars-cov-2 is 89% identical to the bat sars-like-covzxc21 and 82% identical to the human sars-cov [15]. in addition, phylogenetic analysis indicated that two bat sars-like covs were the nearest homologs of sars-cov-2 [13]. based on genomic structure and phylogenetic analysis, the subfamily coronavirinae are divided into four genera, namely alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, gammacoronavirus, and deltacoronavirus [13, 18, 19]. currently, seven human covs have been reported: 229e (hcov-229e), oc43 (hcov-oc43), nl63 (hcov-nl63), hku1 (hcov-hku1), sars-cov, mers-cov, and sars-cov-2. hcov-229e and hcov-nl63 belong to the alphacoronavirus genus, while hcov-hku1, sars-cov, mers-cov, and hcov-oc43 are betacoronavirus members [18]. sars-cov-2 is also classified as a novel betacoronavirus belonging to the subgenus sarbecovirus of the coronaviridae family [13, 15].the 3’ terminal one-third of sars-cov-2 genome sequence encodes four structural proteins, namely spike protein (s), envelope protein (e), membrane protein (m), and nucleocapsid protein (n). among these, the s gene is particularly important for receptor binding and host specificity [13]. infection by cov begins with the binding of the s protein, a surface antigen determining viral tropism, to cell-surface molecules expressed in host cells [20]. as shown in table 1, host receptors for the seven human covs include human aminopeptidase n (cd13) for hcov-229e [21]; 9-o-acetylated sialic acid for hcov-oc43 [22]; angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) for sars-cov [22]; ace2 for hcov-nl63 [23, 24]; 9-o-acetylated sialic acid for hcov-hku1 [25, 26]; dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) for mers-cov [27]; and ace2 by sars-cov-2 [18].at presentation, the most common symptoms in covid-19 patients are fever, dry cough, and shortness of breath, whereas headache, diarrhea, and vomiting are more rare [3, 28–30]. however, early neurological symptoms (e.g. headache, epilepsy, and unconsciousness), without obvious respiratory symptoms, have been reported for numerous covid-19 patients [10, 31]. a 2005 case report by xu et al. provided the first direct evidence that sars-cov has the ability to infect the central nervous system (cns) [32]. a predicted cdna fragment specific for sars-cov was amplified by nested rt-pcr from vero-e6 cell cultures inoculated with a brain tissue extract from a symptomatic patient, and presence of enveloped virus particles, 80–90 nm in diameter, was found by transmission electronic microscopy [32]. shortly before this finding, another study had reported the case of a 32-year-old woman with sars whose cerebrospinal fluid tested positive for sars-cov [33]. these findings were further supported by experiments in mice that demonstrated the ability of various covs to cause cns infections [34–36]. indeed, sars-cov-2 shares similar characteristics with sars-cov, and both anecdotal and statistical data indicate that neurologic symptoms are not common in covid-19 patients [10]. since it is well known that cerebral hemorrhage may result from viral infection of the cns compromising the neurovascular unit [37–40], available evidence strongly suggest that sars-cov-2 infection may greatly increase the incidence of hemorrhagic stroke, especially in at-risk patients.hypertension is the most important risk factor for cerebral hemorrhage [41, 42]. of note, for the 138 covid-19 confirmed cases analyzed by wang et al. [30], 43 patients (31.2%) were hypertensive, a proportion that reflects, relative to other diseases, the higher susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection conferred by hypertension. similar results were recently reported by both guan et al. [26] and the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team [50]. sars-cov-2 infection in humans is mediated by binding of the receptor-binding domain (rbd) of the viral s glycoprotein to ace2 receptors in host cells, and this in turn may lead to downregulation of ace2 expression [20, 43]. since reduced ace2 expression implies increased ang ii availability, covid-19 patients with pre-existing hypertension may experience large blood pressure (bp) fluctuations, making them especially susceptible to hemorrhagic stroke episodes.there is a close relationship between systolic bp variability (sbpv) and poor prognosis of cerebral hemorrhage. divani et al. reported that elevated sbpv in the first 24 h of admission was related to unfavorable in-hospital prognosis in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage (ich) [44]. since bp elevations resulting from downregulation of ace2 expression may occur after sars-cov-2 infection, higher sbpv may be present on admission in hemorrhagic stroke patients affected by covid-19. therefore, the management of bp might require additional attention during the hyper-acute and acute hemorrhagic stroke phases in covid-19 patients, as both high absolute bp levels and high bp fluctuations are main determinants of cerebral hemorrhage prognosis.diabetes is also an independent risk factor for hemorrhagic stroke [42]. huang et al. reported that among 41 patients with laboratory- confirmed sars-cov-2 infection, 8 (20%) cases had diabetes; this again represents a higher proportion of comorbidity cases compared with other diseases [45]. indeed, available data suggest that among covid-19-confirmed cases with underlying chronic diseases, diabetes ranks second after hypertension [29, 45].elevated plasma d-dimer levels were associated with increased risk of hemorrhagic stroke [41]. recently, chen et al. conducted a retrospective, single-center study including 99 patients with covid-19 and found elevated d-dimer levels in 36 patients (36%) [28]; however, mortality rate for this subgroup was not reported. meanwhile, in a similar study assessing 191 covid-19-confirmed patients, d-dimer greater than 1 mg/l on admission was associated with significantly increased odds (p = 0.0033) of in-hospital death [46]. of note, a recently posted pre-print article reporting on 248 consecutive covid-19 cases in wuhan found d-dimer elevation (≥ 0.50 mg/l) in 74.6% (185/248) of the patients. d-dimer levels correlated with disease severity, and values >2.14 mg/l predicted in-hospital mortality with a sensitivity of 88.2% and specificity of 71.3% [47].surprisingly, two recent studies have reported an association between sars-cov-2 infection and the incidence of stroke [31, 48]. a single center, retrospective, observational study by li et al reported a 5% risk of ischemic stroke and a 0.5% risk of cerebral hemorrhage in 221 patients with sars-cov-2 infection from wuhan, china [48]. in this cohort, patients with new onset stroke are obviously older, more likely to present with severe covid-19 and have the above risk factors including hypertension, diabetes and elevated plasma d-dimer levels [48]. another study of 214 patients reported 5 (5.7%) developed acute cerebrovascular diseases including 4 (4.6%) patients with ischemic stroke and 1 (1.1%) with cerebral hemorrhage in severe patients with covid-19 [31]. nevertheless, further studies including larger sample sizes, more exhaustive assessment of patients’ clinical histories, and additional molecular analysis are clearly needed to determine in which cases stroke is directly triggered by sars-cov-2 infection, or it occurs coincidentally [49].inflammatory monocyte-macrophages (imms) and neutrophils are major sources of cytokines and chemokines involved in the pathogenicity of sars-cov-2 [50]. some of these factors represent classical inflammatory biomarkers associated with secondary brain injury following cerebral hemorrhage and may have prognostic value in hemorrhagic stroke patients [51–55]. lattanzi et al. recently reviewed available evidence pointing to the relevance of assessing the neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (nlr) to determine inflammatory status in ich patients [54]. in turn, newer studies confirmed nlr’s predictive value for prognosis of ich [56, 57]. neutrophil-derived matrix metalloproteinases (mmps) are upregulated after acute ich, contributing significantly to tissue destruction and activation of neuro-inflammatory cascades [54]. accordingly, research suggests that it may be possible to mitigate brain damage by early, short-term inhibition of mmps [53]. napoli et al. reported that increased concentrations of serum c-reactive protein (crp), a marker of inflammation, may be an independent predictor of ich outcome [52]. nevertheless, it should be considered that interethnic genomic differences may influence crp status and its predictive values on different stroke phenotypes. another marker, namely serum neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (ngal), a member of the lipocalin family of proteins associated with transport of small hydrophobic molecules, plays an important role in the innate immune response and has also been identified as an independent predictor for outcome following hemorrhagic stroke [51]. given that these inflammatory biomarkers have been associated with both sars-cov-2-related cytopathic effects and hemorrhagic stroke outcome, it would be worthwhile to explore which changes in inflammatory biomarkers occur after hemorrhagic stroke and their predictive value in patients with and without covid-19. this would allow to better define reliable indices of hemorrhagic stroke severity and functional recovery.substantially reduced peripheral lymphocyte counts were evident in severe covid-19 cases [28–30, 45, 58]. xu et al. reported pathological findings of lung, liver, and heart biopsies, as well as blood cell analysis, from a patient who died of covid-19 [59]. the findings showed infiltration of imms in the lung, whereas peripheral cd4 and cd8 t cells were reduced in number but overactivated. the authors suggested that severe immune injury in this patient was due to overactivation of t cells, manifested by increased representation of highly pro-inflammatory ccr6+ th17 cd4 t cell subsets and enhanced cytotoxic capacity of cd8 t cells. these data suggest that although lymphopenia is a common feature in patients with covid-19, it may be paralleled by a pro-inflammatory phenotypic switching in t cell subsets that could be critically associated with disease severity and mortality [9, 59].in addition, it was suggested that like sars-cov, sars-cov-2 also acts on lymphocytes in the respiratory mucosa, leading to a systemic “cytokine storm” concomitant with reduced peripheral blood lymphocytes which impairs cellular immune function [28]. this effect will be clearly potentiated by immune senescence, a well-described phenomenon in many middle-aged and elderly people [60], and aggravated by underlying conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and cerebrovascular disease. this evidence points to worsened outcomes for patients with covid-19 and cerebral hemorrhage comorbidity.soon after the covid-19 outbreak, investigations confirmed that the ace2 receptor, abundantly expressed in lung alveolar epithelial cells, enables sars-cov-2 entry into host cells through the rbd of the virus’ s glycoprotein [12, 61, 62]. the rbd that confers ace2 binding specificity is part of the s1 subunit of the large ectodomain of the s protein. the ectodomain contains also an s2 subunit, which mediates fusion between the viral and host cell membranes [61]. a ternary structure of the rbd of sars-cov-2 was obtained by molecular simulation, revealing that the structure is essentially superimposable (72% identity) to that of sars-cov, except for a flexible loop with cngvegfnc that replaces the rigid loop with ctppalnc present in sars-cov [61]. further analysis indicated that the unique f486 residue in the flexible loop can penetrate deep into a hydrophobic pocket in ace2 formed by f28, l79, y83, and l97 [61].ace2 was identified in 2000 as a homolog of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace), although with different substrate specificity [63]. ace2 primarily acts on angiotensin ii (ang-ii), a major bioactive peptide [43], to generate the vasodilatory heptapeptide ang-(1-7), while ace acts on angiotensin i (ang-i) to generate ang-ii [43]. ace2 counterbalances the vasopressor effect of the ace/ang-ii/at1 axis by stimulating vasodilation through the ace2/ang-(1-7)/masr axis [64, 65]. demonstrating the adversarial relationship between ace and ace2, crackower et al. reported that heart function is impaired in ace2-deficient mice, and this effect can be rescued by ablation of ace expression [66]. ace2 expression is widely distributed across different cells and tissues. to date, it was identified in epithelial cells of the oral mucosa [62], pulmonary alveolar type ii cells [67–69], esophagus upper and stratified epithelial cells, absorptive enterocytes from ileum and colon [69], cholangiocytes [70], myocardial cells, kidney proximal tubule cells, and bladder urothelial cells [46]. in addition, ace2 expression has also been detected in vascular endothelial and smooth muscle cells [71] and in some neurons [43, 64, 71–73], including those in the cardio-respiratory center of the brainstem [43]. the widespread expression of ace2 is thus consistent with the reported effects of sars-cov-2 on multiple tissues and organs. binding of sars-cov-2 to ace2 receptors in brain blood vessels may trigger the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as interleukin-6 (il-6) and tumor necrosis factor (tnf), leading to activation and extravasation of lymphocyte subsets, neutrophils, and macrophages with subsequent neurological manifestations [74]. on the other hand, neuronal ace2 expression could also be a significant factor in covid-19 cases associated with cerebral hemorrhage. research on the 2003 sars outbreak concluded that downregulation of ace2 expression occurred in infected organs, including lungs [75], kidney [43], heart [76], liver [43], and brain [43]. similarly, a study by chen et al. reported decreased ace2 expression in the lungs of covid-19 patients [61].downregulation of ace2 expression may increase risk of hemorrhagic stroke in several ways: i) ace2 deficiency in the brain may impair endothelial function in cerebral arteries, leading to a 4-fold elevation in the risk of cerebrovascular events, including hemorrhagic stroke [77]; ii) downregulation of ace2 expression may increase local ang-ii levels, which acting on at1 receptors may rise bp and facilitate hypertrophy and fibrosis [64]; iii) decreased ace2 expression would also lead to reduced generation of ang (1-7) and depression of ang (1-7)/masr signaling, thus preventing its vasodilatory, growth inhibiting, and antifibrotic actions [64, 78] (figure 1).it calls for special attention the fact that covid-19 may exacerbate any underlying hypertension and put patients at higher risk for hemorrhagic stroke. several mechanisms may contribute to hemorrhagic stroke in hypertensive patients infected with sars-cov-2. these include fibrinoid necrosis, promoted by increased vascular pressure [79], and extensive structural and functional alterations in endothelium and smooth muscle in intracerebral arteries, often aggravated by atherosclerosis, especially in the elderly [80].the bbb is a semi-permeable structure consisting of a well-defined basement membrane and endothelial cells bound by tight junctions that limit the passage of macromolecules into the brain parenchyma. the bbb lies in close apposition to brain cell types, including pericytes, astrocytes, microglia, and neurons, and is especially susceptible to damage by both hypertension and diabetes [81, 82]. xu et al. reported that a chemokine, i.e. the monokine/mig/cxcl9, induced by ifn-g mostly in glial cells, might be involved in the brain immunopathology triggered by sars [32]. elevated mig levels in the blood are correlated with brain infiltration of cd68+ monocytes/macrophages and cd3+ t lymphocytes in the brain [32]. given the similarities between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov, this mechanism deserves further exploration as it may lead to therapeutic strategies to prevent or attenuate brain pathology in covid-19 patients.the bbb is a dynamic and complex structure that helps maintain brain homeostasis and compensates fluctuations in the systemic circulation [83]. expression of ace2 in endothelial cells of the bbb may be a gateway for sars-cov-2 entry into the brain [83]. moreover, the ensuing ace2 down-regulation, compounded by age-related ace2 deficiency in older patients, might further increase endothelial dysfunction and risk of ich [77]. more studies are needed to ascertain the impact of ace2 expression at the bbb and its effect on sars-cov-2-mediated cns symptoms, particularly ich.there is accruing evidence that viral cns infections may cause hemorrhage stroke [37, 39, 84]. the pathogenesis may involve cytokine, chemokine, and protease actions increasing bbb permeability, and damage and/or demise of the neurovascular unit during the necrotizing process [37]. although the specific mechanisms remain unclear, it is obvious that the type and extent of the immune response triggered by the sars-cov-2 determine symptoms severity. a recent study from anderson et al. revealed that bats, the most likely source of the novel sars-cov-2, have evolved a highly specific innate immune response characterized by a large expansion of the type i interferon gene family [85]. while this may clarify the basis of bats’ immune resistance to sars-cov-2, there are still many open questions about the mechanism(s) mediating immune defense against cov-2 in humans. in this regard, it will be very valuable to ascertain and compare immunological (i.e. t cell status, cytokine expression) and genetic (i.e. hla haplotypes) profiles between symptomatic and asymptomatic covid-19 patients, which have shown to influence responses to recent viral outbreaks [86]. this should allow predicting why high viral replication early in the course of infection would lead to the “cytokine storm” characteristic of severe covid-19 cases [50].the current covid-19 outbreak has undoubtedly increased anxiety, fear, and stress in many people around the world. social stress, anxiety, and depression are potential risk factors for hemorrhagic stroke, therefore adequate management of these conditions is a key aspect in primary prevention of cerebrovascular disease [87, 88]. the locus coeruleus, a structure in the brainstem, consists mainly of adrenergic neurons that play a crucial role in the genesis of anxiety by releasing catecholamines that critically influence the stress response [89]. indeed, research has shown that excessive adrenergic stimulation by catecholamines could lead to severe vasospasm and microcirculation disturbances, thus increasing the risk of hemorrhagic stroke [90].although people of all ages can be infected, middle-aged and elderly people are most severely affected by covid-19, suggesting that aging is a prominent risk factor. accordingly, it seems logical that the risk of hemorrhagic stroke in covid-19 patients would increase significantly with age, although a recent article by oxley et al reported covid-19-related stroke episodes occurred in five young patients [91]. based on available evidence, camacho et al. concluded that age is a strong risk factor for hemorrhagic stroke, the deadliest stroke type [92]. their study highlights several age-related processes and pathologies, including cerebral microembolism, white matter lesions, vascular basement membrane thickening, and increased bbb permeability, which determine endothelial damage, changes in vessel elasticity, and ensuing fluctuations in blood flow and pressure that cause loss of autoregulation and increase the risk of ich [92].research on both animal models and humans indicated that aging is closely associated with endothelial dysfunction and oxidative stress in cerebral arteries [93–97]. moreover, studies in rodents suggested that these deleterious effects can be promoted by alterations in the ras system in aged brains. specifically, works by pena-silva et al. [77] and labandeira-garcia et al. [98] suggested that age-related downregulation of ace2 and at2 expression may promote vascular dysfunction because the anti-inflammatory/anti-oxidant effects of angii/at2 and ang1-7/masr signaling are overridden by pro-inflammatory/pro-oxidant signaling through the angii/at1 axis. although confirmatory data in humans is still needed, these studies provide strong support for the overall concept that brain ras activity has a critical effect on cerebrovascular function during aging and may contribute to endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and risk of hemorrhagic stroke.covid-19 emerged as a new human infectious disease caused by sars-cov-2, a novel coronavirus. a significant proportion of covid-19 cases, especially older patients, manifest neurological, rather than respiratory, symptoms on admission and may be at higher risk of developing cerebral hemorrhage. the mechanisms by which covid-19 may promote hemorrhagic stroke in the elderly are not yet clear, but may involve downregulation of ace2 expression secondary to sars-cov-2 binding to neurovascular ace2 receptors. this might increase ang-ii expression and decrease ang (1-7) expression, leading to severe bp elevation. increased bbb permeability, and extensive alterations in endothelium and smooth muscle function in intracerebral arteries. the patients most gravelly affected by covid-19 have underlying hypertension disease, which greatly increases the risk of hemorrhagic stroke. since sbpv in the first 24 h of admission predicts cerebral hemorrhage outcome, special attention should be paid to management of bp in at-risk covid-19 patients. predisposing factors may be compounded in covid-19 patients by the inability of their immune system to efficiently prevent or counteract the pernicious effects of the pro-inflammatory cytokines released upon infection. in addition, anxiety and stress may lead to enhancement of adrenergic tone and trigger vasospasm and microcirculation disturbances, further contributing to cerebrovascular symptoms. in light of this, exploring the changes in inflammatory biomarkers occurring in covid-19 patients with cns symptoms suggestive of incipient stroke would aid diagnosis and treatment to avoid irreversible outcomes.the first case of the new coronavirus disease 2019 in mexico was confirmed on february 28 th , 2020 1 . since then, the government of mexico has launched a series of preventive measures which adhere to the world health organization (who) sars-cov-2 strategic preparedness and response plan aimed at limiting the spread of the virus 2 . the "national campaign for healthy distance", implemented from march 23 rd to may 30 th 2020 included social distance, hand washing, general confinement, self-isolation for those with covid-19 associated symptoms for 14 days and limited economic mobility 3 globally, individual factors associated with covid-19 mortality have been found to be: male sex, age over 65 years, ethnicity, hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and respiratory disease, among others 5, 6 . according to the 2018 national health and nutrition survey (ensanut-2018) of mexico, 36.1% of adults over the age of 19 were obese, 39.1% overweight, 13.7% diabetic and 25% hypertensive 7 . considering that most states in mexico hold a heterogeneous distribution in the prevalence of such comorbidities, regions with an increased burden of these diseases and sociodemographic related factors are at higher risk of encountering more severe manifestations of covid-19 which might require hospitalization or critical care, as well as higher covid-19 mortality rates.it is deemed that in order to curb the pandemic, national decisions ought to be in coordination with those at a local level. in the united states sociodemographic and health factors related to covid-19 vary importantly across counties [8] [9] [10] .mexico has 2,457 municipalities distributed in 32 states, which are the basis of the territorial organization and the political and administrative division 11 . by june 1 st , 2020, the federal government gave the states of the country the responsibility for deciding the reopening of social, educational and economic activities based on a "traffic light" system established by the moh 12 . covid-19 is however expected to linger within communities for several months or even years to come. targeted public policy interventions in regions that are highly vulnerable to covid-19 are crucial to safeguard, protect and strengthen communities facing the pandemic. therefore, the objective of this study was to analyze the municipality-level factors associated with a higher mortality rate (mr) of covid-19 in mexico, and to pinpoint locations expected to suffer from a high covid-19 mortality.coronavirus pandemic surveillance in mexico has been carried out using the sentinel model proposed by the pan american health organization (paho) 13 .this model works with 475 nationally representative health facilities that monitor coronavirus cases through the test for sars-cov-2 conducted in ten percent of suspected cases and 100% those suspected with severe acute respiratory syndrome and signs of breathing difficulty, or in deaths of those hospitalized suspected to be covid-19 cases. the operational definition of a suspected case in mexico is of an individual who in the last 7 days presented at least 2 of the following signs and symptoms: cough, fever, or headache, accompanied by at least one of the following signs or symptoms: dyspnea, arthralgia, myalgia, odynophagia/pharyngeal burning, rhinorrhea, conjunctivitis and/or chest pain 14 .a confirmed case of covid-19 is defined as a person with a diagnosis given by the national network of public health laboratories recognized by the institute of epidemiological diagnosis and reference (indre) who met the criteria of a suspected case 15 .we used the daily updated open data source from the general directorate of epidemiology of mexican moh which includes demographic and health information of confirmed, negative, and suspect cases of covid-19. 4 we extracted the data as of june 20 th , 2020 of the number of confirmed symptomatic cases and deaths. at the municipality-level level, we obtained data on variables that we hypothesized could be linked to differential testing practices or exposure to sars-cov-2 of the most recent and complete information from census, and records from to identify the municipality-level factors associated with the mortality rate of covid-19, we adjusted a negative binomial regression model in which the dependent variable was the sum of confirmed covid-19 deaths in symptomatic cases (n=18 886) by municipality of residence and the independent variables were the quintiles of the distribution of sociodemographic and health outcomes within the municipality. expected mortality rates (emr) for each municipality, incidence rate ratios (irr) and 95% confidence intervals were estimated.to better understand the association between mr of covid-19 and municipalitylevel factors, and in addition to the main objective of the study, we also fitted . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. from 402 083 observations, 35% were positive symptomatic cases of covid-19, 50.3% negative and 14.2% suspect cases. the proportion of deaths was 11.8% in positive cases, 2.56% in negative cases, and 2.71% in suspect cases. at the moment of the analysis, two thirds of the municipality-level had symptomatic cases and almost half had reported deaths due to covid-19. (data not shown)in table 1 is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . table 2) municipality-level factors associated with high cumulative incidence rate of covid-19 were similar than those associated to high mortality, except by the is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . the states of oaxaca, chihuahua and guerrero had case-fatality rates of covid-19 higher than 80%.at the individual level, we also explored characteristics of the confirmed symptomatic cases that were associated with higher lethality of covid-19 in order to observed if the risk factors observed in other countries remain in the mexican context. (supplementary table 2 .) in concordance with the municipality-level results, diabetes, belonging to an indigenous ethnic group, and obesity were associated with higher risk of mortality due to coronavirus. other individual risk factors of lethality-case were age 40 or over, male sex, hypertension, ckd, copd and immunosuppression. in addition, having received medical care in private health institutions was associated with a lower lethality of covid-19 compared to those cared for at public health services. as for individuals who sought medical attention between 6 and 14 days after the onset of symptoms, they had a higher risk of dying compared to those who received medical care between 0 and 5 days after the onset of symptoms.in supplementary table 3 , we illustrate the municipality-level factors associated to the cumulative incidence and lethality rates as of june 20 th , 2020 and disaggregated by month. we found that municipality-level factors association with cumulative incidence and mortality rate of covid-19 varied within the course of the pandemic in mexico.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. .municipality-level factors found to be associated with higher risk of mortality of covid-19were the population density, the prevalence of diabetes and obesity, the mortality rate of diabetes, the proportion of indigenous population, of economically active population and the rate of economic units that operate essential activities during the covid-19 outbreak.first, high proportion of population economically active may reflect lower confinement and increased mobility, while higher population density is may be related to less social distancing and high connectivity. secondly, high mortality rate of diabetes means inadequate control of glucose levels -which has a negative impact on the immune and cardiovascular systems both crucial in the body's response to covid-19 25 -and also, lower access and quality of medical care, or weaker local health care systems 26 .despite of at the individual level, the hypertension was associated with higher lethality of covid-19. at the municipality level, the mortality rate of hypertension was not associated with high mortality of covid-19, and within states with the highest prevalence of hypertension they had lower mortality risk of covid-19. this result could be explained by the fact that the prevalence used in our model came from adults already diagnosed with hypertension, which according to previous surveys represented approximately 60% of the total cases of hypertensive population and are those with access to health care services and antihypertensive medication 27 . nevertheless, unknown and unobserved variables, prior to the demand of healthcare services might be reflecting an inverse association between hypertension and covid-19 mortality.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.11.20151522 doi: medrxiv preprintit is important to note that the cumulative incidence of cases in indigenous populations was low; however, the risk of mortality from coronavirus was higher than in municipalities with lower proportion of indigenous population. these findings could indicate a lower access to healthcare services and testing, combined with a dynamic where the epidemic migrates further into more marginalized areas with a higher proportion of indigenous population.other countries have found that many mechanisms underlying the higher lethality of covid-19 in ethnic minorities are related to marginalization conditions such as locality of residence, work conditions and health inequalities 28, 29 .marginalized conditions such as non-sewage service or dirt floors were inversely associated with mortality of covid-19. communities with these household characteristics are mostly remote and with low connectivity, which could be protective from sars-cov-2 exposure.notwithstanding, marginalized and remote communities could also have lower access to both testing for sars-cov-2 and health care which could lead to underreporting of cases and deaths. special screening strategies and tracing and isolation of contacts within these vulnerable communities are essential to favor the prevention of deaths from covid-19 30 .in may 2020, the mexican moh published a list of 324 municipios de la esperanza ("hope municipalities") which in the last 28 days prior to may 16 did not have any confirmed cases of covid-19 and were not adjacent to municipalities with confirmed cases. this list was a guide for state governors to restart non-essential activities on may 18, 2020 31 . however, according to our results, 16% of these municipality-level are at high risk of having worse outcomes in the event of an outbreak and, as of june 20, 2020, 389 symptomatic cases and 29 deaths due to covid-19 were confirmed in these municipalities.the identification of municipalities with a high burden of risk factors of severe illness or death of covid-19 is critical to establish the most convenient health policies at the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.11.20151522 doi: medrxiv preprint municipality level. many of these municipalities are in locations susceptible to an outbreak onset as the pandemic evolves in mexico. municipalities with no confirmed cases yet, but with populations at risk of becoming seriously ill from covid-19 could have a greater burden of the disease in the upcoming months if contingency measures and mobility restrictions are eased to soon. a targeted approach will be crucial to prevent or control the onset of new outbreaks within these municipalities include testing, isolation and contact tracing as well as more general measures according to the three-stage traffic light system that was established in mexico to reactivate the economy and reduce contingency measures 12 .additional to the municipality-level factors associated with the cumulative incidence and mortality of covid-19 we identified that municipalities in condition of extreme poverty had higher case-fatality rate of covid-19. for example, oaxaca, chihuahua and guerrero are states in which some municipalities had case-fatality rates higher than 80%. this finding suggests a low availability of tests in this communities.as per the limitations within our study, que precision of the estimations depends on the quality of the databases for example; the aging of our data for some variables is up to 10 years, which may not reflect heterogeneous changes within municipalities by 2020.nevertheless, data from previous years, still holds relation to the following years and they were useful to find expected associations. for obesity, diabetes and hypertension prevalence, the information from the ensanut-2018 are representatively at state level reducing the variability within municipalities. however, for the rest of the variables, such as mortality rates of diabetes and hypertension, information was disaggregated at the municipality.finally, the ecological design of our study prevented us to from establishing causal associations.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.11.20151522 doi: medrxiv preprint to our knowledge this is the first study that estimated mortality rate of covid-19 by using the burden of related comorbidities and sociodemographic characteristics, in order to identify municipalities at risk of high mortality rates of coronavirus in mexico. our findings could contribute to the national strategic preparedness and response plans towards a "new normality" 30 by informing at a municipality-level level factors ought to consider in the decision-making process and public health interventions to minimize the negative impact of covid-19 on the health and livelihoods of the most at-risk communities.based on our results, we considered this is a good moment to modify the current epidemiological surveillance strategy for confirming covid-19 positive cases and deaths in populations who might be under-reported by the sentinel surveillance approach. for instance, indigenous communities and communities with extreme poverty could be affected not only by the risks of covid-19 afflicting the health of the population, but also by increasing food insecurity, domestic violence, disrupting the routine care of chronic diseases or the economic repercussions this might bring. it is critical to count on data on the impact of covid-19 amongst these populations to identify, prioritize and address the needs of these vulnerable populations.using small area demographic characteristics and burden of comorbidities of covid-19 is useful to identify locations at risk of covid-19 mortality. in mexico, municipality-level risk factors associated with high mortality rates of covid-19 were high proportion of the population economically active, high population density, high proportion of indigenous population, and high diabetes mortality. based on their characteristics many of the municipalities that have not experienced high mortality yet are prone to do so as the epidemic curve progresses. we therefore warn against overconfidence and premature easing . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.11.20151522 doi: medrxiv preprint of mobility restrictions and other contingency measures. local governments ought to reinforce local strategies to prevent outbreaks in vulnerable communities to covid-19.since november 2019, the rapid outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , which arose from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection, has recently become a public health emergency of international concern [1] . covid-19 has contributed to an enormous adverse impact globally. hitherto, there have been 109,577 laboratory-confirmed cases and 3,809 deaths globally as of march 10 th , 2020 [2] .the clinical manifestations of covid-19 are, according to the latest reports [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] , heterogeneous. on admission, 20-51% of patients reported as having at least one comorbidity, with diabetes (10-20%), hypertension (10-15%) and other cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases (7-40%) being most common [3, 4, 6] . previous studies have demonstrated that the presence of any comorbidity has been associated with a 3.4-fold increased risk of developing acute respiratory distress syndrome in patients with h7n9 infection [13] . similar with influenza [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] , severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) [19] and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] , covid-19 more readily predisposed to respiratory failure and death in susceptible patients [4, 5] . nonetheless, previous studies have been certain limitations in study design including the relatively small sample sizes and single center observations. studies that address these limitations is needed to explore for the factors underlying the adverse impact of our objective was to evaluate the risk of serious adverse outcomes in patients with covid-19 by stratification according to the number and type of comorbidities, thus unraveling the sub-populations with poorer prognosis.this was a retrospective case study that collected data from patients with covid-19 throughout china, under the coordination of the national health commission which mandated the reporting of clinical information from individual designated hospitals which admitted patients with covid-19. after careful medical chart review, we compiled the clinical data of laboratory-confirmed hospitalized cases from 575 hospitals (representing 31.7% of the certified hospitals for admitting patients with between december 11 th , 2019 and january 31 st , 2020. the diagnosis of covid-19 was made based on the world health organization interim guidance [29] . because of the urgency of data extraction, complete random sampling could not be applied in our settings. all clinical profiles outside hubei province were centrally provided by the national health commission. three respiratory experts from guangzhou were dispatched to wuhan for raw data extraction from wuhan jinyintan hospital where most cases in wuhan were located. our cohort included 132 patients from wuhan jinyintan hospital, and one each from 338 hospitals. our cohort represented the overall situation as of jan 31 st , taking into account the proportion of hospitals (~ one fourth) and patient number (13.5%, 1,590/11,791 cases) as well as the broad coverage (covering all major provinces/cities/autonomous regions). confirmed cases denoted the patients whose high-throughput sequencing or real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) assay findings for nasal and pharyngeal swab specimens were positive [3] . see online supplement for further details.the interval between the potential earliest date of transmission source (wildlife, suspected or confirmed cases) contacts and the potential earliest date of symptom onset (i.e., cough, fever, fatigue, myalgia) was adopted to calculate the incubation period. in light that the latest date was recorded in some patients who had continuous exposure to contamination sources, the incubation periods of less than 1.0 day would not be included in our analysis. the incubation periods were summarized based on the patients who had delineated the specific date of exposure.the clinical data (including recent exposure history, clinical symptoms and signs, comorbidities, and laboratory findings upon admission) were reviewed and extracted by experienced respiratory clinicians, who subsequently entered the data into a computerized database for further double-check of all cases. manifestations on chest x-ray or computed tomography (ct) was summarized by integrating the documentation or description in medical charts and, if available, a further review by our medical staff. major disagreement of the radiologic manifestations between the two reviewers was resolved by consultation with another independent reviewer. because the disease severity reportedly predicted poorer clinical outcomes of avian influenza [13] , patients were classified as having severe or non-severe covid-19 based on the 2007 american thoracic society / infectious disease society of america guidelines [30], taking into account its global acceptance for severity stratification of community-acquired pneumonia although no validation was conducted in patients with viral pneumonia. the predictive ability of the need for icu admission and mortality has been validated previously [31, 32] . briefly, severe cases denoted at least one major criterion (septic shock requiring vasoactive medications, or respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation), or at least three minor criteria (respiratory rate being 30 times per minute or greater, oxygen index being 250 or lower, multiple lobe infiltration, delirium or loss of consciousness, blood urea nitrogen level being 20 mg/dl or greater, blood leukocyte count being 4,000 per deciliter or lower, blood platelet count being 100,000 per deciliter or lower, body temperature being lower than 36 degrees, hypotension necessitating vasoactive drugs for maintaining blood pressure).comorbidities were determined based on patient's self-report on admission. comorbidities were initially treated as a categorical variable (yes vs. no), and subsequently classified based on the number (single vs. multiple). furthermore, comorbidities were sorted according to the organ systems (i.e. respiratory, cardiovascular, endocrine). comorbidities that were classified into the same organ system (i.e. coronary heart disease, hypertension) would be merged into a single category.the primary endpoint of our study was a composite measure which consisted of the admission to intensive care unit (icu), or invasive ventilation, or death. this composite measure was adopted because all individual components were serious outcomes of h7n9 infections [13] . the secondary endpoint was the mortality rate.statistical analyses were conducted with spss software version 23.0 (chicago, il, usa). no formal sample size estimation was made because there has not been any published nationwide data on covid-19. nonetheless, our sample size was deemed sufficient to power the statistical analysis given its representativeness of the national patient population. continuous variables were presented as means and standard deviations or medians and interquartile ranges (iqr) as appropriate, and the categorical variables were presented as counts and percentages. in light that no random sampling was conducted, all statistical analyses were descriptive and no p values would be presented for the statistical comparisons except for the cox proportional hazards regression model. cox proportional hazards regression models were applied to determine the potential risk factors associated with the composite endpoints, with the hazards ratio (hr) and 95% confidence interval (95%ci) being reported. our findings indicated that the statistical assumption of proportional hazards analysis was not violated. moreover, cox regression model was considered more appropriate than logistic regression model because it has taken into account the potential impact of the various duration of follow-up from individual patients. the age and smoking status were adjusted for in the proportional hazards regression model because they have been recognized as the risk factors of comorbidities even in the general population. the smoking status was stratified as current smokers, ex-smokers and never smokers in the regression models.the national health commission has issued 11,791 patients with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 in china as of january 31 st , 2020. at this time point for data cut-off, our database has included 1,590 cases from 575 hospitals in 31 province/autonomous regions/provincial municipalities (see online supplement for details). of these 1,590 cases, the mean age was 48.9 years. 686 patients (42.7%) were females. 647 (40.7%) patients were managed inside hubei province, and 1,334 (83.9%) patients had a contact history of wuhan city. the most common symptom was fever on or after hospitalization (88.0%), followed by dry cough (70.2%). fatigue (42.8%) and productive cough (36.0%) were less common. at least one abnormal chest ct manifestation (including ground-glass opacities, pulmonary infiltrates and interstitial disorders) was identified in more than 70% of patients.severe cases accounted for 16.0% of the study population. 131 (8.2%) patients reached to the composite endpoints during the study ( table 1) . overall, the median follow-up duration was 10 days (interquartile range: 8, 14) .of the 1,590 cases, 399 (25.1%) reported having at least one comorbidity. the prevalence of specific we have further identified 130 (8.2%) patients who reported having two or more comorbidities. two or more comorbidities were more commonly seen in severe cases than in non-severe cases (40.0% vs.29.4%). patients with two or more comorbidities were older (mean: 66.2 vs. 58.2 years), were more likely to have shortness of breath (55.4% vs. 34.1%), nausea or vomiting (11.8% vs. 9.7%), unconsciousness (5.1% vs. 1.3%) and less abnormal chest x-ray (20.8% vs. 23.4%) compared with patients who had single comorbidity ( table 2) . non-severe cases. furthermore, comorbidities were more common patients treated in hubei province as compared with those managed outside hubei province as well as patients with an exposure history of wuhan as compared with those without ( table 3) .overall, 131 patients (8.3%) reached to the composite endpoints during the study. 50 patients (3.1%) died, 99 patients (6.2%) were admitted to the icu and 50 patients (3.1%) received invasive ventilation. the composite endpoint was documented in 77 (19.3%) of patients who had at least one comorbidity as opposed to 54 (4.5%) patients without comorbidities. this figure was 37 cases (28.5%) in patients who had two or more comorbidities. significantly more patients with hypertension (19.7% vs. 5.9%), cardiovascular diseases (22.0% vs. 7.7%), cerebrovascular diseases (33.3% vs. 7.8%), diabetes (23.8% vs. 6.8%), copd (50.0% vs. 7.6%), chronic kidney diseases (28.6% vs. 8.0%) and malignancy (38.9% vs. 7.9%) reached to the composite endpoints compared with those without ( table 3) .patients with two or more comorbidities had significantly escalated risks of reaching to the composite endpoint compared with those who had a single comorbidity, and even more so as compared with those without (all p<0.05, figure 1 ). after adjusting for age and smoking status, patients with copd (hr 2.68, 95%ci 1.42-5.05), diabetes (hr 1.59, 95%ci 1.03-2.45), hypertension (hr 1.58, 95%ci 1.07-2.32) and malignancy (hr 3.50, 95%ci 1.60-7.64) were more likely to reach to the composite endpoints than those without (figure 2) . results of unadjusted analysis was presented in table e1 -2. overall, findings of unadjusted and adjusted analysis were not materially altered. as compared with patients without comorbidity, the hr (95%ci) was 1.79 (95%ci 1.16-2.77) among patients with at least one comorbidity and 2.59 (95%ci 1.61-4.17) among patients with two or more comorbidities (figure 2 ). subgroup analysis by stratifying patients according to their age (<65 years vs. ≥65 years) did not reveal substantial difference in the strength of associations between the number of comorbidities and mortality of covid-19 (table e3 ).our study is the first nationwide investigation that systematically evaluates the impact of comorbidities on the clinical characteristics and prognosis in patients with covid-19 in china.circulatory and endocrine comorbidities were common among patients with covid-19. patients with at least one comorbidity, or more even so, were associated with poor clinical outcomes. these findings have provided further objective evidence, with a large sample size and extensive coverage of the geographic regions across china, to take into account baseline comorbid diseases in the comprehensive risk assessment of prognosis among patients with covid-19 on hospital admission.overall, our findings have echoed the recently published studies in terms of the commonness of comorbidities in patients with covid-19 [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . despite considerable variations in the proportion in individual studies due to the limited sample size and the region where patients were managed, circulatory diseases (including hypertension and coronary heart diseases) remained the most common category of comorbidity [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . apart from circulatory diseases, endocrine diseases such as diabetes were also common in patients with covid-19. notwithstanding the commonness of circulatory and endocrine comorbidities, patients with covid-19 rarely reported as having comorbid respiratory diseases (particularly copd). the reasons underlying this observation have been scant, but could have arisen from the lack of awareness and the lack of spirometric testing in community settings that collectively contributed to the under-diagnosis of respiratory diseases [33] . it should be stressed that the observed frequency of comorbidity may also reflect the transmission dynamics within particular age groups, case detection or testing practices or hospital admission policies during the early phases of the epidemic. consistent with recent reports [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] , the percentage of patients with comorbid renal disease and malignancy was relatively low. our findings have therefore added to the existing literature the spectrum of comorbidities in patients with covid-19 based on the larger sample sizes and representativeness of the whole patient population in china.a number of existing literature reports have documented the escalated risks of poorer clinical outcomes in patients with avian influenza [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] , sars-cov [19] and mers-cov infections [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] . the most common comorbidities associated with poorer prognosis included diabetes [25, 29] , hypertension [28], respiratory diseases [19, 28] , cardiac diseases [19, 28] , pregnancy [16] , renal diseases [28] and malignancy [19] . our findings suggested that, similar with other severe acute respiratory outbreaks, comorbidities such as copd, diabetes, hypertension and malignancy predisposed to adverse clinical outcomes in patients with covid-19. the strength of association between different comorbidities and the prognosis, however, was less consistent when compared with the literature reports [16, 19, 25, 28] . for instance, the risk between cardiac diseases and poor clinical outcomes of influenza, sars-cov or mers-cov infections was inconclusive [16, 19, 25, 28] .except for diabetes, no other comorbidities were identified to be the predictors of poor clinical outcomes in patients with mers-cov infections [25] . few studies, however, have explored the it has been well accepted that some comorbidities frequently co-exist. for instance, diabetes [35] and copd [36] frequently co-exist with hypertension or coronary heart diseases. therefore, patients with co-existing comorbidities are more likely to have poorer baseline well-being. importantly, we have verified the significantly escalated risk of poor prognosis in patients with two or more comorbidities as compared with those who had no or only a single comorbidity. our findings implied that both the category and number of comorbidities should be taken into account when predicting the prognosis in patients with covid-19.our findings suggested that patients with comorbidities had greater disease severity compared with those without. furthermore, a greater number of comorbidities correlated with greater disease severity of covid-19. the proper triage of patients should be implemented by carefully inquiring the medical history because this will help identify patients who would be more likely to develop serious adverse outcomes of covid-19. moreover, better protection should be given to the patients with coivd-19 who had comorbidities upon confirmation of the diagnosis. a main limitation was the self-report of comorbidities on admission. under-reporting of comorbidities, which could have stemmed from the lack of awareness and/or the lack of diagnostic testing, might contribute to the underestimation of the true strength of association with the clinical prognosis. under-reporting of comorbidities could also lead to over-estimation of strength of association with adverse outcome. however, significant under-reporting was unlikely because the spectrum of our report was largely consistent with existing literature [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] and all patients were subject to a thorough history taking after hospital admission. the relatively low age might help explain the low prevalence of copd in our cohort. moreover, the duration of follow-up was relatively short and some patients remained in the hospital as of the time of writing. more studies that explore the associations in a sufficiently long time frame are warranted. caution should be exercised when extrapolating our findings to other countries where there are outbreaks of covid-19 since the prevalence of comorbidities may differ among different countries. therefore, future studies that include an external validation of the results would be desirable. although the temperature and systolic blood pressure differed between some subgroups, they were unlikely to be clinically relevant.finally, because of the rapid evolving outbreak globally, ongoing studies with the inclusion of more patients would be needed to increase the statistical power and lend support to subgroup analyses stratified by the specific comorbidities (i.e. copd) and their association with the risk of death. data are mean ± standard deviation, n/n (%), where n is the total number of patients with available data.copd=chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. icu = intensive care unit. data are mean ± standard deviation, n/n (%), where n is the total number of patients with available data.copd=chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. icu = intensive care unit data are mean ± standard deviation, n/n (%), where n is the total number of patients with available data.copd=chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. icu = intensive care unit cox proportional hazard regression models were applied to determine the potential risk factors associated with the composite endpoints, with the hazards ratio (hr) and 95% confidence interval (95%ci) being reported.shown in the figure are the hazards ratio (hr) and the 95% confidence interval (95%ci) for the risk factors associated with the composite endpoints (admission to intensive care unit, invasive ventilation, or death). the comorbidities were classified according to the organ systems as well as the number.the scale bar indicates the hr.cox proportional hazard regression models were applied to determine the potential risk factors associated with the composite endpoints, with the hazards ratio (hr) and 95% confidence interval (95%ci) being reported.the model has been adjusted with age and smoking status a bcomorbidity and its impact on 1,590 patients with covid-19 in china: a nationwide analysis a significance of high prevalence of diabetes and hypertension in severe covid-19 patientshidekatsu yanaisevere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), which causes coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) has reached a pandemic level. in a recent retrospective cohort study of covid-19, comorbidities such as diabetes and hypertension were present in nearly half of patients [1] . the odds of in-hospital death were significantly higher in patients with diabetes (2.85) and hypertension (3.05) [1] . it remains unknown why the prevalence of diabetes and hypertension is high in covid-19 patients and why such diseases can be risk for severe covid-19 including death.to elucidate such clinical questions, i searched the prevalence of diabetes and hypertension and the controlling status of such diseases in all covid-19 patients, severe and nonsevere covid-19 patients using pubmed. the prevalence of each disease in severe and non-severe covid-19 patients was meta-analyzed by peto's exact method, and odds ratio (or) with 95% confidence interval (ci) was shown.the prevalence of diabetes in all covid-19 patients, severe and non-severe covid-19 patients were shown in table 1 [1 -12] . half of studies showed a statistically significantly higher prevalence of diabetes in severe patients than in non-severe patients. in the meta-analysis, the prevalence of diabetes in severe patients was significantly higher than that in non-severe patients (or: 3.52, 95% ci: 2.65 -4.67). unfortunately, only three studies were available to analyze the controlling status of diabetes. all three studies showed that plasma glucose levels in severe patients were significantly higher than those in non-severe patients. although such data did not present sufficient evidence, elevation of plasma glucose is likely to be associated with severity of covid-19. zhu et al performed a retrospective, multicentered study of 7,337 cases of covid-19 in hubei province, china, among which 952 had pre-existing type 2 diabetes [13] . they found that subjects with type 2 diabetes required more medical interventions, and had a significantly higher mortality (7.8% vs. 2.7%) and multiple organ injury than the non-diabetic individuals. further, well-controlled blood glucose was associated with markedly lower mortality compared to individuals with poorly controlled blood glucose, supporting a significance of hyperglycemia in severe covid-19.the prevalence of hypertension in all covid-19 patients, severe and non-severe covid-19 patients was shown in table  2 [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . five of 12 studies showed a statistically significantly higher prevalence of hypertension in severe patients than in non-severe patients. in the meta-analysis, the prevalence of hypertension in severe patients was significantly higher than that in non-severe patients (or: 2.69, 95% ci: 2.16 -3.34). seven studies were available to analyze the controlling status of hypertension. five studies did not show any difference in blood pressure between severe and non-severe patients. huang et al showed that systolic blood pressure was significantly higher in severe patients than in non-severe patients [2] . itelman et al showed that minimal systolic blood pressure was significantly lower in severe patients than in non-severe patients, and maximal systolic blood pressure was significantly higher in severe patients than in non-severe patients [11] . blood pressure itself is unlikely to be associated with severity of covid-19. since hypertension is one of the most significant risk factors for severe disease and mortality in covid-19, and angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) 2 is the entry receptor of sars-cov-2 [14, 15] , the effects of ace inhibitors (aceis) and angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) in covid-19 patients have received much focus. a recent study has shown the protective effects of aceis/ arbs against mortality in covid-19 [16] , challenging the association between aceis/arbs use and severe covid-19.why is hypertension one of the most significant risk factors for severe disease and mortality in covid-19? diabetes and hypertension are crucial coronary risk factors, and diabetes and hypertension are closely interlinked because of similar risk factors, such as endothelial dysfunction, vascular inflammation, arterial re-modelling, atherosclerosis, dyslipidemia, and obesity [17] . common mechanisms, such as upregulation of the reninangiotensin-aldosterone system, oxidative stress, inflammation, and activation of the immune system likely contribute to the close relationship between diabetes and hypertension [17] . high prevalence of diabetes and hypertension in severe cov-id-19 patients can be explained by such vascular damage. the prevalence of cardiovascular disease (cvd) in all covid-19 patients, severe and non-severe covid-19 patients was shown in table 3 [1-8, [10] [11] [12] . four of 11 studies showed a statistically significantly higher prevalence of cvd in severe patients than in non-severe patients. in the meta-analysis, the prevalence of dm and htn in severe covid-19 patients j clin med res. 2020;12(6):389-392 cvd in severe patients was significantly higher than that in non-severe patients (or: 5.37, 95% ci: 3.73 -7.74). further, cvd was significantly associated with increased odds of death (or: 21.4) [1] , supporting a significant association between vascular damage and severity of covid-19. d-dimer is detected in injured vascular endothelium [18] , and von willebrand factor is produced by endothelial cells in response to injury, and high von willebrand factor level has been observed in systemic vasculitis [19] . multivariable regression showed increasing odds of in-hospital death associated with ddimer greater than 1 µg/ml (or: 18.42, 95% ci: 2.64 -128.55; p = 0.0033) on admission [1] . elevated von willebrand factor levels were observed in covid-19 patients in the intensive care unit [20] . d-dimer was also reported to be significantly increased in kawasaki disease with coronary artery lesions, and to be the independent risk for coronary artery lesions in kawasaki disease [21] . von willebrand factor parameters were reported to represent potential biomarkers for disease activity and coronary artery lesion in patients with kawasaki disease [22] . a very recent article reported the development of kawasaki disease in covid-19 patient [23] , supporting an association between endothelial injury and severe covid-19.in conclusion, endothelial injury may be associated with severity of covid-19, which can partially explain high prevalence of diabetes and hypertension in severe covid-19.i thank the staffs (yukie kawamura, keiko nakamura, harue author has no financial disclosures to report.the author declares that he has no conflict of interest concerning this article.not applicable.hy designed the research, collected and analyzed data, and wrote and approved the final paper.the author declares that data supporting the findings of this study are available within the article.since last november, almost 5.5 million confirmed covid-19 infections and 350 000 deaths have been reported. 1 as evidence is mounting, it has become clear that while covid-19 initially affects the airways and lungs, the inflammatory storm occurring later during the infection also involves the cardiovascular system and leads to venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, 2 heart blocks, 3 myocardial infarction, as well as myocarditis [4] [5] [6] and heart failure. 7 furthermore, any cardiac condition seems to represent a major risk factor for an unfavourable outcome of the covid-19 infection.finally, and less apparent initially, the lockdown in all affected countries produced extensive collateral damage as patients were afraid to visit hospitals for acute cardiac conditions and were deprived of necessary care as outpatient and elective inpatient services had been cancelled. this second focus issue on covid-19 and cardiovascular disease addresses all these issues and starts with the fast track 'association of hypertension and antihypertensive treatment with covid-19 mortality: a retrospective observational study' by fei li and colleagues from china. they investigated whether the treatment of hypertension, especially with renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) inhibitors-as suggested initially 8 -would influence the mortality of all patients with covid-19 infection admitted to the huo-shen-shan hospital in wuhan, china. 9 this hospital was designed only for treating covid-19 and opened on 5 february 2020. hypertension and its treatment were stratified according to medical history or medications prior to the infection. among 2877 patients, 29.5% had a history of hypertension. after adjustment for confounders, patients with hypertension had a two-fold increased relative mortality risk as compared with those without hypertension. patients with a history of hypertension, but without antihypertensive treatment, had an even higher risk of mortality compared with those with treatment, with a hazard ratio of 2.17. a quarter of the patients were treated with at least one raas inhibitor, while the rest received beta-blockers, calcium antagonists, or diuretics. in those on raas inhibitors, mortality was numerically lower, but did not reach significance ( figure 1) . thus, in this largest cohort published so far on that issue, hypertension appears independently associated with mortality from covid-19. furthermore, these data do not support the hypothesis that raas inhibitors worsen outcomes among persons with this infection. these important findings are put into context of the debate on the role of ace2 and covid-19 in a thought-provoking editorial by luis ruilope from the hospital 12 de octubre in madrid, spain. 10 troponins are known risk factors for outcome in patients with acute coronary syndromes, 11, 12 heart failure, 13 valvular heart disease, 14 pulmonary embolism, 14 and even normal individuals. as such, it was important also to study this aspect in patients with covid-19 infection. in their article entitled 'characteristics and clinical significance of myocardial injury in patients with severe coronavirus disease 2019', bo yang and colleagues from the wuhan university renmin hospital in china investigated this aspect in 671 patients with severe covid-19 infection. 15 of those, 9.2% died; these patients had more comorbidities and more commonly had myocardial injury (i.e. 75.8% vs. 9.9%) than survivors. the area under the receiver operator characteristic curve of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i for in-hospital mortality was 0.92. the optimal cut-off points (i.e. >0.026 ng/ml) and high levels of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i predicted in-hospital death, with a hazard ratio of 4.56 and 1.25, respectively. in multivariable logistic regression, older age, comorbidities such as hypertension, coronary artery disease, chronic renal failure, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and a high level of c-reactive protein were predictors of myocardial injury. thus, risk of in-hospital death among patients with severe covid-19 is predictable by markers of myocardial injury, which were associated with an inflammatory response and cardiovascular comorbidities. additionally, the covid-19 pandemic affected not only those with the infection, but also cardiac patients at large. it appears that the recommendations of governmental agencies to stay at home most probably deterred cardiac patients from visiting a hospital when acute symptoms occurred, as outlined in the article 'reduction of hospitalizations for myocardial infarction in italy in the covid-19 era' authored by ciro indolfi from the division of cardiology, magna graecia university in catanzaro, italy and colleagues of the società italiana di cardiologia and the ccu academy investigators group. 17 they conducted a multicentre, observational, nationwide survey on admissions for acute myocardial infarction at italian intensive cardiac care units over a 1-week period during the covid-19 outbreak, compared with the equivalent week in 2019. they observed a 48.5% reduction in admissions compared with the equivalent week in 2019. the reduction was significant for both st-segment elevation myocardial infarction (stemi) admission, with a 26.5% reduction, and non-stemi (nstemi), with a 65.4% reduction. among stemis, the reduction was greater for women, with 41.2%, than for men, with 17.8%. a similar reduction in acute myocardial infarction admissions was registered in north italy (52.1%), central italy (59.3%), and, surprisingly, also in southern italy (52.1%) where fewer covid-19 cases were observed. thus, the covid-19 pandemic has led to a significant collateral damage even in non-covid-19 patients with cardiac disease. as outlined in an insightful editorial by m. chadi alraies from wayne state university in washington, dc, usa, 18 the causes may be multifactorial and may be related to the fact that patients may have been afraid to visit hospital during the pandemic or that fewer plaque ruptures occurred due to the standstill of life during the lockdown.finally, a comprehensive review entitled 'covid-19: from epidemiology to treatment' by jose miro and colleagues from the hospital clinic-idibaps in barcelona, spain reminds us that cardiologists and cardiovascular surgeons must be aware now of virus infections in their patients and on their impact in general. 19 healthcare workers should be educated and trained to tackle the enormous challenge posed by sars-cov-2 and other viruses in wards, operating theatres, icus, and cardiac catheterization laboratories. this review provides the necessary knowledge about covid-19 and focuses on relevant aspects on prevention and management for specialists within the cardiovascular field.as much as patients and the clinical service suffered from the covid-19 pandemic, so did research, and running clinical trials in particular. indeed, in most countries, any running protocols were stopped, which impacted on the recruitment, follow-up, and eventually the integrity, safety, and results of such trials. this issue is discussed in the current opinion article 'conducting clinical trials in heart failure during (and after) the covid-19 pandemic: an expert consensus position paper from the heart failure association (hfa) of the european society of cardiology (esc)' by stefan anker from the charité in berlin, germany and colleagues. (figure 2 ) 20 for heart failure trials, covid-19 may be particularly impactful as patients with heart failure are likely to be at greater risk of infection with covid-19 and the consequences might also be more serious. furthermore, they are also at risk of adverse outcomes if their clinical care is compromised. the authors note that as physicians and clinical trialists, it is our moral and ethical duty to ensure safe and effective care is delivered to trial participants without affecting the integrity of the trial. many regulatory authorities from different world regions have issued guidance statements regarding the conduct of clinical trials during this covid-19 crisis. however, international trials may benefit from expert guidance from a global panel of experts to supplement local advice and regulations, thereby enhancing the safety of participants and the integrity of the trial. accordingly, the heart failure association of the european society of cardiology conducted web-based meetings with clinical trialists in europe, north america, south america, australia, and asia. in this article, the authors highlight the challenges this pandemic poses for the conduct of clinical trials in heart failure and offers advice on how they might be overcome, with some practical examples. while this panel of experts are focused on heart failure clinical trials, these discussions and recommendations may apply to clinical trials in other therapeutic areas.the issue is further complemented by discussion forum contributions. in a contribution entitled 'clinically suspected myocarditis in the course of coronavirus infection', krzysztof ozieranski and colleagues from the warszawski uniwersytet medyczny in poland comment on the recent article 'coronavirus fulminant myocarditis saved with glucocorticoid and human immunoglobulin' by yuan fang and colleagues from the sichuan university west china hospital in china. 21, 22 fang et al. respond to ozieranski in a separate contribution. 23 27 finally, in a contribution entitled 'renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system dysregulation and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection', thadathilankal john and colleagues from the stellenbosch university faculty of medicine and health sciences in bellville, south africa comment on the recent viewpoint article 'sars-cov2: should inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system be withdrawn in patients with covid-19?' by gabriela kuster fro the university hospital basel in switzerland. 8, 28 kuster et al. respond to this comment in a separate manuscript. 29 the editors hope that readers of this issue of the european heart journal will find it of interest.angiotensin ii type 2 receptor (at 2 r) [7] (fig. 1 ). ang ii signaling through at 1 r mediates the effects of vasoconstriction, inflammation and fibrosis, whereas at 2 r activation has opposing effects through vasodilation, the antiinflammatory response and antifibrosis effects [7] . angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a homolog of ace, has distinct enzyme active sites and is a key counterregulatory enzyme that degrades ang ii to ang-(1-7), thereby attenuating its effects on vasoconstriction, sodium retention, inflammation, and fibrosis through the mas receptor [7] . ace2 also cleaves angiotensin i to angiotensin-(1-9) [7] . the effects of ace2 are not suppressed by ace inhibitors (aceis) [7] . under normal physiological conditions, activities of the ace/ang ii/at 1 r axis, ace/ ang ii/at 2 r axis, and ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas receptor axis are in a dynamic equilibrium state, maintaining the normal function of the corresponding system [7] . aceis and at 1 r blockers (arbs) not only inhibit the ace/ang ii/at 1 r pathway but also modulate the ace/ang ii/at 2 r pathway and ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas receptor pathway [7] .previous studies have revealed a cell-specific expression pattern of ace2 in multiple organs, and ace2 is broadly expressed in the heart, kidneys, and intestine as well as in alveolar epithelial cells of the lungs, which are the principal target of and the main site of injury caused by sars-cov-2 [8] . under normal conditions, ace2 expression in the lungs is lower than that in other organs, including the heart, kidneys, and intestine [8] . the degree of expression and the biological relevance of ace2 may vary depending on the tissue and clinical state. the functional role of ace2 in the lungs appears to be relatively minimal under normal conditions [9] , but ace2 may be upregulated in certain clinical states, probably for organ protection. it has been shown in experimental models that ace2 is upregulated by relatively high doses of aceis and arbs in the heart, kidneys, and arteries, leading to organ protection [10] . however, the evidence was not always consistent among the diverse ras inhibitors or distinct organs [10] . in the tanno-sobetsu study, a japanese population-based cohort, we previously showed that the urinary level of ace2, which is derived mainly from the kidneys, was significantly higher in hypertensive patients who had been treated with olmesartan, an arb, for more than 1 year than in untreated control subjects and patients who had been treated with calcium channel blockers, including amlodipine and longacting nifedipine, the acei enalapril or other arbs, including losartan, candesartan, valsartan and telmisartan [11] . this finding suggests that olmesartan uniquely increases renal expression and urinary excretion of ace2, potentially leading to additional renal protection via pleiotropic effects. however, data showing the effects of ras inhibitors, including aceis and arbs, on the expression of ace2 in the lungs are lacking in experimental animal models and in humans.similar to the entry receptor of sars-cov in sars, sars-cov-2 in covid-19 invades the host through ace2 as the host cellular receptor for the viral spike protein [12] (fig. 1) . therefore, the expression and distribution of ace2 are key determinants for coronavirus entry into cells. two distinct mechanisms for sars-cov-2 infection have been reported: endocytosis by ace2-binding sars-cov-2 entry [13, 14] and transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2)-mediated cleavage of sars-cov-2 accompanied by ace2 [12, 14] (fig. 1) . given that ace2 is the receptor that allows coronavirus entry into cells, pretreatment with ras inhibitors, such as aceis and arbs, might modulate sars-cov-2 infection and the development of lung injury and other organ damage caused by the virus.it has been reported that sars-cov infection in sars reduces ace2 expression, resulting in lung injury via an imbalance between the ace/ang ii/at 1 r axis and the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas receptor axis [15] . in addition, exposure to the sars-cov spike protein in a mouse model induced acute lung injury, which was rescued by losartan, an arb [15] , indicating that activation of the ace/ang ii/ at 1 r pathway is involved in lung injury. it has also been shown that dysregulation of ace2 mediates acute lung injury in mouse models of infection by other viruses, such as influenza virus and respiratory syncytial virus [16] . furthermore, continued viral infection and replication contribute to reduced membrane ace2 expression in cultured cells [16] . after the initial engagement of the sars-cov-2 spike protein, there is a subsequent downregulation of ace2 abundance on cell surfaces, as seen in sars-cov [15] . under such conditions, ace2, which converts ang ii angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) converts angiotensin i (ang i) to angiotensin ii (ang ii). ang ii signaling leads to organ damage, such as lung injury, by promoting inflammation and fibrosis through the ang ii type 1 receptor (at 1 r) and has opposing effects through the ang ii type 2 receptor (at 2 r). angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) converts ang ii to ang-(1-7) and ang i to ang-(1-9). ang-(1-7) signaling attenuates the effects of inflammation and fibrosis through the mas receptor (mas-r). it has been suggested that ace2 is upregulated by some ace inhibitors (aceis) and at 1 r blockers (arbs). ace2 is also a receptor of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). ace2-binding sars-cov-2 is internalized by endocytosis into the cell, and membrane-anchored ace2 on the cell surface is downregulated. downregulation of ace2 promotes organ damage through activation of the ace/ang ii/at 1 r pathway and deactivation of the ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas-r pathway. another mechanism of sars-cov-2 infection is transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2)-mediated cleavage of sars-cov-2 accompanied by ace2. ace2 is also shed from the membrane by a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (adam17), and the soluble form of ace2 may intercept the virus from binding to membrane-anchored ace2 in the cell plasma membrane. possible increases in the expression and soluble form of ace2 induced by ras inhibitors would have beneficial effects of protection against lung injury and other organ damage but not infection with sars-cov-2 to ang-(1-7), is unable to exert protective effects in organs. it has been reported that ang ii levels were higher in patients with covid-19 (n = 12) than in healthy controls (n = 8) and that elevated plasma ang ii levels were correlated with the total viral load and degree of lung injury [17] . data regarding the effects of ras inhibitors on lungspecific expression of ace2 are lacking. however, even if ras inhibitors modify the expression of ace2 in the lungs, there is a possibility of facilitation of greater engagement and entry of the sars-cov-2 spike protein during sars-cov-2 infection. conversely, a possible increase in ace2 expression induced by ras inhibitors would protect against lung injury and other organ damage in covid-19 by inhibiting downregulation of ace2-induced activation of the ace/ang ii/at 1 r pathway (fig. 1) . clinical trials are currently underway to test the safety and efficacy of several arbs, including losartan (clinicaltrials.gov number: nct04312009, nct04311177, and nct04335123), valsartan (nct04335786), and telmisartan (nct04355936), in patients with covid-19.on the other hand, ace2, a membrane-bound enzyme, is distinctly shed from the membrane by a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (adam17), and a soluble form of ace2 exists in body fluids [18] (fig. 1) . in pathological states, shedding of ace2 is increased, resulting in elevated soluble ace2 levels in blood, urine, and other body fluids [19] . it has been suggested that a soluble recombinant ace2 protein intercepts the virus from binding to membrane-anchored ace2 in the cell plasma membrane [20] . restoration of ace2 through administration of recombinant ace2 was reported to reverse lung injury in mouse models of other viral infections [21] . furthermore, treatment with recombinant human ace2 safely reduced ang ii levels in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome [22] . clinical trials to test whether administration of recombinant ace2 protein may be beneficial in restoring balance to the ras network and potentially preventing organ injury have also been arranged in patients with covid-19 (nct04287686 and nct04335136). possible induction of ace2 in lungs by ras inhibitors would result in increased soluble ace2 and may have a beneficial effect of protection from membrane-anchored ace2-mediated infection with sars-cov-2 (fig. 1) .because of a lack of evidence, there are still concerns about an increased risk of sars-cov-2 infection and worsening lung injury in covid-19 patients receiving ras inhibitors. however, withdrawal of ras inhibitors or switching from ras inhibitor therapy to another antihypertensive therapy may require careful follow-up to avoid unstable control of blood pressure. clinical trials are currently underway to evaluate the effects of continuation (nct04357535), switching (nct04330300), and discontinuation (nct04353596 and nct04329195) of aceis and arbs in covid-19 patients. based on the currently available evidence, multiple societies of the specialty announced that administration of ras inhibitors should be continued in stable hypertensive patients who are at risk for, are being evaluated for, or have covid-19 [23] . interestingly, it has been reported that covid-19 patients with hypertension who were receiving a ras inhibitor, an acei or an arb, (n = 17) had a significantly lower peak viral load of sars-cov-2 in cells than did covid-19 patients who were not receiving a ras inhibitor (n = 25) [24] . in a retrospective, multicenter study in hubei, china, the unadjusted mortality rate was significantly lower in covid-19 patients with hypertension taking an acei or arb (n = 188, 3.7%) than in those not taking an acei or arb (n = 940, 9.8%) [25] . furthermore, a mixed-effect cox model after adjustment for age, sex, comorbidities and in-hospital medications showed that the risk for all-cause mortality was lower in a group of patients treated with an acei or arb than in a group of patients not treated with an acei or arb [25] . on the other hand, according to a report in the new york city area, mortality rates for patients with hypertension who were not taking an acei or arb (n = 953), those who were taking an acei (n = 168), and those who were taking an arb (n = 245) were 26.7%, 32.7%, and 30.6%, respectively, though the results were unadjusted for known confounders including age, sex, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, and comorbidities [2] . further detailed investigations using a large number of patients regarding ras inhibitors and covid-19 need to be addressed.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.publisher's note springer nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.as of 4 april 2020, 1,139,207 confirmed cases of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid -19) have been reported worldwide [1] . examination of the full-length genome revealed that the coronavirus responsible for covid-19, namely severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), is a β-coronavirus in the same subgenus as the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) virus, but in a different clade [2] . the structure of the receptor-binding gene region is very similar to that of the sars coronavirus in which both employ the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) for cell entry [2] . ace2, a negative regulator of the renin-angiotensin system (ras), is a homolog of ace, where its expression can be identified principally in the heart, kidney, and airway epithelial cells [3] . it functions as a carboxypeptidase by converting angiotensin ii to angiotensin-(1-7), thereby opposing the vasoconstrictive effect of angiotensin ii [4] .currently available epidemiological studies have reported an increased prevalence of cardiovascular disease (cvd), including hypertension, among patients who developed a severe subtype of covid-19 [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] . for example, the study by guan et al. [5] , which is one of the earliest analyses of the characteristics of chinese patients with covid-19, reported that the prevalence of coronary heart disease was more than fourfold higher among patients who developed the combined primary endpoint of admission to an intensive care unit, mechanical ventilation, or death, relative to patients with less severe outcomes. in addition, more recent studies [9, 10] that evaluated covid-19-associated cardiac injury observed a high prevalence of hypertension (59.8-63.5%), coronary heart disease (29.3-32.7%), cardiomyopathy (15.4%) and chronic heart failure (14.6%) among covid-19 patients complicated with cardiac injury, which is independently associated with mortality with covid-19.since then, researchers tend to favor an association of cvd with the severity of covid-19 [11, 12] . nevertheless, interpreting such an association should be done with caution, since the validity of such an association is hampered by an unclear definition of cvd, including hypertension, adopted in these studies [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] . without knowing the baseline cvd status of patients, it is hard to suggest that cvd is an added risk factor for developing severe covid-19 infection. moreover, the available studies originated from china, therefore the generalizability of such an association to the global population is limited. patients with underlying cvd are likely to experience excessive morbidity from any cause because they have diminished circulatory reserve to meet the excessive demands on the cardiovascular system. furthermore, since the prevalence of cvd is increased with age, age may act as a confounding factor; available studies also reported that older patients with covid-19 tend to develop a severe course of the disease, including the development of cardiac injury [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] . future studies with age-stratified analysis could shed some light on the association of cvd with the severity of covid-19 infection.on the other hand, some researchers have called to consider the safety of ras inhibitors, including ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii type i receptor blockers (arbs), among patients with covid-19 [11, 12] . there has been speculation that patients with covid-19 who are receiving these agents may be at increased risk for adverse outcomes, given that ace2 is a functional receptor for sars-cov-2 and ras inhibitors can increase ace2 levels [11, 12] . however, an increased level of ace2 upon exposure to ras inhibitors has not been a universal finding. while some animal studies [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] have noticed an increased expression of ace2 upon exposure to ace inhibitors or arbs, other studies reported otherwise [19, 20] . the findings from human studies [21] [22] [23] [24] have discredited the association of levels of ace2 with the use of ace inhibitors and arbs, although one study [25] did notice an increased urinary secretion of ace2 in hypertensive patients treated with the arb olmesartan, but not with other ace inhibitors and arbs. furthermore, another study [26] demonstrated an increased gene expression for ace2 in the small intestine of patients under ace inhibitor/arb treatment compared with untreated controls. in addition, the elevation of serum ace2 was only found in patients with unsatisfactory blood pressure control utilizing ace inhibitor therapy, as reported in a study among hypertensive subjects [27] . therefore, the effect of ras inhibitors on ace2 among human subjects is mainly due to the expression of ace2 in the plasma, kidney and gastrointestinal system, and is not the known effect, if any, of ras inhibitors on the expression of ace2 in human airway epithelial cells. furthermore, increased expression of ace2 did not correspond to increased ace2 activity in an animal study [16] , and it is not known if the biological effect on ace2 would wane immediately upon discontinuation of ace inhibitors and arbs.the role of ace2 in coronavirus infection is still controversial. although ace2 is a prerequisite for infectivity of sars-cov, the presence of other co-factors seems to be important for efficient cellular infection, since sars-cov was also identified in cell types lacking ace2 expression [28] . in addition, the upregulation of ace2 is not entirely harmful, since, paradoxically, an increased level of ace2 might protect against coronavirus-induced lung injury [29] . binding of the coronavirus spike protein to ace2 leads to ace2 downregulation, which in turn results in excessive production of angiotensin ii [30] . as angiotensin ii increases pulmonary vascular permeability, it could produce lung injury and impair lung function [30, 31] . coincidentally, a study that investigated the clinical and biochemical parameters of patients with covid-19 observed that levels of angiotensin ii were higher compared with healthy controls [32] . moreover, angiotensin ii levels were linearly associated with lung injury, supporting the hypothesis that angiotensin ii is responsible for lung injury in covid-19. as previously mentioned, the clinical course of covid-19 can be complicated by cardiac injury manifested by increased biomarkers, which portends a worse prognosis, and ace2 plays a significant role in myocardial recovery response [9, 10, 33] . indeed, in some of the heart samples from patients who died from sars, the presence of viral rna was identified, which was associated with reduced ace2 protein expression [34] .the safety issue of ace inhibitors and arbs has since created great concerns on social media sites, but emerging data are reassuring. a retrospective observational study [35] published in the chinese language reported that the use of ace inhibitors or arbs did not differ significantly between patients who recovered and patients who died from covid-19, suggesting that the use of ras inhibitors may not result in worse prognosis, although a conclusion on the safe use of ras inhibitors could not be firmly drawn from this study due to the limited number of patients receiving ras inhibitors (n = 22). however, another recent retrospective study [36] reported that covid-19 patients with underlying hypertension taking ace inhibitors/arbs had a much lower proportion of critical disease (9.3% vs. 22.9%; p = 0.061) and a lower mortality rate (4.7% vs. 13.3%; p = 0.283) than their hypertensive counterparts not receiving an ace inhibitor/arb. furthermore, patients taking ace inhibitors/arbs had significantly lower levels of c-reactive protein and procalcitonin when compared with patients not receiving an ace inhibitor/arb, suggesting a potential anti-inflammatory function in covid-19.ras inhibitors could be indicated for chronic heart failure or chronic kidney disease, in which self-discontinuation of these agents without prior consultation with physicians may lead to decompensation within days to weeks, further compromising cardiopulmonary reserve in patients at risk of covid-19 [37, 38] . the benefits that are specific to ace inhibitors/arbs may not be recapitulated by other antihypertensive agents for these diseases. while no data have been reported on the effect of temporary discontinuation of ras inhibitors on mortality among patients with covid-19, the shreds of evidence extrapolated from other patient settings suggest harm, in which studies from the veterans affairs healthcare system showed that non-resumption of arbs table 1 position statements of selected major cardiovascular societies on the use of renin-angiotensin system inhibitors in the context of covid-19 [ american heart association, heart failure society of america, american college of cardiology "… recommend continuation of raas antagonists for those patients who are currently prescribed such agents for indications for which these agents are known to be beneficial, such as heart failure, hypertension, or ischemic heart disease"17 march 2020 https ://www.acc.org/lates t-in-cardi ology /artic les/2020/03/17/08/59/hfsa-acc-aha-state ment-addre sses-conce rns-re-using -raas-antag onist s-in-covid -19 within 2 days, or ace inhibitors within 14 days, after surgery was associated with higher 30-day mortality rates [39, 40] . the risk of fall in the elderly population from abruptly stopping long-term medication (e.g. ace inhibitors) could result in significant adverse consequences by increasing the risk of fractures and bleeding.in conclusion, although cvd has been reported as one of the most common comorbidities among patients with severe covid-19, the association of cvd with the severity of covid-19 has yet to be confirmed, since, thus far, there is no biological connection between cvd and viral replication. in addition, the established benefits of ace inhibitors and arbs in cvd outweigh the uncertain risks among patients at risk of covid-19 since available evidence demonstrated no direct pathological relationship between ras blockade and covid-19. therefore, we echo the position statements ( table 1 ) of some of the major cardiovascular societies [41] to discourage the discontinuation of ace inhibitors or arbs in patients with covid-19. such statements should provide reassurance to clinicians who would like to continue using ace inhibitors and arbs among patients at risk of covid-19. furthermore, an ongoing clinical trial of covid-19-infected patients receiving an ace inhibitor/arb randomized to either an alternative antihypertensive medication or continuation of the ace inhibitor/arb therapy may provide a definitive answer to this debate [42] .funding no external funding was used in the preparation of this manuscript.in december, 2019, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2; previously 49 known as 2019-ncov) was first reported in wuhan city, the capital of hubei province in china, 50 and has subsequently spread to other regions of china and 199 countries and territories (1-3).sars-cov-2, which belongs to a unique clade of the sarbecovirus subgenus of the 52 orthocoronavirinae subfamily (4), was later designated coronavirus disease 2019 in 53 february, 2020, by world health organization. 54 patients with covid-19 present primarily with fever, dry cough and fatigue or myalgia (5). 55 although most patients with covid-19 are thought to have a favorable prognosis, older patients 56 and those with chronic diseases may have worse outcomes (6). patients with chronic underlying 57 conditions may develop viral pneumonia, dyspnea and hypoxemia within 1week after onset of the 58 disease, which may progress to respiratory or end-organ failure and even death (7). 59 several studies have reported the clinical characteristics and risk factors associated with death in 60 patients with covid-19 pneumonia (2, 6, (8) (9) (10) (11) . we are aware of no systematic review and meta-61 analysis that summarized available findings in this regard. thus, we aimed to systematically 62 review the present evidences on the association between age, gender, hypertension, diabetes, 63 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), cardiovascular diseases (cvds) and risk of death 64 from covid-19 infection, and to summarize the available findings in a meta-analysis. 67 study protocol 68 the present systematic review and meta-analysis were planned, conducted and reported in 69 adherence to the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) 70 guidelines (12).search strategy 73 we performed a literature search using the online databases of isi web of science, pubmed, 74 scopus and google scholar for relevant publications up to 22 march 2020. the following medical 75 subject headings (mesh) and non-mesh keywords were used in our search strategy: ("novel 76 coronavirus" or "sars-cov-2" or "covid-19") and ("death" or "mortality" or "survival" 77 or "fatal outcome"). literature search was done by two independent researchers (mp and sy). 78 we also searched the reference lists of the relevant articles to identify missed studies. no restriction 79 was applied on language and time of publication. to facilitate the screening process of articles 80 from databases, all literature searches were downloaded into an endnote library (version x8, 81 thomson reuters, philadelphia, usa). in our meta-analysis, eligible articles were included if they met the following inclusion criteria:(1) all studies assessing the association between age, gender, comorbidities and mortality risk from 86 covid-19 infection as the major outcomes of interest; (2) observational studies with retrospective 87 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint the newcastle-ottawa scale (nos) was used for assessing the quality of included retrospective 98 cohort studies based on the following three major components: selection of the study patients, 99 adjustment for potential confounding variables and assessment of outcome (13). based on this 100 scale, a maximum of nine points can be awarded to each study. in the present study, articles with 101 the nos score of ≥ 5 were considered as high quality publications.statistical analysis 104 we used hrs, ors, and rrs (and their 95% confidence intervals) reported for the association 105 between risk factors and mortality from covid-19 infection, to calculate log rrs and their 106 standard errors (ses). then, the overall effect size for mortality in relation to risk factors was 107 calculated using random-effects model. for examining the between-study heterogeneity, we 108 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10. 1101 performed the cochran's q test (i 2 ≥ 50% were considered between-study heterogeneity) (14). to 109 identify potential sources of heterogeneity, we did subgroup analysis according to the predefined 110 criteria as follows: age (≥65 vs. <65), gender (male vs. female), hypertension (yes vs. no), diabetes 111 (yes vs. no), copd (yes vs. no) and cvds (yes vs. no). in addition to the main analysis, we carried 112 out sensitivity analysis to find if the overall estimate depended on the effect size from a single 113 study. assessing the publication bias was done by the formal test of egger (15). all statistical 114 analyses were conducted using stata, version 14.0 (stata corp, college station, tx, usa). p-115 values were considered significant at level of < 0.05.in our initial search, we found 135 papers. of these, 15 duplicates, 17 non-english, 26 non-human, 120 46 reviews and 17 studies that did not fulfill our eligibility criteria were excluded, leaving 14 121 papers for further evaluation. out of remaining 14 papers, 8 were excluded because of the 122 following reason: did not report hrs, ors or rrs with 95% cis. finally, we included 6 123 retrospective studies in the current systematic review and meta-analysis ( figure 1 ).study characteristics 126 all studies were conducted in wuhan, china and used retrospective cohort design (2, 6, 8-11). the 127 sample size of studies varied from 172 to 20812 patients (mean age, 58.7 years). five studies used 128 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10. 1101 real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) (2, 6, 8, 10, 11) and one study 129 used clinical features (9) to identify covid-19 infection. the nos scores ranged between 5 to 8.demographic characteristics and risk of death from in the meta-analysis of six effect sizes, obtained from six studies (2, 6, 8-11) (22,350 patients and 133 741 cases of death), we found that older age (≥65 years old) was associated with a 239% (over pheterogeneity=0.075) and risk of death from covid-19 ( figure 3 ). we found that hypertension, 149 diabetes, copd and cvds were associated with 329% (over threefold), 311% (over threefold), 150 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20056291 doi: medrxiv preprint 769% (over sevenfold) and 739% (over sevenfold) higher risk of covid-19 mortality, findings from the current systematic review and meta-analysis supported the hypothesis that older 161 age (≥65 years old), hypertension, diabetes, copd and cvds were associated with higher risk of 162 mortality from covid-19 infection. to the best of our knowledge, current study is the first meta-163 analysis to summarize earlier retrospective studies on the association between demographic 164 characteristics, comorbidities and risk of death from covid-19. 165 our findings are partially in agreement with previous narrative review (16). previously, older age 166 has been reported as an important risk factor for mortality in sars and middle east respiratory 167 syndrome (mers) (17, 18). the current meta-analysis confirmed that increased age (≥65 years 168 old) was associated with death in covid-19 patients. the age-dependent defects in b-cell and t-169 cell function and the excess production of type 2 cytokines could lead to prolonged 170 proinflammatory responses and deficiency in control of viral replication, potentially leading to 171 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint (11). 173 previous studies suggested that covid-19 infection is more likely to affect older males with 174 comorbidities, and can result in fatal respiratory diseases such as acute respiratory disease 175 syndrome (10, 20). interestingly, sars and mers also infected more males compared to females 176 (21, 22). differences in the levels and type of circulating sex hormones in males and females might 177 influence the susceptibility of covid-19 infection. previous study showed that sex hormones 178 modulate the responses of adaptive and innate immunity (23). however, our findings showed that 179 gender was not a risk factor for mortality in covid-19 patients.the other risk factors related to death include hypertension, diabetes, respiratory system disease 181 and cvds. a previous study showed that hypertension and diabetes are more prevalent in patients 182 with severe mers infection (22). similarly, the mortality rate of influenza was significantly higher 183 in patients with hypertension, metabolic disease, cvds and respiratory system disease (24). 184 previous studies reported that high protein expression of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) 185 receptor, the receptor for covid-19, in specific organs correlated with organ failures in sars 186 patients (25-28). it has been shown that circulating ace2 levels are higher in patients with 187 hypertension, diabetes and cvds (29, 30). therefore, patients with these comorbidities may be 188 more prone to die from covid-19 infection because of the high expression of ace2 receptor, 189 though further research on the mechanism is needed.the pathogenesis of covid-19 is still not completely understood. cytokine storm is thought to 191 play an important role in disease severity (31). neutrophilia was found in both the lung and cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . figure 2 . forest plot for the association between age, gender and risk of mortality from covid-19 using random-effects model.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10. 1101 in december, 2019, a cluster of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause appeared in wuhan, hubei province, china. by 7 january 2020, china rapidly isolated the novel coronavirus and shared the viral genome sequence to world health organization (who) [1] . the novel coronavirus was identified as a novel enveloped rna betacoronavirus and named 2019 novel coronavirus (later named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 [sars-cov-2] by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses), which has a phylogenetic similarity to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), but the contagosity is higher than sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [2] . in order to prevent the epidemic of this contagion, chinese government made a decision to temporarily shut down the traffic departing from wuhan on 23 january 2020 and adopted a series of control measures. who declared the spread of sars-cov-2 was listed as a public health emergency of international concern, and subsequently designated the pneumonia infected by sars-cov-2 as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) [3] . until 19 april 2020, covid-19 has swept across 213 countries and regions which reported 2 245 872 confirmed cases and 152 707 deaths. the largest number of confirmed cases were in the united states, followed by spain and italy [4] . this phenomenon signified fighting with covid-19 is not only a matter for china, but an imperative event for global.nowadays, the majority of studies on covid-19 in china are focused on wuhan, the hardest-hit area, and little is known about the clinical features of covid-19 outside of wuhan [5] [6] [7] . the study of chang et al. [8] included 13 cases in beijing and the research of xu et al. [9] enrolled 62 cases in zhejiang, however, due to the small sample size, clinical characteristics might be not comprehensive. researches with a larger number of confirmed cases were urgently needed outside of wuhan. the clinical spectrum of covid-19 appears to be wide, comprising mild type without pneumonia, common type with pneumonia, severe type with respiratory distress, and critical type with respiratory failure, shock or even death [10] . diverse subtypes have their unique features, whether in epidemiology or laboratory results. a study with 72 314 cases reported by the chinese center for disease control and prevention (china cdc) showed that the case-fatality rate was 49.0% among critical cases [11] . therefore, mastering the characteristics of different subtypes and early identification of the severity of illness is of great significance for the treatment.hence, the aim of our study is to summarize the epidemiologic and clinical characteristics, laboratory and radiograph findings, treatments, and outcomes of different subtypes of patients with covid-19 in zhejiang province. on this basis, we want to explore risk factors for the severity of illness in patients with covid-19 and appeal to clinicians to attach importance to these factors.we conducted a retrospective study investigating on the epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, radiograph, treatments and outcomes characteristics of confirmed cases of covid-19 in zhejiang province from 17 january to 12 february 2020. diagnosis of covid-19 was in accordance with the interim guidance from the who [12] . a confirmed case of covid-19 was defined as a positive result on real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) assay of sputum and throat swab specimens. only laboratory-confirmed patients were enrolled in our study. data were uniformly collected by the health commission of zhejiang province, where all patients were allocated at specific hospitals for unified treatment according to the government emergency rule. all data enrolled in our study had been shared with who and the preliminary results were reported to the authority of zhejiang province.information of medical records were gathered and sent to the data collection center in hangzhou. demographic, epidemiological, clinical, laboratory, treatments and outcomes data were exacted from electronic medical records using a standardized data collection form. a group of doctors who have experiences in treating the patients with covid-19 reviewed and disposed the data. when information was incomplete, the working team in hangzhou would contact the doctor in charge for explanation.this study was approved by the clinical research ethics committee of the first affiliated hospital, college of medicine, zhejiang university (no. iit20200005c). written informed consent was waived by the ethics commission of the designated hospital, and oral consent was obtained from patients.sputum and throat swab specimens collected from all patients were tested by rt-pcr for sars-cov-2 rna. briefly, the cdc of zhejiang province and at municipal level, and the first affiliated hospital, school of medicine, zhejiang university were responsible for confirmation of sars-cov-2, with national authorization.laboratory tests were conducted on admission, including blood routine examinations, serum biochemical tests, coagulation function examinations, infection-related biomarkers, and an identification of other respiratory pathogens such as influenza a virus, influenza b virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus and respiratory syncytial virus. chest radiograph or computed tomography (ct) was done for all inpatients at admission. treatment measures and outcomes were followed up to 12 february 2020.the illness severity of covid-19 was defined according to the chinese management guideline for covid-19 (version 6.0) [13] . patients with covid-19 was categorized as mild, common, severe, and critical according to the illness severity. mild type was defined as mild symptoms and no pneumonia on imaging. common type was defined as having respiratory tract symptoms and imaging with pneumonia. severe type was defined as satisfying any of the following items: 1) respiratory distress and respiratory frequency ≥ 30/min; 2) blood oxygen saturation ≤ 93% at rest; 3) pao 2 /fio 2 ratio ≤ 300 mmhg; 4) lung infiltrates > 50% within 24-48 h. critical type was defined as satisfying any of the following items: 1) respiratory failure occurs and require mechanical ventilation; 2) shock occurs; 3) combined with other organ failure and requires icu monitoring and treatment. the incubation period was defined as the time from exposure to the onset of illness, which was estimated among patients who could provide the exact data of close contact with confirmed or suspected individuals. family cluster was defined as occurring two or more cases with fever and/or respiratory symptoms within the family in recent 2 weeks. fever was defined as axillary temperature of at least 37.3°c. gastrointestinal symptoms included nausea, emesis and diarrhea.once the temperature returned to normal for more than 3 days, respiratory symptoms significantly improved, the imaging of lung obviously absorbed, and two consecutive negative results for sars-cov-2 antigen (sampling interval at least 1 day), patients could be discharged from hospital.continuous variables were presented as median (interquartile range [iqr] ) and compared using kruskal-wallis. categorical variables were presented as frequency (percentages), and compared using the χ 2 test or fisher's exact test when appropriate.to analyze risk factors for the severity of illness in patients with covid-19, univariate and multivariate ordinal logistic regression models were used. variables with p < 0.05 in the univariate models were selected into the multivariate model for calculating. a two-sided α of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. all the analyses were done with spss version 25.0 (ibm corporation, armonk, ny, usa).the kaplan-meier method was used to estimate hospitalization time, and the log rank test was applied for comparisons among mild, common, and severe type. the kaplan-meier analysis was performed using 'survival' packages in r version 3.6.1 (r foundation, vienna, austria).from 17 january 2020 to 12 february 2020, clinical data were collected on 788 patients with covid-19 in zhejiang province. according to the definition of clinical classification, they were divided into 52 cases (6.6%) of mild type, 658 cases (83.5%) of common type, 61 cases (7.7%) of severe type, and 17 cases (2.2%) of critical type.as shown in table 1 , the median age in mild, common, severe, and critical type was 37.5 years (iqr: 19. .5%, respectively. hypertension was the most common underlying disease and there were significant differences among the four subtypes (9.6% vs 13.2% vs 31.1% vs 88.2%, p < 0.001). in both severe and critical type, the ratio of patients with gastrointestinal symptoms exceeded 15%.on admission, the majority of leucocyte in all subtypes were normal or decreased. as shown in table 2 , the four types had significant differences in neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, platelets count, albumin (alb), aspartate aminotransferase (ast), sodium, blood urea nitrogen (bun), creatinine (cr), creatinine kinase (ck), lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), c-reactive protein (crp) and procalcitonin (pct) (p < 0.05). in contrast, there were no significant differences in hemoglobin, international normalized ration (inr), alanine aminotransferase (alt), total bilirubin (tb) and potassium (p > 0.05).multiple mottling and ground-glass opacity were typical imaging manifestations of patients with covid-19. the proportion of it in common, severe, and critical type were 27.8, 60.7, and 88.2%, respectively.patients with covid-19 were quarantined in designated hospital and a total of 668 patients received antiviral treatments in our research. as shown in table 3 , interferon-α inhalation, lopinavir/ritonavir and arbidol were the most commonplace antiviral regimen in all subtypes. glucocorticoids were not used in mild type, but in all critical types, and there were significant differences in the use among the four types (0.0% vs 8.2% vs 47.5% vs 100.0%, p < 0.001). similar to glucocorticoids, there were significant differences among the four types based on the use intravenous immunoglobulin (0.0% vs 3.6% vs 42.6% vs 70.6%, p < 0.001). till 12 february 2020, none of patients used extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) and continuous renalreplacement therapy (crrt).at the endpoint of our study, 21 cases (40.4%) of mild type, 273 cases (41.5%) of common type, 27 cases (44.3%) of severe type, and 1 case (5.9%) of critical type discharged from hospital, and none of the patients died. kaplan-meier analysis showed a significant difference in hospitalization time among mild type, common type and severe type (fig. 1) .as shown in table 4 the outbreak of covid-19 is now becoming an enormous threat to public health. with further research of the structure and infection mechanism of respiratory, scientists found angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) might be the site of sars-cov-2 binding on the surface of cells, with the same route of infection of sars-cov [14] . it has been proved that ace2 might play an important role in virus transmission and infection. sars-cov-2 not only attacked the lung but also caused damages to many other organs, including heart, kidney, liver and central nervous system [3, 6, 15, 16] . the diagnosis of covid-19 was complicated by the diversity in symptoms, imaging findings and the severity of illness, therefore, describing features of each subtype and exploring risk factors for the severity of illness could help clinicians to better tackle with this disease. in this respective study, the median age of critical types was higher than the other three types, with the reason of low immunity and degeneration of related physiological function in older. the length of the incubation period is related to many factors, such as the number of pathogens, the time required for toxin production and transmission, and human immunity. the incubation period was shorter in severe type, probably due to poor immunity and higher viral load [17] . fever and cough were the dominant symptoms in all subtypes, while hemoptysis was rare. fever is a protective mechanism by activating the immune systems to resist pathogens, and cough is a reflective defense against invaders.when an individual was infected, the above two symptoms generally appeared at early stage. although hemoptysis was an atypical symptom, it was reported that there was covid-19 patient admitted only with hemoptysis as the initial symptom [18] . moreover, we should be alert to the patients who didn't have a fever, due to 6.6% of severe type without fever in our study. hypertension and diabetes were the most pervasive underlying diseases in all subtypes, and the proportion of them were higher in critical type. in consideration of the aged constituting the majority of the critical type, it is common that the rates of comorbidities increased. according to the laboratory results, the decrease of lymphocyte occurred in 70.6% of critical type. the decrease of lymphocyte was a prominent feature of critical type in our cohort which was consistent with a previous study [19] . sars-cov-2 might mainly act on lymphocyte, especially t lymphocytes, as did sars-cov [6] . in addition, the increased ast and ldh implied a potential of liver and heart damage which was more common in severe and critical types.currently, there is no effective antiviral treatment for covid-19 [20] . in the light of the previous clinical experience, interferon-α, lopinavir/ritonavir and arbidol were applied for antiviral therapy in our hospital, however, the therapeutic regimen was not researched a consensus among hospitals. a retrospective study identified that proper use of corticosteroid in critical type with sars could lead to a lower mortality and shorter hospitalization stay [21] . in our study, the dosage of glucocorticoids was limited to 40-80 mg/d to avoid side effects. until 12 february 2020, 21 cases (40.4%) of mild type, 273 cases (41.5%) of common type, 27 cases (44.3%) of severe type, and 1 case (5.9%) of critical type discharged from hospital.compared with initial patients infected with sars-cov-2 in wuhan, the illness condition of patients in zhejiang province are relatively milder. none of the patients died at the end of our follow-up. this feature is obviously different from researches in wuhan which reported a higher mortality [10, 19] . at early stage of outbreak of covid-19 in wuhan, shortage of local medical resources, insufficient understanding of this disease and no effective drugs might contribute to this phenomenon.several risk factors for the severity of illness in patients with covid-19 were identified in our study including male, fever, cough, hemoptysis, gastrointestinal symptoms, hypertension, and higher age-grading. several studies demonstrated that differences in covid-19 disease prevalence and severity were associated with sex, which was similar to our results [3, 6, 19] . one study, using single-cell sequencing, found that expression of ace2 was more predominant in asian men [22] . during the evolution, females develop enhanced innate and adaptive immune responses than males and are less susceptible to viral infections [23] . these above two points might be the reasons for the higher prevalence and severity of covid-19 in men than in women. additionally, in our study, the presence of any one of the comorbidities was higher in male compared with female (30.7% vs 24.4%, p = 0.048). we thought this result might also partly explain why men are more prone to severity illness.our study found increasing odds of the severity of illness was associated with gastrointestinal symptoms. a bioinformatics analysis on single-cell transcriptomes demonstrated that ace2 was not only highly expressed in the lung at2 cells, esophagus upper and stratified epithelial cells but also in absorptive enterocytes from ileum and colon. recently, two independent laboratories from china declared that they have successfully isolated live sars-cov-2 from the stool of patients [24] . an increasing number of studies remind us that digestive system might serve as an alternative route of infection for sars-cov-2 [25] . we consider the digestive tract transmission of sars-cov-2 might impair the function of intestinal mucosal barriers and increase the production of inflammatory factors, further aggravating the severity of illness.in addition, covid-19 patients combined with hypertension were at higher risk for the illness severity in our study. renin-angiotensin system (ras) plays an important role in the pathogenesis of hypertension. it could be simply summarized as two axes, one is ace-ang ii-at1 axis responsible for constriction of blood vessels, and the other is ace2-ang-(1-7)-mas axis with the opposite effect [26, 27] . generally, the two axes could interact with each other and maintain the blood pressure balance. however, the balance would be broken in hypertension, with the result of a lower expression of ace2. once infected by sars-cov-2, the level of ace2 would be even lower, followed by intensified ang ii activity. ang ii would further promote vasoconstriction, increase vascular permeability and mediate inflammatory responses, leading to illness aggravation.there are several limitations in our study. firstly, the retrospective design of our study might affect integrality of data and diminish its credibility, and more prospective cohort studies should be on the agenda in the future. secondly, patients enrolled in our study only come from zhejiang province, and large-scale researches at the national level were urgently needed which could provide more reliable and comprehensive data. thirdly, changes of the illness in different subtypes needed to be further investigated. a model for predicting the changes of disease was necessary for clinicians to better guide treatments. moreover, laboratory results were not included in ordinal logistic regression model to explore risk factors for the severity of illness, due to the normal range of some indicators varied from different hospitals.in summary, our study reported the largest cases of patients with covid-19 in zhejiang province, and indicated risk factors of illness severity which was of great significance for early identification and prompt treatment. based on the research findings, we recommend that clinicians should pay close attention to these features in patients with covid-19 including older age, male, fever, cough, hemoptysis, gastrointestinal symptoms and hypertension, and strengthen self-protection during the outbreak of covid-19. hypertensive disorders are the most common medical complications of pregnancy and a major cause of maternal and perinatal morbidity and death. the detection of elevated blood pressure during pregnancy is one of the cardinal aspects of optimal antenatal care. with the outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) and the risk for person-to-person spread of the virus, there is a desire to minimize unnecessary visits to health care facilities. women should be classified as low risk or high risk for hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and adjustments can be accordingly made in the frequency of maternal and fetal surveillance. during this pandemic, all pregnant women should be encouraged to obtain a sphygmomanometer. patients monitored for hypertension as an outpatient should receive written instructions on the important signs and symptoms of disease progression and provided contact information to report the development of any concern for change in status. as the clinical management of gestational hypertension and preeclampsia is the same, assessment of urinary protein is unnecessary in the management once a diagnosis of a hypertensive disorder of pregnancy is made. pregnant women with suspected hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and signs and symptoms associated with the severe end of the disease spectrum (e.g., headaches, visual symptoms, epigastric pain, and pulmonary edema) should have an evaluation including complete blood count, serum creatinine level, and liver transaminases (aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase). further, if there is any evidence of disease progression or if acute severe hypertension develops, prompt hospitalization is suggested. current guidelines from the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists (acog) and the society for maternal-fetal medicine (smfm) for management of preeclampsia with severe features suggest delivery after 34 0/7 weeks of gestation. with the outbreak of covid-19, however, adjustments to this algorithm should be considered including delivery by 30 0/7 weeks of gestation in the setting of preeclampsia with severe features. key points: · outbreak of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) warrants fewer office visits.. · women should be classified for hypertension risk in pregnancy.. · earlier delivery suggested with covid-19 and hypertensive disorder..a proposed plan for prenatal care to minimize risks of covid-19 to patients and providers: focus on hypertensive disorders of pregnancywe thank joshua brown, kevin lo and colleagues, and christopher tignanelli and colleagues for their responses to our correspondence 1 , and we welcome the opportunity to reply.the fast-developing pandemic of corona virus disease 2019 , which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was first reported from wuhan, china, 2 and has spread globally. as of march 22, 2020, 307 297 people have been infected by sars-cov-2, with 13 049 deaths and 92 382 people recovered. several reports have summarised the clinical and epidemiological features of covid-19 and have shown specific comorbidities associated with increased risk of infection and developing into a severe or fatal case. of 1099 infected patients, 173 had severe disease, in whom the most common comorbidities were hypertension (24%), diabetes (16%), coronary heart disease (6%), and cerebrovascular disease (2%). 3 in a second cohort of 41 patients hospitalised with covid-19, 4 diabetes (20%), hypertension (15%), and cardiovascular disease (15%) were frequent comorbidities. among 191 patients hospitalised with covid-19, 5 the most common comorbidities with significant effects on mortality were hypertension (30%; p=0·0008), diabetes (36%; p=0·0051), and coronary heart disease (15%; p=0·0001). in an analysis of 201 patients with covid-19, 6 84 (42%) patients developed acute respiratory distress syndrome, with hypertension (27%) and diabetes (19%) as the most common comorbidities.hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease, which seem to be the most common comorbidities in patients with covid-19, are typically treated with drugs that inhibit the renin-angiotensin system (ras), including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) or angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs). the long history of use and thorough investigation of these drugs means that efficacy and safety of ras inhibitors is very well documented, not only for management of blood pressure but also for protection from disease-associated inflammation and organ remodelling. 7 the high proportion of patients with severe covid-19 and these comorbidities suggests a causative link and led to our hypothesis, 1, 8 which has also been presented by others. 9,10 based on the drugs most frequently given to patients to treat these comorbidities (ie, aceis and arbs), we postulated whether these drugs might further increase risk for severe or fatal covid-19. 1 this hypothesis is supported by the observation that organ-specific expression of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) correlates with the vulnerability to infection by sars-cov-2. 11 our concern was initiated after investigating the molecular mechanism by which sars-cov-2 attaches to and infects cells. both sars-cov-2 and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) bind to the host cell's membrane via ace2, 12 which is specifically highly expressed by epithelial cells in oral mucosa. 13 ace2 is a widely expressed protein in lung, intestine, kidney, and blood vessels, and on immunoreactive cells. 11 moreover, circulating amounts of ace2 are increased in patients with hypertension or diabetes, and levels are further increased by different drugs, including aceis and arbs. 14, 15 it should also be emphasised that specific alleles control ace2 expression, activity, and response to aceis. 15 in addition to animal models, humans given aceis, arbs, or both, had increased ace2 levels on intestine luminal cells. 16 in this context, it should be noted that modification of glyco sylation is essential for binding of sars-cov-2 spike protein. inhibition of ace2 glycosylation by either chloroquine, hydrochloroquine, or a serine protease inhibitor significantly reduces the infection of host cells by sars-cov and sars-cov-2 in vitro. [17] [18] [19] we are aware of the beneficial effects of aceis and arbs protecting the heart and kidney for patients with hypertension and diabetes. an opposing hypothesis has suggested that upregulation of ace2 expression or infusion of human recombinant ace2 might protect against sars-cov-2 infections. 20, 21 however, it has to be emphasised that the role of ace2 in these protective effects are not well understood. [12] [13] [14] furthermore, it should be noted that aceis have been reported to modify the adaptive immune response, 22 suggesting that long-term use of aceis might suppress the adaptive immune response, which is a key defence against viral infections. similar effects on the adaptive immune response are known for most non-steroid antiinflammatory drugs. these effects need to be addressed in an extended discussion and investigated with clinical trials in the context of the covid-19 pandemic.available published data indicate that ace2 is a double-edged sword, particularly when considering patients with sars-cov-2 infection and comorbidities of hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. the final answer as to whether drugs to treat these comorbidities (ie, aceis or arbs) are more beneficial than harmful in this current pandemic is unclear, and all hypotheses should be investigated rather than being interpreted as evidence. this work is of special importance because coronaviruses in general have always been a part of the common influenza season and, in the future, new sars-cov will probably develop.the overinterpretation of our hypothesis should not lead to changing drugs for patients with hypertension or diabetes without first consulting with an expert clinician. nevertheless,angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) has its homologue, ace2 discovered in 2000 as a ace related caroxypeptidase not inhibited by captopril (1, 2) . ace2 was firstly shown to be expressed in the kidneys of both the normotensive and the spontaneously hypertensive rat strains (3) . subsequent studies demonstrated down-regulation of renal ace2 in three different models of hypertension (4) . moreover, circulating and cardiac levels of angiotensin ii (at-ii) were shown to increase in the ace2-null mice. ace2 is the principal pathway for ang-(1-7) formation from at-ii (ang-1-8), protecting against excessive activation of at1 receptor in the heart tissues, however, newer findings suggested that ace2 can be an important element in the renin-angiotensin aldosterone system (5) . following these studies, ace and ace2 focused the attention of researchers for their contribution in diverse human disorders. recently, the new coronavirus (2019-ncov or sars-cov-2) outbreak which has affected people all over the world has further highlighted the role of ace2. this virus has about 80% sequence identity with the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-related coronaviruses (sars-covs) and 96% sequence identity to a bat coronavirus. most remarkably, sars-cov-2 was shown to utilize the similar cell entry receptor ace2 as sars-cov (6, 7). a recent study has shown that the ace2-binding pocket for sars-cov-2 spike protein receptor-binding domain (rbd) is almost identical to this one of sars-cov rbd. structural protein modeling led to identification of amino acid residues in sars-cov-2 rbd that critical in ace2 binding. notably, most of these residues are either highly conserved or have comparable side chain chemical properties with the sars-cov rbd.this similarity of the structure and amino acid sequence stimulated intensive debate on the convergent evolution of these viruses rbds under a pressure of enhanced binding to ace2 (8) . ace2 has been shown to be expressed as a membrane bound protein in several human tissues such as lung, intestine, heart and kidney. the surface expression of this protein on was j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f demonstrated on ciliated bronchial cells and on the lung alveolar epithelial cells but also in endothelial cells, which was stated a noticeable discovery (9) . moreover, a recent in silico analysis of rna-seq profiles verified expression of ace2 in the mucosa of oral cavity (10) . figure 1 shows the molecular mechanisms initiated after sars-covs entry into the cells and the significance of ace and ace2 in these processes. then, ace converts at-i to at-ii. finally, ace2 cleaves at-ii to produce at-(1-7). at-ii can bind with at1r to initiate inflammation and fibrosis in lung tissue. however, binding of at-(1-7) with masr inhibits this process. sars-covs exploits ace2 for their entrance into the cells. a transmembrane serine protease tmprss2 has a crucial role in activation of the fusion of a virus with cell membrane. moreover, the furin protease which is proconvertase physiologically required to activate proteins in the golgi apparatus mediates proteolysis of the spike protein s2 subunit, an unique feature for sars-cov-2 (11) . ace2 levels are decreased in sars-cov infected cells leading to increase in at-ii and decrease in at- (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f levels. based on receptor effects of these proteins mediated by at1r and masr, these two alterations have synergic effects on induction of lung fibrosis. moreover, at-ii has a role in degradation of ace2 through ubiquitination (12) . sars-covs also enhance expression levels of mir-200c-3p and mir-429 in the infected cells, both of them being regarded as ace2 targeting mirnas (13, 14) (ace: angiotensin converting enzyme, acei: ace inhibitor, at: angiotensinogen, arb: angiotensin ii receptor blocker).in the current review, we discuss the expression pattern and function of the both ace proteins in relation with the underlying disorders, administration of certain medications and the existence of common genomic variants within ace genes to explain the differences in the response of affected individuals to sars-cov-2.in agreement with the role of ace2 on virus uptake by cells, up-regulation of human ace2 has increased disease severity in mice infected with sars-cov (15) . moreover, injecting sars-cov spike into mice has led to down-regulation of ace2, thus aggravating the lung injury (16, 17) . consequently, ace2 functions as the cellular receptor for sars-cov entrance but also confers a protective mechanism against lung injury (18) . based on these investigations, level of expression of ace2 is an important factor in the sars-cov infection. thus, comorbid conditions that influence expression of this protein might affect severity of disease. table 1 summarizes the available data on abnormal expression of ace and ace2 in human/ animal disorders. several medications have been shown to alter expression levels of ace or ace2.administration of these medications not only can modify a risk of infection with sars-cov, but also can affect the disease course. table 2 summarizes the results of studies which reported alteration of ace or ace2 levels following administration of certain medications.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f several potentially functional gene polymorphisms have been identified in ace and ace2. table 3 shows the results studies which assessed the association between ace polymorphisms and human disorders. micorna (mirnas) as regulators of gene expression have been involved in several acerelated pathways and have been shown to alter expression of ace proteins or being altered by ace proteins. these small-sized rnas can bind with the 3′ untranslated region (3′ utr) of their targets to stimulate degradation of the target mrna and suppress translation.moreover, mirnas can interact with 5′ utr, coding regions, and promoters, thus regulating gene expression by various mechanisms. secretion of mirnas in extracellular components provides them the ability to participate in the cell-cell communication (85) . table 4 shows the results of studies which assessed association between mirnas and ace proteins. on the other hand, a meta-analysis has reported association between the administration of ace inhibitors and reduction in risk of pneumonia. notably, ace inhibitors may be more efficient in reducing the risk of pneumonia in asian patients. also, treatment with ace j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f inhibitors was associated with a significant reduction in risk of pneumonia-related mortality compared with controls (96) . this may be also related to the dual effect of ace2 in viral infection and protection against acute respiratory distress syndrome.although the ace/ace2 regulation is complicated, it seems that in the absence of ace the accumulation of angiotensin i may lead to the upregulation of ace2. whether this could facilitate the viral infection, is plausible because ace2 is considered as a specific target for coronavirus treatment (95) . it means that the population-based differences in the ace2 expression may affect the efficacy of a future antiviral treatment.in brief, we summarize that coronaviruses, such as sars-cov and sars-cov-2, utilize ace2 receptor for cell entry and infection. we know that the most severe consequence of the expression.in addition to the routine models for investigation of the pathological events during infections, tissue engineering methods particularly "advanced biomaterials" or "functionalized scaffolds" (101) would provide study models to investigate the potential of such approaches in the treatment of the disorder. as an advance in the field of functional studies, the obtained results from "safe" in-vitro models which work without any additive can be applied in human models (102) .taken together, the data presented above show the diversity of factors that modulate ace/ severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a novel highly pathogenic human coronavirus recently recognized as the cause of the coronavirus disease 2019 .the outbreak sparked in wuhan, capital city of hubei province in china, and spread rapidly to other countries, reaching devastating pandemic proportion (1) . italy is the one of the hardest hit countries by covid-19, with more than 200,000 laboratory-confirmed cases by may 2, 2020 (2) .the clinical course of covid-19 may be complicated by several life-threatening conditions including sepsis, respiratory failure, heart failure, acute kidney and cardiac injury, and septic shock (3) . little is still known about the patient clinical characteristics predisposing to the occurrence of these life-threatening conditions. acute distress respiratory syndrome (ards) is one of the most frequent encountered complication of covid-19, and has been associated with significantly lower patients' survival during hospitalization. although its pathophysiology is not completely understood, the interplay between inflammation and coagulation seems to have a central role (4) .whether anti-inflammatory drugs and anticoagulants might influence the onset of ards in has not yet been investigated.the aim of this multicenter study was to evaluate the prevalence of antithrombotic therapies at admission in patients with covid-19 and the potential association between antithrombotic therapy and ards, as disease clinical presentation, or in-hospital mortality. at admission, all patients underwent medical history, physical examination and laboratory evaluation. chest x-ray and/or computed tomography (ct) scan were also performed to rule out pneumonia in one or multiple sites. the covid-19 population was divided in two groups according to the diagnosis of isolated pneumonia or pneumonia with ards and according to inhospital mortality. ards diagnosis was defined according to the berlin definition (5) .the prevalence and the type of antithrombotic therapy have been compared between these groups. discontinuation of antithrombotic therapy during hospitalization was considered as an exclusion criterion. the institutional ethics committee approved the protocol. verbal and written informed consent for participation was provided for all patients.distribution of continuous data was tested with the kolmogorov-smirnov and the shapiro-wilk test. normally distributed variables were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (sd), whereas non-normal distributed ones as median and interquartile range (iqr). categorical variables were reported as numbers and percentages. continuous normally-distributed variables were compared by using the student t-test; differences between non-normally distributed variables were tested with the mann-whitney u test. categorical variables were compared with chi-squared test, or fisher exact test, when appropriate. the unadjusted and adjusted risk ratios (rr) for the outcomes of interest were calculated using logistic regression models and presented as rr with their 95% confidence intervals (ci). we used propensity score weighting to account for potential selection bias in treatment assignment between the two study groups (average treatment effect weights). the propensity score model was developed incorporating all pre-procedural covariates potentially related to the outcome and/or treatment decision regardless of their statistical significance or collinearity with other variables included in the model. the following baseline covariates were j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f included in the propensity score model: age, smoke, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery disease (cad), heart failure, obesity, dyslipidemia, stroke, and chronic kidney disease (ckd). after weighting, standardized mean differences were calculated to assess the balance for all covariates included in the propensity score model; values higher than 0.10 were considered statistically significant for differences among groups.for all test, a p value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. analysis were performed by using r version 3.5.1 (r foundation for statistical computing, vienna, austria).the characteristics of the study population were reported in table   2 ). figure 1 shows the proportion of death according to pre-admission antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy.in spite of the significant differences among survived and not survived covid-19 patients in baseline characteristics, the inverse probability weighting produced a good covariate balance, with absolute standardized differences less than 10% for all variables. figure 2 shows graphically how the antiplatelet and anticoagulant arms were more balanced in terms of allocation probability respect to patients were not taking anti-thrombotic drugs at admission. unadjusted and adjusted regression models for the risk of ards and death according to pre-admission antithrombotic therapy was reported in table 3 . pre-admission antithrombotic therapy with antiplatelets or anticoagulants did not result associated with increased risk of ards at admission and in-hospital mortality in covid-19 patients.the main findings of the present study can be summarized as follows: a large proportion of patients admitted for covid-19 is on treatment with antithrombotic agents; antithrombotic therapy stratified patients with older age and higher prevalence of comorbidities; patients who did not survived were older and showed higher prevalence of comorbidities; neither antiplatelet therapy nor anticoagulant therapy affected the risk of severe clinical presentation as ards at admission or death during hospitalization.among our study population including italian hospitalized covid-19 patients, we confirmed the epidemiological association between cardiovascular risk (cv) factors and the individual susceptibility to sars-cov2 infection, as previously described in chinese and american cohort studies (6, 7) . particularly, hypertension, diabetes and coronary artery disease j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f were the most prevalent comorbidities. moreover, as previously showed by early chinese data (8, 9) , the prevalence of cv diseases, in particular hypertension, was significantly increased in critically ill covid-19 patients with ards compared to those with milder forms of disease and, in the same way, hypertension and cad were significantly increased in non-survived covid-19 patients compared to survivors.among our study population, the af prevalence, as preexisting comorbidity at admission, was 12.5%, higher than expected in general population (10) ; however, no difference in af prevalence has been shown in covid-19 patients with more severe form of disease characterized by ards and poor clinical outcome.the pathogenesis of ards in the clinical context of covid-19 may be related to the direct effect of sars-cov-2 on alveolar epithelial cells and to indirect effects of infection-related hypoxia, both conditions predisposing to thrombotic events. moreover, preliminary reports (11, 12) suggest that a severe inflammatory response and disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) may occur in covid-19 patients predisposing to microvascular pulmonary thrombosis.based on the pathophysiological hypothesis that covid-19-induced ards patients may be driven by microvascular thrombotic processes, we decided to investigated if the pre-admission antithrombotic therapy, including both antiplatelet and anticoagulant drugs, might impact on the clinical course and prognosis of hospitalized covid-19 patients.in the present analysis, antithrombotic therapy before admission did not influence the clinical presentation covid-19 in terms of ards and in-hospital mortality. these results suggest that the pathophysiology of microvascular pulmonary thrombosis in the clinical context of covid-19induced pneumonia is not influenced by pre-admission antithrombotic treatment, probably due to the complex interplay between clotting system activation and the sars-cov2 immuno-mediated inflammatory response, two processes that mutually reinforce each other. the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) outbreak has spread across the world with more than 5.1 million confirmed cases [1] . early reports on clinical characteristics have identified hypertension as the most common comorbidity reported in covid-19 patients [2] [3] [4] [5] . zhou et al. documented pre-existing hypertension as a risk factor for in-hospital death of covid-19 [6] . this observation is of great interest since the renin-angiotensin system (ras) is an important component in regulating blood pressure, and the transmembrane angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which catalyzes the cleavage of angiotensin ii (a vasoconstrictor) into vasodilatory peptides, is also the cellular entry receptor for sars-cov-2.given the common use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) and angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) in patients with cardiovascular diseases [7] , there has been wide discussion whether administration of acei/arb might modulate covid-19 disease severity. concerns have been raised whether hypertensive patients should stop taking acei/arb and switch to other anti-hypertensive drugs in the context of covid-19 pandemic [8, 9] . there have also been counter-arguments in favor of the use of acei/arb in covid-19 patients, based on previous studies showing that acei/arb are associated with improvements in pneumonia-related outcomes [10, 11] , as well as a protective role of arbs in sars-cov and influenza infected animals [12, 13] .the renin-angiotensin system (ras) plays a central role in regulating blood pressure and maintaining hemodynamic homeostasis. in hypovolemic conditions, angiotensinogen is serially cleaved by renin and angiotensinconverting enzyme (ace) into angiotensin i (ang i) and angiotensin ii (ang ii), respectively. ang ii then acts on the cellular receptor angiotensin ii receptor i (at1) to constrict the blood vessels and increases blood pressure (fig. 1) . to counteract this vaso-constrictive effect of ras, fig. 1 physiology of ace/angii/at1 and ace2/ang 1-7 /mas axes. (a) schematic structures of angiotensin and its derivatives. the three-letter codes were used to represent amino acid residues. (b) physiology of angiotensin processing and blood regulation. in hypovolemic conditions, renin, secreted by cells in macula densa in the kidney, cleaves angiotensinogen into a decapeptide angiotensin i (ang i). the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) further cleaves the peptide into an octapeptide angiotensin ii (ang ii), which acts on the cellular receptor angiotensin ii receptor i (at1) to constrict the blood vessels and increases blood pressure ("yang"). ace2 is a monocarboxypeptidase transforming the ang ii into angiotensin-(1-7) (ang 1-7 ), which binds to the g protein-coupled receptor mas to dilate the blood vessels and counter-balance ace/ang ii in blood pressure regulation ("yin"). figure was generated with biorender. the human body has developed another system in an exquisite "yin-yang" balance. the ace2 is a homolog of ace [14, 15] that metabolizes ang ii into angiotensin-(1-7) (ang 1-7 ), which dilates the blood vessels and counterbalance ace/ang ii in blood pressure regulation [16] (fig.  1 ). of note, in a rat model of lipopolysaccharide-induced acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), reduced pulmonary levels of ang 1-7 contribute to disease pathogenesis, and administration of this peptide or the arb losartan reduces the development of ards [17] . the nonangiotensinase function of ace2 was recognized when it was identified to be cellular receptor for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) [18] , as well as more recently for sars-cov-2 [19] [20] [21] . ace2 expression has been documented in various human organs, including oral and nasal mucosa, lung, intestine, kidney, heart, arterial/venous endothelium and others [22] [23] [24] [25] .high-quality clinical evidence for acei/arb usage in covid-19 patients is insufficient to draw definitive conclusions whether chronic acei/arb should be continued or stopped [26] . several recent retrospective, hospital-based studies have reported no adverse or marginal protective effect of acei/arb on the clinical outcomes of covid-19 patients [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] . to contribute to this discussion, we have performed a secondary analysis on a previously-reported single-center retrospective cohort of covid-19 patients in wuhan, china [6] .we previously collected data from 702 hospitalized adult covid-19 patients admitted to jinyintan hospital (wuhan, china), who had definite outcome (dead or discharged) between december 29, 2019 and february 15, 2020 [6] . data were extracted from medical records into an electronic data collection form by two independent researchers. their electronic medical records were screened for medical history of hypertension in past medical history or admitting diagnosis and for oral antihypertensive treatment before and during hospitalization. the anti-hypertensive treatments we included in the analysis were acei, arb, β-blockers, calcium channel blockers (ccbs), diuretics, and others (α-blockers and traditional chinese medicine). patients with definitive long-term anti-hypertensive treatments, as either recorded in the medical history or in the prescribed medication chart as standing order during hospitalization, were included in the final analysis. the comorbidities were either selfreported by the patients or evaluated by attending physicians and recorded in admitting diagnosis.the study was approved by the research ethics commission of jinyintan hospital (ky-2020-01.01) and the informed consent was waived by the research ethics commission.fever was defined as axillary temperature of at least 37.3°c. sepsis and septic shock were evaluated based on sepsis-3 international consensus [33] . ards was diagnosed according to the berlin definition [34] . acute kidney injury was defined according to the kdigo clinical practice guidelines [35] . diagnosis of acute cardiac injury was made if serum levels of high-sensitive cardiac troponin i was above the 99th percentile upper reference limit [36] . secondary infection, hypoproteinemia, and coagulopathy were defined as previously [6] .continuous variables were expressed as median (interquartile range (iqr)) and categorical variables as number (proportion). two-group comparisons (acei/arb vs. non-acei/arb) were conducted with mann-whitney u test or c 2 /fisher exact test where appropriate. the risk of death, icu admission, invasive mechanical ventilation and corresponding odds ratio both with and without adjustment for age and gender were calculated by logistic model, comparing patients in acei/arb group with those in non-acei/arb group. four previously-reported risk factors for death (age, history of diabetes, qsofa score, and ddimer) were included in univariable and multivariable analysis with logistic model. a 2-sided α less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. statistical analyses were conducted using sas software (version 9.4, sas institute) and spss software (version 25, ibm).a total of 702 adult laboratory-confirmed covid-19 patients admitted to jinyintan hospital, who had definite clinical outcome by february 15, 2020, were screened in this study, of whom 188 patients had a medical history of hypertension. among them, 101 patients had antihypertensive treatment medications recorded in their medical records and were included in the final analysis. the schematic of patient selection is shown in fig. 2 . patients who took acei or arb as part of their antihypertensive therapy were included in the acei/arb cohort (n = 40), and those without were categorized in the non-acei/arb cohort (n = 61).patients in acei/arb group and non-acei/arb group were comparable in age (median, 66.5 vs. 65.0 years, p = 0.80) and gender distribution (male, 48% vs. 56%, p = 0.42), as shown in table 1 . they were also in similar phase of the disease with median time from symptom onset to admission being 12.5 days (iqr 8.5-16.0 days) and 13.0 days (iqr 8.5-15.5 days), respectively. in addition to hypertension, patients in two groups also shared similar proportions of comorbidities and smoking history.the vital signs and laboratory test results on admission were generally similar between the two groups (table 1) . comparable proportions of patients in two groups had lymphocyte count less than 0.8 â 10 9 /l (55% vs. 48%, p = 0.51), increased serum cardiac troponin i (18% vs. 19%, p = 0.88), and increased serum d-dimer levels (59% vs. 58%, p = 0.95). the percentages of heart failure, defined as brain natriuretic peptide (bnp) value ≥ 100 pg/ml on admission, were also similar among the two groups (28% vs. 27%, p = 0.93). values of the inflammatory markers, including serum ferritin, procalcitonin, and interleukin-6 were not different between the two groups, nor were chest imaging features distinguishable. the sequential organ failure assessment (sofa) scores in acei/arb group (median 2.0, iqr 1.0-4.0) were numerically smaller than those in non-acei/arb group (median 4.0, iqr 2.0-4.5), although the difference is not statistically significant (p = 0.29).among the 101 patients recorded with anti-hypertensive medication, 40 cases had therapies based on acei/arb, either as mono-therapy or combined with β-blockers, ccb, thiazide diuretics or spironolactone (tables 2 and 3) . no usage of sacubitril-valsartan was reported in this cohort. the non-acei/arb therapy was mostly based on calcium channel blockers (tables 2 and 3 ). the usage of other anti-hypertensive medications (α-blocker, β-blocker, and diuretics) was comparable between the two groups ( table 2) . similar percentages of patients were under optimal blood pressure control based on the vital signs taken on admission (table 1) . chronic treatment on ras antagonists was not associated with statistically significant changes in serum electrolyte (sodium and potassium) or serum creatinine levels ( table 1) .compared with the hypertensive patients who were not given acei/arb, we observed no significant differences in percentages of in-hospital mortality (28% vs. 34%, p = 0.46), icu admission (20% vs. 28%, p = 0.37), or mechanical ventilation (18% vs. 26%, p = 0.31) in those receiving a regimen that included an acei or arb. of note, the percentages with these major outcomes were uniformly smaller in acei/arb group. similarly, numerically fewer patients in acei/arb group developed respiratory failure (43% vs. 59%, p = 0.10), sepsis (48% vs. 59%, p = 0.26) or ards (28% vs. 36%, p = 0.37) heart failure, n (%)coronary heart disease, n (%) 12 (12) 5 (13) 7 (11) 1.0000respiratory rate>24 /min, n (%) 19 (19) 6 (15) 13 (21) creatinine>133 (mmol/l), n (%) 6 (6) 2 (5) 4 (7) 1.0000 during hospitalization. hospital length of stay and duration of viral shedding for discharged patients were similar between acei/arb and non-acei/arb groups (table  4) . we did not include the non-survivors in the analysis for viral-shedding duration because it has been previously reported that non-survivors had prolonged viral shedding until death [6] . further multivariable analysis adjusted for age and gender did not provide statistical evidence for association between acei/arb treatment and severe clinical outcome in covid-19 patients ( table 5 ). as previously reported in the total population [6] , older age, increased d-dimer values (>1µg/ml) and higher qsofa scores were associated with higher risks of in-hospital mortality in hypertensive covid-19 patients in the logistic model (table 6 ).the hypothesis that acei or arb treatment changes covid-19 disease progression was based in part on potential impact of ras antagonists on ace2 expression. theoretically, does administration of an acei or arb have an impact on ace2 expression or activity? first of all, it has been shown that aceis do not affect ace2 activity [15] . in terms of ace2 expression, olmesartan, but not other aceis, arbs or calcium channel blockers, has been found to increase urinary ace2 levels in hypertensive patients [37, 38] . also, acei treatment has been reported to increase serum ace2 activity in diabetic patients [39] . yet the soluble ace2 (sace2) levels do not always reflect the tissue ace2 expression in lung or other organs. in fact, it is reasonable to hypothesize that sace2 may even negatively correlate with tissue ace2 since sace2 is cleaved from the membrane-bound enzyme before being released into the blood stream. also, it has to be noted that increase in ace2 enzymatic activity does not always match the upregulation of ace2 expression [40, 41] . therefore, change in pulmonary tissue ace2 after acei or arb treatment has to be directly studied to provide answers for this question, although studies of upper respiratory tract ace2 expression or ace2 enzyme activity in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid might provide indirect evidence [42, 43] . hypertensive animal models might be a surrogate before clinical evidence is available. in rat cardiac myocytes, ang ii significantly reduces ace2 activity and downregulates ace2 mrna expression; these effects can be blocked by the arb losartan, indicating that ang ii regulates ace2 [24] . mice deficient for ace show markedly improved disease in an ards model induced by acid aspiration or sepsis, and recombinant ace2 can protect mice from severe acute lung injury [44] . in mice and rat models, arb treatment consistently increases ace2 mrna and protein levels in heart, kidney, and aorta tissue, although its effect on lung ace2 expression has not been studied. also, the effects of acei administration on ace2 expression differs among experiment models and tissues [45] . animal models of sars-cov-2 infection that recapitulate the pathogenesis of severe covid-19 are needed to better understand the effects of ace inhibitors and arbs.in this single-center retrospective study, we did not observe difference in clinical presentations of patients with or without acei/arb treatment on admission. nor did we find any important differences in severe clinical outcomes, namely in-hospital death, icu admission, and mechanical ventilation, in these two groups. however, our preliminary analysis was limited by the retrospective nature of the cohort, its small sample size, and possibly nonrecorded data as the prescription records for drugs not directly relevant to covid-19 treatment may be incomplete. only patients with complete anti-hypertensive treatment information were included in the analysis, but this strategy, by excluding about half the hypertensive cases in the original hypertensive cohort, reduced statistical power of this study. based on the percentages of in-hospital mortality and icu admission reported in this cohort, around 500-1000 patients for each group would be necessary to provide total 101anti-hypertensive treatment as either mono-therapy or combined therapies. a one of 14 patients took valsartan and benazepril. all the other 13 patients were on either acei or arb as mono-therapy. a means angiotensinconverting enzyme inhibitor (acei) or angiotensin ii receptor blocker (arb); b means β-blocker; c means calcium channel blocker (ccb); d means diuretics. acei refers to benazepril in this cohort. arb medications include valsartan, irbesartan, telmisartan, and candesartan. β-blockers used in this cohort include metoprolol and bisoprolol. ccbs include amlodipine, nifedipine, felodipine, lacidipine, and lercanidipine. diuretics include hydrochlorothiazide and spironolactone. other uncommon medications not listed in this table were terazosin (α-blocker) and traditional chinese medicine with un-specified formula.statistical difference given two-tailed α = 0.05 and β = 0.2. although this cohort had enough power to detect the association between older age and increased covid-19 mortality (table 6) , it is under-powered for the marginal effect of acei/arb on altered clinical outcome if there was association.other confounding factors including age should be carefully evaluated before drawing the final conclusion from retrospective analysis. it has to be noted that while acei/arb are the most popular anti-hypertensive drug in the us [46] , ccbs are more widely used in china [7, 47] . this partially explains the high ccb usage in the non-acei/arb group (tables 2 and 3 ). after adjustment for the difference of ccb prescription, acei/arb still does not show association with covid-19 mortality (or 0.70, 95% ci 0.24 -1.99, p = 0.5011). we did not observe association between ccb usage and covid-19 mortality, either, from this cohort (data not shown). pre-existing heart failure should also be assessed because ras antagonists including acei, arb, and aldosterone inhibitors were basic treatment options for chronic heart failure. proper multivariable adjustment on confounding factors should be implemented in retrospective analysis. we did not adjust for history of heart failure concerning the small sample size and the self-reporting nature of this factor. we did not have information for viral load of patients on admission, because only qualitative rt-pcr test results were available in the medical records. it would be interesting to examine whether chronic acei or arb treatment would affect virus replication in future studies. similar to our findings, no association was observed between acei/arb prescription and poor clinical prognosis or severe disease of covid-19 in several other retrospective cohorts in china [27, 28, 48, 49] or globally [29] [30] [31] [32] . compared with these reports, patients in this cohort were sicker on admission and the in-hospital mortality was higher (32%). this likely related to the study hospital being a referral center with severe cases during early epidemic in wuhan.with accumulating information from multiple large cohort studies, it seems clear that prior receipt of acei or arb does not bring additional risks of hospital admission or poor prognosis of covid-19. the discussion has therefore been gradually shifted to whether chronic treatment of acei or arb before covid-19 onset is associated with less severe illness. acei and arb have been reported with protective effect in a previous metaanalysis for pneumonia-related mortality in general [10] . in terms of covid-19, de abajo et al. found a decreased risk of covid-19 hospital admission in the subgroup analysis of diabetic patients with ras inhibitors [31] . information from other large covid-19 case series and preferably population-based cohort studies, optimally linked to serologic testing, are necessary to determine whether receipt of acei or arbs are associated with reduced risk of symptomatic sars-cov-2 infection and especially of severe covid-19 illness. systematic analysis combining data from multiple studies would be helpful in answering this question. there have also been randomized clinical trials in progress studying the efficacy of acute initiation of acei for treatment of covid-19 (e.g., nct04366050 and nct04355429).in conclusion, there has been accumulating evidence for no association between chronic acei/arb treatment and severe outcome of covid-19. meanwhile, current studies are pointing toward a putative protective role of prior acei or arb receipt in covid-19 illness, which awaits further evidence for confirmation. several professional societies have released statements on continuing current anti-hypertensive treatment during the covid-19 pandemic [50] , considering the risk of destabilizing blood pressure after changing medications. we agree that the best option is to continue previous therapy and wait for further evidence.dr. frederick g. hayden declares he has served as non-compensated consultant to cidara, glaxosmithkline, gilead sciences, restorbio, regeneron, sab biotherapeutics on coronavirus interventions, outside the submitted work. all other authors declare no competing interests. the study was performed in accordance with the helsinki declaration of 1975, and was approved by the research ethics commission of jinyintan hospital (ky-2020-01.01). informed consent was waived by the research ethics commission. abbreviation: or, odds ratio; qsofa, quick sequential organ failure assessment.the past 2 decades have witnessed three lethal zoonotic diseases of humans caused by novel coronaviruses: the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2002, the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in april 2012, and currently, coronavirus disease-19 (covid-19) caused by sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2, respectively. all three coronaviruses are listed in the who blueprint list for priority pathogens [1] . coronaviruses are members of the coronaviridae family, a heterogeneous family of rna viruses that cause respiratory tract infections in humans. hcov-229e, hcov-nl63, hcov-oc43 and hcov-hku1 cause mild infections whilst mers-cov, like sars-cov and sars-cov-2, can cause a spectrum of clinical manifestations from mild to severe disease and death [2] .the ongoing global pandemic of sars coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) has affected almost 3 millions of people in all continents [3] . the high death rate has been attributed to comorbidities of diabetes, hypertension, coronary artery disease amongst others [4] . renin-angiotensin system (ras) blockers are extensively used worldwide to treat many cardiovascular disorders, where they are effective in reducing both mortality and morbidity. these drugs are known to induce an increased expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2).in patients with diabetes. hypertension, treated with ace inhibitors and arbs, results in an upregulation of ace2, which theoretically could enhance sars-cov-2 infection [6] . therefore, since sars-cov-2 strongly interacts with ace2, patients undergoing chronic ras blocker treatment may be more prone to sars-cov2 infection or develop worse forms of covid-19. in this review, we will discuss some aspects of the viral-cell interaction, pathophysiology and the aceis/arbs action mechanism. lastly, we suggest a scientific rationale for continuing ras blockers therapy in patients with covid-19 infection, thus providing both those clinicians working in the emergency setting and facing with acute cardiovascular diseases, and those following outpatients receiving acei/arbs during the covid-19 pandemic, a basis for their therapeutic decision-making.as widely described in literature [7] , the complex renin-angiotensin system (ras) plays a crucial role in the pathophysiology of several morbidities, such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, myocarditis [8] , heart failure and myocardial infarction, where the use of ras blockers is essential for management. ace inhibitors (aceis) and/or angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) delay or prevent the onset of heart failure in asymptomatic patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction and, importantly, reduce both mortality and morbidity of patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. in these patients, aceis/arbs are titrated to the upper tolerated dose to achieve adequate ras inhibition [9, 10] . the most recent esc guidelines recommend employing aceis/arbs as antihypertensive treatment to prevent cardiovascular events and heart failure in diabetic patients, particularly in those with cardiovascular complications [11] . also, esc guidelines on hypertension give ia recommendation for employment of aceis and arbs as antihypertensive drugs with demonstrated efficacy in blood pressure and cardiovascular events reduction [12] . further, hemodynamic changes after an acute myocardial infarction cause a strong activation of both the circulating and the local ras [13] . this adaptive response [14] could be dangerous and contributes to the development of cardiac structural and electrophysiological remodelling [15, 16] . the effects of ras inhibition are beneficial [17] in all patients after a myocardial infarction and are more prominent in more severe patients [18] . further, in one systematic overview including 100,000 patients, it was observed that the most significant short-term survival benefit occurs if treatment with aceis is started within the first 7 days (40% in days 0 to 1, 45% in days 2 to 7, 15% subsequently) [19] . in line with this, guidelines provide class ia/ib recommendation to commence aceis/arbs treatment within the first 24h after the acute event in all st-segment elevation myocardial infarction (stemi) patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction, heart failure, anterior stemi or diabetes [18, 20] . treatment with aceis/arbs is also recommended (class ia/ib) in non-st-segment elevation myocardial infarction (nstemi) patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction, heart failure, hypertension or diabetes mellitus, in order to reduce mortality and risk of recurrent ischaemic event or hospitalization for heart failure [21, 22] .in the context of sars-cov-2 infection, it is important to note that aceis/arbs increase the local expression and activity of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) [23] , a zinc metalloprotease that exists both as a membrane-associated form and as a secreted form. ace2 is ubiquitously expressed, with the highest levels of transcripts being found in the lung, the heart and the gastrointestinal and urinary systems. ace2 is mostly expressed in lung alveolar type ii (at2) cells, myocardial cells, vascular endothelia, buccal epithelial cells, t and b lymphocytes, on the proximal tubule epithelial cells in the kidney, and in testes [24, 25] . all cardiac cell components (i.e. endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, cardiac myocytes, fibroblasts and macrophages) express ace2, although the highest levels were observed in vascular cells, especially pericytes [26, 27] . upregulation of ace2 expression has been documented in patients affected by myocardial infarction or heart failure. however, in animal models of ageing, pressure overload and chronic ischaemia, ace2 downregulation has been associated with cardiac hypertrophy, adverse remodelling and fibrosis [28] [29] [30] . conversely, ace2 expression is reduced in hypertension, advanced diabetes mellitus and atherosclerotic plaques and, experimentally, by both angiotensin ii (ang ii) and endothelin [28] [29] [30] [31] . importantly, it has been estimated that heritability accounts for 67% of the variability in ace2 circulating levels. moreover, ace2 genetic variants have been associated with both essential hypertension and coronary heart disease (chd), whilst they act as disease modifiers of both hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies [31] . concerning development, it was shown that ace2 protein levels and activity are high during gestation and decline postnatally [32] .ace2 acts as a negative regulator of ras, by degrading angii to the heptapeptide angiotensin 1-7 (ang1-7) [33] , that exerts its biological activity via the mas receptor, modulating the release of nitric oxide (no), antagonizing the intracellular effect of angii stimulation (thus tempering the production of reactive oxygen species), at least in part by activating intracellular phosphatases [34] . as a result, ang1-7 exerts many positive effects on the cardiovascular system (e.g. increased endothelial function, reduced fibrosis, anti-proliferative effects on smooth muscle cells, anti-cardiac hypertrophy), as well as on other organs, such as the lungs, where it exerts anti-fibrotic, anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic effects [35] [36] [37] . moreover, ace2 cleaves other peptides and plays a central role in inactivating des-arginine(9)-bradykinin (des-arg(9)-bk), a potent metabolite of the kininkallikrein system that increases vascular permeability, thus promoting angioedema, acting on b1 type receptors, which are, in turn, upregulated by inflammatory cytokines [38, 39] . according to some authors, the leakage of plasma in the subendothelial compartment in conjunction with the inflammatory response triggered by the host-virus interaction may have a central pathogenetic role in the endotheliitis and disseminated intravascular coagulation that have been documented to occur in covid-19 patients [39] [40] [41] . ace2 plays an important role in heart failure, in diabetic microvascular or macrovascular disease [42] and in inflammatory lung disease [43] , and aceis/ arbs-mediated increase in ace2 exerts a protective role in many conditions such as atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction, myocardial dysfunction, heart failure, diabetes mellitus and acute lung injury (ali).although the details have not been completely elucidated yet, sars-cov-2 was originated either as a result of natural selection that took place in a host before zoonotic transfer or by natural selection in humans after the zoonotic transfer had occurred [44, 45] . importantly, during the selection process, the virus acquires a furin cleavage site and three predicted o-linked glycans around the site that are very likely associated with the acquisition of a highly pathogenic phenotype [44] .coronaviruses' (sars-cov, sars-cov-2) spike (s) protein, binds with high affinity to human ace2 [45] (figure 1 ). before sars-cov-2 and sars-cov cell entry, their s protein is subjected to a priming process via serine protease tmprss2 in order permit the attachment of viral particles to ace2 and thus on cell surface [46] . this entry mechanism is confirmed by the fact that tmprss2 inhibition or tmprss2-ko mice show both decreased, though not abolished, s protein priming, and reduced viral entry, spread, and inflammatory chemokine and cytokine release [46, 47] . sars-cov-2 is then internalized mainly by endocytosis. in this process, phosphatidylinositol 3phosphate 5-kinase (pikfyve), two pore channel subtype 2 (tpc2) and cathepsin l are critical for virus entry [48] . sars-cov binding also induces the release/shedding of catalytically active ace2 ectodomains via adam-17⁄tace activity [49] [50] [51] [52] . in line, inhibition of adam17/tace blocks ace2 shedding and limits viral entry in both in vitro and in vivo [53] . intriguingly, recent data show that soluble ace2 (sace2) could inhibit s-mediated infection in vitro. although sace2 was not able to completely abrogate viral entry, ace2 shedding may help in contrasting viral diffusion to different organs [54] . conversely, it has been demonstrated that ace2 downregulation following infection has a detrimental effect in the pathogenesis of ali [55] , although this effect could be limited, judging by the amount of ace2 expressed by the at2 cells of the lungs, or the ratio between ace2 and circulating sace2 [24, 56, 57] . altogether, these results suggest that ace2 might not be the only receptor for sars-cov-2. in fact, recent structural and predictive studies proposed other receptor-mediated mechanisms for sars-cov-2 cell entry, indicating three other aminopeptidases, alanyl aminopeptidase (anpep), glutamyl aminopeptidase (enpep) and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4), as the most probable additional receptors [58, 59] .it is known that the virus survival strategy is to elude and suppress host innate immune defences through gene deactivation or inhibition [57, 60, 61] . inhibits host gene translation [62] . more precisely, a marked downregulation of ace2 mrna and protein expression was associated with the presence of sars-cov and (hcov)-nl63 (another human coronavirus, causing mild to severe respiratory tract infections, excluding sars) in target tissues [63] . however, whilst sars-cov induced ace2 shedding from the cell surface, (hcov)-nl63 did not, suggesting that ace2 shedding is directly related with prognostic severity [30, 52, 53] . additionally, a viral titre-and infection time-related sars-cov effect on ace2 mrna has been shown, where lower viral titre is associated with upregulation instead, higher dosage and time after infection are correlated to reduced ace2 expression [64] . last, since interleukin (il)-2, il-7, il-10, g-csf, ip-1 mcp-1 mip-1a and tnf-a are highly increased in patients with severe sars-cov infection, with respect to patients with mild symptoms, it was hypothesized that ace2 suppression could result from a direct cell driven effect, rather than virus mediated. in line, in vitro data could support a suppressive role for il7 and il2 on ace2 expression [64] .part of the conundrum related to the role of ace2 in sars-cov-2 infection (designated coronavirus disease-19 or covid-19) is related to the role exerted by this enzyme in ali. indeed, ali that can be caused by a number of aetiological agents (e.g. influenza and coronaviruses, bacterial pneumonia, sepsis [65] , cigarette smoking [66] , particulate matter [67] and aspiration pneumonia [68] ) has been associated with the activation of the local ras [69] . ang ii, by acting on angii type 1 receptor (at1r), activates several signal transduction pathways, including mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) and janus-activated kinase (jak)/ signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (stat3), phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (pi3k), promoting vascular permeability, vasoconstriction, myofibroblast, smooth muscle cell and macrophage activation, fibrosis, and the expression of inflammatory cytokines [65, 70, 71] . the latter effect has been mainly attributed to the ability of angii to activate the transcription factor nfjb via at1r [72] . angii may also bind to other receptors, the most studied of which is type 2 receptor (at2r). however, the net effect of at2r stimulation is less clear since both pro-and anti-inflammatory effects have been described [57] . to corroborate the crucial role exerted by pulmonary ras on ali, it was shown that angii levels are increased in animal models of ali [73] . importantly, recent reports on sars-cov-2-infected patients showed a significant increase in ang ii plasma level that was inversely correlated with viral load [74] . in line, survivors of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) have been associated with lower plasmatic ace levels, in a preliminary report [75] . moreover, by evaluating the levels of angiotensinogen metabolites, it was shown that ards outcome was associated with higher ang1-9/ang1-10 and ang1-7/ang1-10 ratios, suggesting higher activity of both ace and ace2 in survivors [76] . conversely, at1r blockage resulted in the protection of animal models of lung injury [77] . further, an accumulating body of literature is showing the protective role exerted by ace2 on ali. indeed, ace2 knockout animals develop more severe forms of ali in response to a series of injurious stimuli [67, 73, 75] . conversely, the results of clinical trials that experimented the administration of soluble ace2 to treat patients suffering from ards, although in early phase and not designed to test efficacy, did not show very promising results [78] . moreover, as anticipated, ace2 downregulation causes also accumulation of des-arg(9)-bk, which interacts with type b1 bradykinin receptor, possibly leading to the observed development of angioedema, and coagulation cascade triggering [39] . last, the protective effect of ace2 may be also postulated considering both that ace2 levels decrease with age and that, although children are vulnerable to the infection, these patients are usually less severe [79] .the relevance of myocardial involvement in sars-cov-2 infection is related to the high frequency of patients showing evidence of acute cardiac injury, especially amongst those that necessitated icu care [80] . this finding is similar to that observed in patients that succumbed to the sars crisis in toronto, where the duration of disease was almost 10 times shorter in patients that showed cardiac involvement vs. those that had no evidence of cardiac infection [30] . in line, a recent report suggests that the sars-cov-2 infection can be complicated by acute fulminant myocarditis [81] .in this scenario, left ventricular function completely recovered early after immunomodulation therapy [82] suggesting that organ damage in these patients is more the consequence of a 'cytokine storm', than of an uncontrolled viral replication [80, 82, 83] . to complete the picture, the presence of viral particles infecting myocardial interstitial cells, but neither endothelial cells nor myocytes, was recently described to occur in one patient that died of covid-19, with a clinical scenario characterized by respiratory distress, hypotension and cardiogenic shock [84] .consistently, sars-cov-2-infected patients were characterized by high amounts of plasmatic il1b, ifnc, ip10 and mcp1 levels. additionally, more severe patients had higher concentrations of g-csf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a and tnf-a, strongly supporting the relevance of cytokines in dictating prognosis [80] . this observation has stimulated early trials experimenting il6 axis inhibition in covid-19 patients [82] . cytokine-mediated systemic response to infections can be associated with transient cardiac dilatation and dysfunction [85] . however, local viral replication could depress cardiac function too. indeed, sars-cov can activate the nlrp3 inflammasome [86] , thus promoting the release of il1b and possibly il18, a mediator known to cause systolic impairment [87] . notably, extrapulmonary, multiorgan sars-cov dissemination at the time of death was described in patients who died of sars during the toronto outbreak [88] and sars-cov viral rna was detected in 35-40% of cardiac autopsy samples [30, 88] . histology studies conducted on these hearts showed cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, fibrosis and an inflammatory infiltrate, mainly constituted by cd68 + macrophages [30] . however, necropsy of 39-year-old woman who died from sars-cov, with severe left ventricular dysfunction at echocardiographic evaluation, has shown slight left ventricular enlargement without evidence of interstitial lymphocytic infiltrate or cardiomyocyte necrosis [89] . importantly, in one postmortem cardiac specimen of a 50-year-old patient who died from sars-cov-2 infection, only limited interstitial mononuclear cell infiltrates without significant injury were described [90] . similar findings, characterized by cd68 + macrophage infiltrates showing evidence of a cytopathic effect, were recently reported in a case report of a 69-year-old patient that died from covid-19 [84] . the paucity of lymphocyte infiltrate observed in these reports may be explained by the severe lymphopenia that accompanies covid-19 [80] .the mechanism of negative effect on myocardial tissue of sars-cov infection was hypothesized to be related to both ace2 downregulation and cytokine storm [63, 82] . as outlined above, ace2 expression may be reduced both by the binding of sars-cov to ace2, leading to the endocytosis of the latter [91] , and as a result of the activation of adam-17/tace by sars spike protein, known to cleave, internalize and promote ace2 shedding in endothelial cells [49] . downregulation of ace2 results in an unbalance between the detrimental action of angii and the cardioprotective effects of ang1-7. further, more chronic negative consequences on the cardiovascular system might be related to ace2 downregulation via des-arg(9)-bk accumulation and its consequential increase in vascular permeability, inflammation that leads to an increased atherosclerotic plaques formation [92] . further, adam-17⁄tace activation, induced by the spike protein, promotes tnf-a release, thus increasing macrophage mobilization and activation [49, 52] . moreover, sars-cov nucleocapsid (n) protein potentiates tgf-b-mediated fibrosis [93] .on the basis of the increase of ace2, associated with aceis/arbs treatment, it has been speculated that these drugs might rise the chances of severe covid-19 [94] . according to the last report (29 th april 2020) from the italian istituto superiore di sanit a, 25.452 patients positive to sars-cov-2 died. the observed mortality was higher amongst males in all age groups and in patients with comorbidities. in 9.23% of the total sample, data regarding comorbidities were available; 81.7% of the deceased patients had 2 or more comorbidities, such as arterial hypertension (69.2%), diabetes mellitus (31.8%) and chd (28.2%). similar data regarding comorbidities and gender differences in mortality were observed during china covid-19 emergency [95] . prior to hospitalization, 24% of covid-19-positive deceased italian patients were on treatment with aceis and 16% were receiving arbs.the gender difference in mortality could be related to the smoking prevalence and sex-based immunological differences. moreover, a recent study suggests that ace2 expression seems to be higher in women than men and to decrease with age [64, 96, 97] . the more severe prognosis of patients of older age may also been related to distinct mechanisms, such as the age-associated decline in the molecular machinery involved in removing cytosolic dna [98] . also, patients with hypertension or diabetes show high rate of ace2 genetic polymorphism that could influence ace2 or ang1-7 levels in the human body [64, [99] [100] [101] . therefore, a negative correlation between ace2 expression and mortality has been suggested [64] .should indications for aceis/arbs treatment change for patients with covid-19?an enormous body of literature shows that aceis/ arbs should be given as early as possible to all patients with acute myocardial infarction, in asymptomatic patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction, in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction, as well in hypertensive or diabetic patients, for their important benefits for patient survival. conversely, an abrupt discontinuation of aceis, in survivors of myocardial infarction on long-term treatment [102, 103] or in patients with heart failure [104] , can be potentially harmful. further, at the time of this pandemic covid-19, there are no experimental or strong clinical data to contraindicate this therapy whilst, on the contrary, some are supporting the opposite [105, 106] .calcium channel blockers were suggested as alternative treatment for aceis and arbs [107] . however, since the development and progression of the remodelling process after an myocardial infarction, in setting of heart failure, hypertension or diabetes mellitus depends on neurohormonal activation, only medications, which block the effect of neurohormones [108] , have demonstrated to reduce morbidity and mortality of patients. for calcium channel blockers, in spite of their beneficial hemodynamic activities, there is no evidence supporting their ability to exert favourable effect early after an acute myocardial infarction on preventing heart failure in diabetics with hypertension and on general mortality reduction [18, 109, 110] . lastly, calcium channel blockers have a strong interaction with antiviral drugs (lopinavir/ritonavir) used to treat covid-19 patients.in a recent retrospective observational study from wuhan, including 188 hypertensive subjects affected by covid-19, treatment aceis/arbs was associated with lower all-cause mortality [105] . furthermore, a large population-based case-control study performed in lombardy during the ongoing covid-19 epidemic spread on more than 6000 covid-19 patients did not show evidence that the use of either arbs, or aceis, affects the risk of covid-19 infection [111] . italian regulatory agency (aifa) recommended on 17 march 2020 do not to modify the therapy in progress with anti-hypertensives (whatever the therapeutic class) in well-controlled hypertensive patients, as they expose frail patients to potential new side effects or an increase in risk of adverse cardiovascular events does not appear justified. for the same reasons, compared to the hypothesis of using ace inhibitors and sartans also in healthy people for prophylactic purposes, remembered that these drugs should be used exclusively for the treatment of pathologies for which there are approved [112] . as depicted in figure 1 , the interaction between sars-cov-2 and the host cell promotes a series of complex alterations leading to both the downregulation of ace2 expression and the increased production and release of inflammatory cytokines. the net loss of the ace2/ang1-7 anti-inflammatory properties, along with a dysregulated vascular permeability ace2/des-arg(9)-bk mediated and the pro-inflammatory properties of secreted cytokines, may be therefore responsible for a large part of the detrimental effects caused by covid-19. taking into account, the evidences presented in this review, and at present, there are no data demonstrating adverse outcomes amongst covid-19 patients in therapy with ace/arbs; on the contrary, it seems that the treatment discontinuation could have plausible negative effects. thus, according with the recommendations of the main cardiovascular international [113, 114] and italian scientific societies [115, 116] , patients chronically taking acei/arbs who contract covid-19 infection should not discontinue the treatment, neither temporarily ( figure 2 ). further researches are needed to indagate some uncleared and controversial aspects of the pandemics.the first report related to the ongoing pandemic of coronavirus dis- 13 january 2020. the world health organization declared the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern on 30 january 2020, and then further elevated the level of emergency by recognizing it as a pandemic on 11 march 2020. 1,2 thus far, more than 3.5 million confirmed covid-19 cases and more than 247 652 related deaths have been reported worldwide. 2 yan et al. reported that the trimer of the spike glycoprotein on the virion surface docking onto the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) 2 dimer structure is an essential step in the attack by sars-cov-2 on human cells and leads to systemic organ injury. 3, 4 this sars-cov-2-ace2 interaction has generated great interest in the development of renin-angiotensin system (ras)-based therapeutic strategies for covid-19. 5 the ras, a key hormone system, regulates blood pressure, fluid and electrolyte balance, and systemic vascular function particularly in maintaining plasma sodium concentration, arterial blood pressure, and extracellular volume. 6 in most organs, ras activation can result in hypertension, inflammation, cell proliferation, and fibrosis. 6, 7 manipulating the ras by stabilizing renin and angiotensin ii (ang ii) levels and promoting ace2 expression can prevent numerous chronic and acute diseases. [7] [8] [9] [10] the ras signal transduction system is regulated by two main axes: (a) ace/ang ii/ang ii type 1 receptor (at1r) axis, which promotes vasoconstriction, hypertension, inflammation, fibrosis, and proliferation, and (b) ace2/ang (1-7)/mas axis, which induces the opposite effects of ace/ang ii/at1r axis activation to inhibit any detrimental consequences (figure 1 ).several studies have indicated that circulating ang ii levels are signifi- f i g u r e 1 steady-state of the ras under normal physiological conditions. the ras signal transduction system is activated via the ace/ang ii/at1r axis; this promotes vasoconstriction, hypertension, inflammation, fibrosis, and proliferation. studies on the biological functions of at2r, a receptor of ang ii, are scant. although at2r activation induces the effects opposite to those of at1r activation, at2r expression is lower than at1r expression in most adult tissues. most functions of ang ii are performed via at1r. the ace2/ang (1-7)/mas axis induces the opposite effects to suppress the harmful effects of the ace/ang ii/at1r axis induction a recent cohort study on 45 000 confirmed cases in china reported a considerably increased mortality rate in patients with covid-19 who had cardiovascular disease (10.5%), diabetes (7.3%), or hypertension (6.3%) compared with those who did not have these comorbidities (0.9%). 27, 28 in addition, an analysis of the medical records of 355 patients who died due to covid-19 in italy revealed that only 0.8% of these patients had no comorbidities. 29 moreover, of all 355 patients, approximately half had at least three comorbidities, approximately one-quarter had two comorbidities, and approximately one-quarter had one comorbidity 29 ; moreover, approximately 73.8% had hypertension, approximately 33.9% had diabetes, and approximately 30.1% had heart disease. 29, 30 therefore, we hypothesize that the higher mortality rate in patients with covid-19 who have comorbidities may be attributable to the two hits to the ras: the first hit originates from chronic inflammation, which activates the ace/ang ii/at1r axis of the ras and the the lung is the primary target for sars-cov-2 infection, mainly because of its large surface area and high ace2 expression in alveolar epithelial type ii cells. in addition to being highly expressed in the lungs, ace2 is highly expressed in tissues, such as the heart, kidney, endothelial, and intestinal tissues, which might explain the multiple organ dysfunction noted in patients with covid-19. 31 one study indicated low covid-19 severity in patients with hypertension receiving ace inhibitors (acei) or angiotensin-receptor blockers (arb); moreover, these patients tended to have low blood interleukin 6 levels. 32 compared with other antihypertensive drugs, acei or arb use has also been reported to increase blood cd3 and cd8 t-cell counts and reduce peak viral load. 32 finally, ace2 activation can reduce the severity of lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury via the activated serine/threonine protein kinase (ampk)/mammalian target-ofrapamycin (mtor) pathway. 33 regulation of the ras may serve as a therapeutic target for covid-19 treatment, and therefore, the underlying mechanism of its effects requires urgent clarification.f i g u r e 2 two hits to the ras by chronic inflammation and covid-19 infection. the ace/ang ii/at1r axis of the ras is activated through chronic inflammation, including hypertension, diabetes, obesity, and cancer. furthermore, sars-cov-2 induces ace2 internalization and shedding, which lead to inactivation of the ace2/ang (1-7)/ mas axis. therefore, the two hits to the ras may be the primary reason for the mortality rate being high among patients with covid-19 who have comorbidities. in brief, the first hit originates from chronic inflammation activating the ace/ang ii/at1r axis, and the second hit originates from the covid-19 infection inactivating the ace2/ang (1-7)/mas axisthe entry of sars-cov-2 into cells is mediated by the efficient binding of the spike (s) viral protein, a 1273 amino acid long protein which belongs to the viral envelope and protrudes outwards with a 'corona' like appearance, to the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptors. [2, 3] the ace2 receptor, discovered by two independent groups in year 2000, [4, 5] is a trans-membrane type i glycoprotein (mono-carboxypeptidase) composed by 805 amino acids which uses a single extracellular catalytic domain to remove one single amino acid from the octapeptide angiotensin ii to generate angiotensin [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . ace2 receptor also converts angiotensin i into angiotensin [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] , which in turn is converted to angiotensin 1-7 by ace and neprilisin ( figure 1 ). the catalytic efficiency of ace2 is 400 times higher on angiotensin ii than on angiotensin i. [6] ace2 shows a 40% structural identity to ace, [4] although ace-inhibitors do not block ace2 because of the different conformational structure of the catalytic site. [4] ace2 mediates the cell entry of three strains of coronavirus: sars-cov, nl63 and sars-cov-2. [7] notably, sars-cov and sars-cov2 share a 76% identity in the amino acid sequence, [8] thereby explaining the propensity of these viruses for binding with ace2. some structural variations of human ace2 have been identified that are characterized by a lower binding affinity with the spike viral protein, with potential protective implications. [9] the first step of viral entry process is the binding of the n-terminal portion of the viral protein unit s1 to a pocket of the ace2 receptor. the second step, which is believed to be of utmost importance for viral entry, is the protein cleavage between the s1 and s2 units, which is operated by the receptor transmembrane protease serine 2 (tmprss2), a member of the hepsin/tmprss subfamily. [10] tmprss2 is stechiometrically contiguous to ace2 receptor. [10] the cleavage of the viral protein by tmprss2 is a crucial step because, after s1 detachment, the remaining viral s2unit undergoes a conformational rearrangement which drives and completes the fusion between the viral and cellular membrane, with subsequent entry of the virus into cell, release of its content, replication, and infection of other cells. the importance of tmpsrr2 is supported by the evidence that entry of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 into cells is partially blocked by camostat mesylate, an inhibitor of tmpsrr2. [2] 3. site of ace2 receptors ace2 genes map to the x chromosome, [11] its expression seems to be higher in asian than in white and african-american people, [12] and receptors are ubiquitous. in particular, ace2 receptors are expressed in the heart (endothelium of coronary arteries, myocites, fibroblasts, epicardial adipocites), vessels (vascular endothelial and smooth cells), gut (intestinal epithelial cells), lung (tracheal and bronchial epithelial cells, type 2 pneumocytes, macrophages), kidney (luminal surface of tubular epithelial cells), testis, brain. [13] [14] [15] [16] in the lung, the wide surface of alveolar epithelial cells might explain the vulnerability of this organ to the consequences of virus invasion. ace2 is mostly bound to cell membranes and only scarcely present in the circulation in a soluble form.the disintegrin and metalloproteinase 17 (adam17), upregulated by angiotensin ii through its type 1 receptors (at1 receptors), cleaves the membrane-anchored ace2, thereby releasing a circulating active form of ace2 with loss of the catalytically activity of the remaining part of the enzyme anchored to membrane. [17] elevated circulating levels of soluble ace2 are markers of different disease states characterized by increased activity of the renin-angiotensin system and associated with a worse prognosis. [18, 19] 4. ace2: angels or devils?in the current sars-cov-2 pandemic, ace2 receptors can be considered 'devils', being the 'entry door' for the virus. evidence about this phenomenon is now strong and convincing. hoffmann et al [2] and walls et al [3] provided unequivocal evidence that sars-cov-2 gain access to cells through ace2 receptors, as it happened with sars-cov. [7] other evidences complete the picture. for example, in a mouse model of sars-cov infection, the virus entry is enhanced by overexpression of ace2. [20] anti-ace2 antibodies, but not anti-ace antibodies are able to block sars-cov viral invasion, [7] which is also blocked by n-(2-aminoethil)-1 aziridine-ethamine, a specific ace-2 inhibitor. [21] the pulmonary lesions induced by experimental sars-cov infection are less aggressive in ace2-knockout mice than in wildtype mice. [22] in the same time, however, ace2 receptors exert salutary biological functions that turn them as 'angels' under several aspects. a pivotal protective function of ace2 is the degradation of angiotensin ii to [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] ., although ace2 is able to metabolize other biological peptides including (des-arg9)-bradykinin. [15] the degradation of angiotensin ii to angiotensin 1-7 is blocked by selective ace2 inhibitors like mln-4760. [23] to understand the relevance of angiotensin ii degradation by ace2 results, it is important to review the biological effects of angiotensin ii. angiotensin ii serves not only as a potent vasoconstrictor and stimulant of aldosterone release. in different experimental and clinical models, angiotensin ii triggered a variety of important adverse reactions which included myocardial hypertrophy and dysfunction, interstitial fibrosis, endothelial dysfunction, enhanced inflammation, obesity-associated hypertension, oxidative stress and increased coagulation. [13] [14] [15] [16] a detailed discussion of the mechanisms through which angiotensin ii mediates the above reactions is out of the purposes of this review. in the current pandemic of sars-cov-2 infection with associated pulmonary inflammation and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), it is interesting to note that angiotensin ii also interferes with adaptive immunity by activating machrophages [24] and other cells of the immune system, with consequent increased production of il-6, [25] tnfα and other inflammatory citokynes. [26, 27] it is important to remark that the deleterious effects of angiotensin ii summarized above almost entirely result from the stimulation of at1 receptors. this chain of events can be defined as the ace→angiotensin ii→at1 receptor axis.the ace2 receptors reduce the adverse effects of angiotensin ii not only by degrading angiotensin ii, thereby eliminating or limiting its deleterious potential, but also by generating angiotensin 1-7 . angiotensin 1-7 exerts numerous salutary and opposite ('counter-regulatory') effects to those of angiotensin ii through an efficient binding with the g protein-coupled receptor mas and angiotensin ii type 2 receptors (at2 receptors). therefore, the ace2→angiotensin 1-7 →mas receptor axis is counter-regulatory to the ace→angiotensin ii→at1 receptor axis.santos et al provided an excellent review of the multiple effects of the ace2→angiotensin 1-7 →mas receptor axis. [28] 4.1. ace2→angiotensin 1-7 →mas receptor axis and the lung studies addressing the pulmonary effects of angiotensin 1-7 appear particularly appealing. mas receptors are expressed at the surface of bronchial smooth muscle cells and alveolar epithelium. [29, 30] in experimental and clinical models of lung inflammation, angiotensin 1-7 exerted anti-inflammatory effects with less infiltrates of lymphocytes and neutrophils, reduced perivascular and peri-bronchial inflammation, and prevention of subsequent fibrosis. [29, [31] [32] [33] ace2 is expressed on the luminal side of the bronchial ciliated epithelia, where it removes a single amino acid residue also from the polypeptide des-arg [9] bradykinin (dabk), [6] thereby preventing the binding of dabk on the bradykinin receptor b1 receptor. [34] in the presence of reduced ace2 function in the lung induced by endotoxins there is an increase of free dabk, which in turn activates b1 receptors with release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and intense lung inflammatory and injury. [34] 4.2. ace2→angiotensin 1-7 →mas receptor axis and thrombosisthe ace2→angiotensin 1-7 →mas receptor axis exerts anti-thrombotic effects [35] [36] [37] [38] . mas receptors are expressed on platelets. [39] stimulation of mas receptors by angiotensin 1-7 increases prostacyclin and no release. [35, 36] animals knockout for mas receptors have a shorter bleeding time and increased size of thrombi. [36] in these animals, administration of angiotensin 1-7 induces a marked antithrombotic effect which is directly related to the plasma levels of angiotensin 1-7 [39] and is inhibited by a-779, an antagonist of mas receptors. [35] thus, angiotensin 1-7 plays an important role in opposing the pro-thrombotic and pro-inflammatory effects of angiotensin ii. [40, 41] 4.3. ace2→angiotensin 1-7 →mas receptor axis and the endocrine systemthe ace2→angiotensin 1-7 →mas receptor axis is well expressed in the pancreas where it improves insulin secretion possibly by improving peri-insular blood flow and inhibiting fibrosis as a result of increased no release. [28, 42] ace2 receptors are also expressed in the adipose tissue [43, 44] and a reduction of ace2 has been noted in the adipose tissue of obese animals [44] in animal experiments, diets rich of fats decreased ace2 activity and angiotensin [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] , and increased angiotensin ii and blood pressure levels in male, but not in female, animals and these reactions were inhibited by at1 blockade with losartan. [45] after ovariectomy, female animals showed similar reactions as in males. [45] these data suggest that ace2 deficiency may favor obesityinduced hypertension. [45] ace2 is also expressed in the cardiac adipocytes. [46] obese patients with heart failure have an increased amount of epicardial adipose tissue [46] and it has been suggested that ace2 deficiency can induce heart failure with preserved ejection fraction in animals. [47] this phenomenon has been attributed to adipose tissue inflammation through local activation of macrophages, which possess at1 receptors on their cellular membrane. [26] 5. what does it happen to ace2 after sars-cov binding?sars-cov and sars-cov2 bind to ace2 receptors, with the subsequent membrane fusion and virus entry into the cell, leads to downregulation of these receptors. [16, 22, 48] in other terms, the virus appears to entry into the cell along with the membrane receptor, which is functionally removed from the external site of the membrane.as a result, the ace→angiotensin ii→mas receptor axis is markedly attenuated, with amplification of the ace→angiotensin ii→at1 receptor axis.since the pulmonary inflammation and the resulting acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) are potentially deadly complications of sars-cov and sars-cov-2, studies addressing the lung complications of ace2 down-regulation are of outmost importance. studies using different models of lung injury showed that the downregulation of ace2 receptors triggers important inflammatory lesions in the respiratory tree (alveolar wall thickening, edema, infiltrates of inflammatory cells, bleeding) which appear to be mediated by angiotensin ii. [22, [48] [49] [50] tracheal instillation of cigarette smoke, [49] or particulate matter of aerodynamic diameter of less than 2,5 ɥm, [50] induces acute lung injury with release of inflammatory cytokines il-6, tnf-α and tgf-β1 and increased expression of ace, consistent with ace→angiotensin ii→at1 receptor axis over-activity. [50] these reactions are increased in ace2 knockout mice. [50] in a model of acid aspiration, which induces acute lung injury, lung inflammatory lesions were more severe and lethal in ace2 knock-out animals. [48] in these animals, injection of recombinant ace2 as well as at1 receptor blockers attenuate the degree of lung injury. [48] these findings strongly suggest that ace2 protects from lung injury induced by acid aspiration. [48] notably, lung injury has been induced by the isolated spike viral protein of the sars-cov, the ligand for ace2 binding, in the absence of other viral components. [22] this model has the merit to investigate the impact of ace2 down-regulation in the absence of confounding effects of viral invasion and replication. the authors found that even the isolated spike viral protein induced down-regulation of ace2 receptors with concomitant increase of angiotensin ii in the lung tissue and precipitation of severe pulmonary inflammatory lesions. [22] also in this model, at1 receptor blockers attenuated the pulmonary lesions induced by the spike viral protein. [22] a key point to remark is that ace2 are mainly expressed in pneumocytes type ii, small cylindrical cells which represent 5% of all pneumocytes. [51] pneumocytes type 2 are responsible for the production of alveolar surfactant, and in the same time they function as 'stem' cells, progenitors of pneumocytes type i (95% of all pneumocytes) which are responsible of gas exchanges. [52] therefore, the damage of pneumocytes type ii due to the binding of coronavirus to ace2 receptors is devastating for at least three reasons: 1) local unopposed ace→angiotensin ii→at1 receptor axis over-activity; 2) reduced production of alveolar surfactant by injured pneumocytes type ii leading to reduced lung elasticity; 3) reduced repair of pneumocytes type i leading to impaired gas exchanges and fibrosis. [53] 6. clinical characteristics of patients infected with sars-cov and sars-cov-2studies from china and italy have shown that hypertension, diabetes and history of cardiovascular disease are the most frequent comorbidities in patients infected with sars-cov-2. [54] [55] [56] older age and male sex are two additional factors associated with sars-cov-2 infection. [54] [55] [56] a similar picture emerged a few years ago with the sars-cov infection. [57, 58] in a study conducted in 201 patients infected with sars-cov-2, most patients were men (63.7% of patients), the mean age was 51 years and the most frequent comorbidities were hypertension (19.4%), diabetes (10.9%) and history of cardiovascular disease (4.0). [55] notably, the patients who developed ards were older and had a higher prevalence of hypertension (27.4% vs. 13.7%), diabetes (19.0% vs. 5.1%) when compared with those who did not develop ards. [55] in a multivariate analysis, the factors associated with progression from ards syndrome to death included older age, neutrophilia and hypercoagulation, mainly reflected by a higher d-dimer. [55] abnormal coagulation parameters and enhanced thrombosis predict a poor prognosis in patients with sars-cov-2. [59] a meta-analysis of 8 studies conducted in china on a total of 46,248 patients infected with sars-cov2 confirmed that hypertension, diabetes and history of cardiovascular disease were the most frequent comorbidities in these patients. [56] again, hypertension and history of cardiovascular disease were significantly more prevalent among the more severe patients. [56] in a recent analysis of 1591 infected patients from italy, the mean age of patients was 63 years, men were 82% and the prevalence of patients with hypertension, diabetes and previous cardiovascular disease was 49%, 17% and 21%, respectively. [54] patients with hypertension were older that those without hypertension (66 vs 62 years, p=0.005). when comparing the patients who died in the intensive care unit with those who survived, the former were older and had a higher prevalence of hypertension (63% vs. 40%, p<0.001). [54] 7. ace2 deficiency: a central role in sars-cov-2 infection?it is interesting to note that several conditions associated with viral infection and severity of the disease share a variable degree of ace2 deficiency. for example, ace2 expression in the lungs markedly decreases with ageing, [60] to a greater extent in men than women. [60] diabetes mellitus has been associated with reduced ace2 expression, possibly as effect of glycosylation. [61] [62] [63] several experimental and clinical studies indicate that ace2 deficiency obtained through deletion or inhibition may be a causative factor for hypertension. [14, 64] treatment with soluble recombinant ace2 reduces the blood pressure rise provoked by angiotensin ii, increases angiotensin 1-7 and reduces angiotensin ii. [65] ace2 deficiency has been associated with exacerbation of hypertension and cardiac hypertrophy induced by angiotensin ii, [66] and maladaptive left ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction. [67] furthermore, deficiency of ace2 enhances the susceptibility to heart failure. [14] a heterozygote loss of ace2 is believed sufficient to increase the susceptibility to heart disease. [68] given the above premises, it is tempting to speculate (figure 2 ) that ace2 deficiency may play a central role in the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 infection. the down-regulation of ace2 induced by viral invasion could be especially detrimental in individuals with baseline ace2 deficiency due, for example, to older age, diabetes, hypertension and prior heart diseases including heart failure.the possibility that a mild or moderate ace2 deficiency may protect from viral invasion seems unlikely because of the intrinsically high affinity of sars-cov-2 to ace2 receptors. [2, 3] by contrast, in a setting of ace2 deficiency, the ace2 down-regulation induced by virus could amplify the imbalance between the ace→angiotensin ii→at1 receptor axis (adverse) and the ace2→angiotensin 1-7 i→mas receptor axis (protective). at lung level, such dysregulation would much facilitate the progression of inflammatory and hyper-coagulation processes which share dependency upon local angiotensin ii hyper-activity insufficiently opposed by angiotensin [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . this chain of events would not deny the concomitant role of other mechanisms including an impaired immune response to initial viral invasion, or a genetic susceptibility to hyperinflammation and thrombosis. [69, 70] in this context, administration of soluble recombinant ace2 [12] or angiotensin 1-7 [71] could be promising therapeutic approaches, requiring urgent evaluation in clinical trials. two trials of losartan as additional treatment for sars-cov-2 infection in hospitalized (nct04312009) or not hospitalized (nct04311177) patients have been announced, supported by the background of the huge adverse impact of the ace→angiotensin ii→at1 receptor axis over-activity in these patients.the possibility that ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii receptor blockers (arbs) may be discontinued even temporarily, because these drugs appear to increase the expression of ace2 receptors, the site of viral entry into the human organism, [72] [73] [74] [75] is actively debated. [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] [81] [82] [83] [84] several scientific societies and various experts in this area expressed the position that discontinuation of these drugs is not justified by evidence and could be dangerous. [76, 77, 81, 82] on the other hand, several experimental data discussed above suggest the potential utility of arbs, particularly to limit lung inflammation during viral invasion. [80, 83] it is hoped that the results of the above mentioned nct04312009 and nct04311177 trials will answer this question.we suggest that ace2 down-regulation induced by the cell entry of sars-cov, nl63 and sars-cov-2 may be particularly detrimental in subjects with pre-existing ace2 deficiency. some degree of ace2 deficiency has been associated with a variety of conditions including older age, hypertension, diabetes and cardiovascular disease, which also characterize people more likely to be infected and to present more severe complications. in a setting of enhanced ace2 deficiency produced by the viral invasion, the marked dysregulation between the 'adverse' ace→angiotensin ii→at1 axis and the 'protective' ace2→angiotensin 1-7 →mas axis would contribute to enhance the progression of inflammatory and thrombotic processes. these considerations provide a rationale for investigating the role of therapeutic approaches conceptually linked to ace2 receptor activity. these include the use of soluble recombinant ace2, angiotensin 1-7 , and angiotensin ii type 1 receptor blockers, which are currently being evaluated. the spread of novel coronavirus (2019-ncov, shook the world with its highly virulent transmissibility, manifesting largely as a severe acute respiratory syndrome, with more than 4.3 million people confirmed to be infected-with approximately 1.3 million cases in the usa-and over 294,000 deaths worldwide at the time of this writing [1] . originating in china, the covid-19 epidemic has surpassed its predecessors in the number of hospitalizations and intensive care unit admissions required to handle an infectious process within a short period of time and of such grand scale [2] . the early sars epidemic that emerged in 2002 similarly involved human-to-human transmission, with animal vectors linked to outbreaks and confirmed in laboratory isolates [3] . initially described as pneumonia of unknown origin, covid-ishan asokan and soniya v. rabadia contributed equally to this work as co-primary authors.this article is part of the topical collection on cardio-oncology 19 is believed to be linked to bats based on its genomic similarity to known bat coronavirus batcov ratg13 [4] . though most coronaviruses are mild, two beta-coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), also took place within the last two decades [5] . these two unique predecessors preceded the pandemic that began in china in 2019. the virus, originating in wuhan, hubei province, china, in late december, resulted in nearly 96,000 cases initially and is now considered a worldwide pandemic [6] .routes of transmission of the virus have been documented to include respiratory droplets, contact, fomites, and fecal-oral transmission [7, 8] . the most common symptoms at onset of illness include fever, cough, myalgia, and fatigue, with rare complaints of sputum production, headache, hemoptysis, loss of taste and/or smell, and diarrhea. in addition to clinical characteristics, patients showcased ground-glass opacities on chest computed tomography scans. however, more than half of the patients in early studies notably developed dyspnea that correlated with patchy infiltrates on chest radiographs. the mean duration of symptoms was roughly 8 days, with progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) occurring between days 8 and 14 [9] . patients receiving mechanical ventilation in the wuhan cohort typically required icu admission of up to 1-2 weeks following symptom development which foreshadowed the scale of the pandemic and mirrored data obtained from the mers epidemic in 2015 [10, 11] .epidemiological data from china confirmed the median age of the patients impacted by the disease to be 59 years, with disease distribution disproportionately impacting males [12] . the data further hypothesized that children might be less likely to become infected, or if infected, demonstrated far milder symptoms. italy documented nearly 22,512 cases by march of 2020, with the largest proportion of cases and fatalities impacting males greater than 60 years of age [13] . in the lombardy study, 68% of patients had at least one existing comorbidity, with hypertension being most frequently cited. other predisposing factors included cardiovascular disease and hypercholesterolemia. a rare subset had pre-existing lung disease, manifesting as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. roughly 11% of the lombardy patients were managed with non-invasive ventilatory support [14] . the need for invasive ventilatory support varied across regions of the world, and some of the wuhan cohort were directly transitioned to extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) for resuscitation purposes [10] .underlying risk factors, such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and immunosuppression, have been explored as prognosticators regarding clinical outcomes of covid-19 infections in hospitalized patients [15•] . however, the impact of the pandemic in patients with a history of cancer and pre-existing and/or cancer treatment-associated cardiovascular disease-the cardio-oncology patient-is unknown. theoretically, this population is likely at higher risk of morbidity and mortality from covid-19 infection, and has unique healthcare needs that put them at higher risk at exposure from community and healthcare-related transmission. examples of these risks include needing ongoing cancer treatments in the outpatient and inpatient setting, as well as imaging-related procedures and operations for cancer-related staging and treatments. if these patients also have pre-existing cardiovascular disease and/or acquired cardiotoxicity during and after treatments, they also warrant additional evaluation.finally, there appears to be a strong correlation with worse outcomes in hospitalized covid-19 patients in cardiovascular and/or cancer-related comorbidities, which will be reviewed below.multiple retrospective analyses including those from china, the usa, and italy have shown that there is high cardiovascular disease (cvd) prevalence in patients that develop covid-19 and particularly those that have more severe disease and worse outcomes. the mechanism by which cardiovascular patients have a higher risk of contracting covid-19 and developing more severe disease is unknown, but potentially may be due to poor cardiovascular reserve, a greater associated age with the cardiovascular conditions, and dysregulated immunity and existing inflammation from their underlying diseases such as hypertension and diabetes [16] . an observational database of the surgical outcomes collaborative registry, which comprised of 8910 hospitalized covid-19 patients from 169 hospitals in asia, europe, and north america, found that an age greater than 65, and diagnosis of history coronary artery disease, heart failure, and/or cardiac arrhythmias were independently associated with increased risk of in-hospital death, with 5.8% (n = 515) of this cohort dying in the hospital [17] . further studies analyzing risk factors and associated clinical outcomes by geography are further described below.a meta-analysis of 6 chinese studies evaluating 1527 affected patients showed that the most prevalent cardiovascular metabolic comorbidities included hypertension (17.1%), cardiac and/or cerebrovascular disease (16.4%), and diabetes (9.7%). most importantly, patients with hypertension and cardiac and/ or cerebrovascular disease significantly accounted for more icu cases compared with non-icu cases with prevalence of 28.8% (rr 2.03) for hypertension, and 16.7% (rr 3.30) for cardiac and/or cerebrovascular disease [18] . data from the world health organization and chinese center for disease control and prevention confirm that patients with comorbidities have a higher case fatality rate (cfr) than those without comorbidities [19, 20] . of the 55,924 laboratory-confirmed cases in china, there was a 3.8% cfr and higher rates were seen with those with cvd (13.2%), diabetes (9.2%), and hypertension (8.4%) [19•] . a cohort study of 201 patients from wuhan jinyintan hospital showed that hypertension was significantly associated with patients progressing to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) (27.4% vs. 13.7%; p = 0.02) and later death (36.4% vs. 17.5%; p = 0.05) [21] .as of march 17, 2020, the cfr in italy is 7.2%. from a total of 22,512 cases of which a detailed chart review of a subsample of 355 deceased patients found high underlying disease prevalence of ischemic heart disease (30%), diabetes (35.5%), atrial fibrillation (24.5%), and cancer (20.3%) [22] . a case series of patients with covid-19 in the icus in the lombardy region demonstrated that hypertension was the most common comorbidity (49%) and cardiovascular disease (21%) was the second. furthermore, there was a statistically significant higher prevalence of hypertension among patients who died compared with those who were discharged from the icu (63% vs. 40%; p < 0.001) [14] .while epidemiologic data in the usa remains dynamic with limited studies to date in major urban centers, a report of 167 confirmed cases linked to a long-term facility in washington state also conferred similar findings showing high underlying disease prevalence with hypertension (44.3%), cardiac disease (40.7%), and diabetes (22.8%) [23] . a large new york study examined a total of 5700 patients, with median age being 63 years age. the new york cohort found hypertension in 56.6% patients, obesity in 41.7% patients, and diabetes in 33.8% of patients. of the patients who died, those with diabetes were more likely to have been mechanically ventilated or be hospitalized in the icu [15•] . another case series of 393 patients admitted to new york hospitals found that 50.1% of patients had hypertension and 21% had cardiovascular disease [24] . not all studies detailed specifics of what defined cardiac disease; therefore, it is difficult to delineate covid-19 direct associations with coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathy, or heart failure from a large sample size standpoint. however, a case series from seattle, washington did state that 42.9% of the 21 critically ill patients with covid-19 had underlying congestive heart failure [25] .in addition to underlying cvd being a risk factor for contracting covid-19, patients that develop acute myocardial injury have worse outcomes, even in those without baseline cardiovascular dysfunction [25] [26] [27] [28] . acute myocardial injury can be categorized in three varieties: elevated troponin levels above the 99th percentile upper reference limit, development of new or worsening heart failure, and myocarditis. several studies from china found that elevated troponin levels were significantly associated with higher mortality [26] [27] [28] . a case series of 187 patients at the seventh hospital of wuhan city, china, found that patients with elevated troponin t (tnt) levels had a significantly higher mortality rate to those with normal tnt levels (59.6% vs. 8.9%; p < 0.001). patients with underlying cvd including those with underlying hypertension, coronary heart disease, and cardiomyopathy were more likely to have elevated tnt levels during their hospital course [26] . lipid metabolism is also observed to be dysregulated in patients with sars-cov infection. serum concentrations of f r e e f a t t y a c i d s , l y s o p h o s p h a t i d y l c h o l i n e , a n d phosphatidylglycerol remained elevated and contributed to chronic cardiovascular damage post infection in patients with sars-cov [29] . long-term cardiovascular and atherosclerotic changes in patients who suffer from covid-19 have not been documented yet given the recent nature of this pandemic.a case series of 21 critically ill covid-19 patients from seattle also found that one-third of their patients developed new cardiomyopathy with cardiogenic shock in the absence of prior systolic dysfunction during the progression of their illness [25] . it is unclear if these patients that developed cardiomyopathy truly had myocarditis or had underlying cvd that predisposed them to this clinical course. however, covid-19 has been shown to directly cause myocarditis in otherwise healthy individuals in several case reports [30, 31] . thus, covid-19 demonstrates various patterns of myocardial injury, with higher mortality risk being associated with elevated troponin levels.in addition, in the cardio-oncology population, elevated cardiac biomarkers can pose an additional layer of complexity and challenge when dealing with management. abnormal elevations of troponin and bnp biomarkers can be indicative of cardiotoxicity from cancer physiology or from the treatments themselves [32] . some elevations may be non-specific and are reflective of subclinical cardiotoxicity in patients receiving anthracyclines and/or anti-her2 agents in which stable patients can be medically managed [33, 34] . however, some patients receiving other agents such as certain tyrosine kinase inhibitors with prothrombotic risk (i.e., ponatinib) or fluoropyridines (i.e., 5-fluorouracil) may suffer cardiotoxicity in the form of coronary ischemia/vasospasm, which may warrant more invasive diagnostic/treatment strategies [35] [36] [37] .elevated cardiac biomarkers have also been associated with worse outcomes and or cardiac hemodynamic instability, including cytokine release syndrome from chimeric antigen therapy (car-t), heart failure from proteasome inhibitor use (i.e., carfilzomib), or myocarditis from immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy [38] [39] [40] [41] . some of these disease processes may confound treatment of a cancer patient also afflicted with covid-19, and thus, multidisciplinary assessment, particularly by a cardio-oncologist, may be essential to provide optimal care in this high-risk population.cancer patients have shown to be at higher risk for contracting the virus likely from their immune dysregulation in setting of their malignancy and various treatments and remain at high risk for sustaining severe outcomes [19, 42] . per the who joint mission report, the cfr for cancer patients (7.6%) was higher than the overall cfr for 55,924 covid-19 patients in china [19•] . reports from italy and washington also support that cancer patients had similar findings [14, 22, 23] . however, the specific type of cancer was neither reported in these studies nor linked to specific outcome. several studies have indicated that cancer patients trend toward having more severe disease. a case series of patients admitted to new york hospitals identified that 5.9% patients had cancer and 43% of these patients required invasive ventilation for support [24] . a prospective cohort study of following 1590 covid-19 patients in china demonstrated that of the 18 patients with cancer, lung cancer was the most frequently incurred malignancy. moreover, in this cohort, history of cancer was associated with a higher risk of severe events (icu admission requiring ventilation or death) and faster progression to severe events (median time for cancer patients 13 days vs. 43 days for noncancer patients). those with a history of chemotherapy or surgery in the past month had a higher risk for severe events even when adjusted for other risk factors including age (or 5.34, 95% ci 1. 80-16.18 ; p < 0.005). of the 18 described in the wuhan group, roughly 10% received chemotherapy and 7.1% targeted therapy. however, age alone was also an independent risk factor for severe events in the cancer group of patients. those with history of lung cancer versus other cancer types did not predict a more severe outcome [42] .another study from china evaluating all cancer patients admitted to zhongnan hospital of wuhan university determined that cancer patients had a 0.79% infection rate compared with the overall city's 0.37% infection rate. a total of 12 patients were affected, 58.3% had non-small cell lung carcinoma (nsclc) with approximately 41.7% were undergoing treatment with chemotherapy and resulting mortality rate as of march 10, 2020, being 25%. additionally, nsclc patients that were greater than age 60 had a higher incidence of covid-19 compared with younger patients with nsclc [43•] . these findings are further corroborated by a study that examined all 28 cancer patients admitted to 3 hospitals in china. lung cancer was the most common cancer type among these patients (25%). diabetes (14.3%) and chronic cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease (14.3%) were the most common comorbidities listed. clinical factors that significantly predicted worse outcomes in this group of patients included age, patchy consolidation on imaging, and receipt of antitumor treatment in the last 14 days [44] . these studies suggest that patients with cancer are at higher risk for covid-19, and those with older age and cancer are at an even higher risk for poor outcomes. lung cancer has been reported to be more common in these studies, but the total sample size of cancer patients remains too low to draw any meaningful conclusions on which malignancy may be most associated with severity of covid-19 infections. lastly, although having recent anticancer treatment increases the risk for severe outcomes, it is unclear which anti-cancer agents are associated with higher risk for acquiring covid-19 infection, severity of infection, and/or mortality. although no formal studies have assessed the direct impact of covid-19 on cardio-oncology patients, a study has shown that both cvd patients and cancer patients do have an increased risk for cardiac injury which in of itself is an independent predictor of mortality [28] . additionally, since the data suggests that cvd and cancer are potentially independent risk factors for virus acquisition and severe outcomes, it is reasonable to assume that if patients have both risk factors, then they may posit higher cumulative risk. there is also concern that cancer treatments may induce disease states such as hypertension and cardiovascular disease-both frequently associated risk factors for worse outcomes in covid-19 patients [19• ]. an example of such a clinical scenario could involve metastatic renal carcinoma patients who develop hypertension from anti-vegf tyrosine kinase therapy, or cardiomyopathy from anti-her2, and anthracycline therapy of breast cancer [45, 46] . however, the definition of "cardiovascular disease" that patients have been classified with in these studies is not always clearly delineated; thus, risk stratification of these patients in regard to covid-19 risk requires more refined investigation and long-term follow-up regarding outcomes.the elevated risk that cancer patients face during the covid-19 pandemic poses many challenges. some of these include providing ongoing cancer treatments especially if patients are undergoing curative therapy, enrolling patients into experimental drug trials, continuing close cardiotoxicity surveillance, and providing treatments to patients who have an optimal window of adequate functional status [47, 48] . given concerns for hospital-acquired covid-19 infections, this additional risk factor can impact continuation of therapy or initiation of regimens for aggressive malignancy that require hospitalization for closer monitoring [43, 47, 48] . moreover, patients that may rely on drugs or stem cell donations for treatment may necessitate access to unique global sources and are rendered at a disadvantage due to travel restrictions and quarantine policies [49] . in response to these climactic changes, the national comprehensive cancer network and national cancer institute have provided guidance to providers on providing care to oncology patients, resource allocation, and managing drug trials [50] .as referenced above, a unique source of transmission in the cardio-oncology population is healthcare exposure. healthcare-related exposure is being given greater importance as an attributable vector. past experience with sars-cov demonstrated that the virus can be transmitted via aerosolizing procedures, such as endotracheal intubation, placing anesthesiologists at great risk for acquiring the infection [51, 52] . during the outbreak of covid-19, implementation of infection control and establishment of safe personal protective equipment (ppe) remained and remains key. intense aerosolizing procedures, such as emergent intubations, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, or bronchoscopies, should require stringent ppe to maintain adequate protection. despite attempting to roll out these precautions, review of the who-china joint mission on covid confirmed that nearly 3387 healthcare workers tested positive for covid-19 infection, resulting in 22 deaths [53] . while initial understanding of the pathogen remained poor, long-time exposure to large-scale infected patients directly increased the risk of infection for healthcare workers and risk of being an asymptomatic carrier [54] . fatigue, lack of available healthcare workers, limited resources, and intensity of response led to several healthcare workers succumbing to infection. though unsettling, it is doubly important to place value on healthcare-related exposure as an established risk factor when dealing with cancer patients with pre-existing risk factors.coronaviruses are a large collection of single-stranded enveloped, non-segmented positive-sense rna viruses that fall within the family of coronaviridae and the order nidovirales [55] . six specific coronaviruses have been identified as human-susceptible, among which alpha and beta subsets demonstrated lower pathogenicity and caused milder respiratory symptoms respectively. genomic analysis of sars-cov-2 showcased 96.2% shared sequencing with bat cov ratg13, thus positing that the bat variant served as the natural host of the virus [4] . however, the severe acute syndromes belong to the b-genus, with envelope-anchored spike protein mediating viral entry into host cells by first binding to a host receptor and subsequently fusing membranes [56] . the covid-19 infection has a well-defined capsular structure with 14 binding residues, with 8 conserved from prior sars-cov infections. the viral genome contains several open reading frames, with majority of the viral rnaencoding non-structural proteins (nsps) that play a role in the pathogenesis of disease. recent research studies focusing on nsp2 and nsp3 demonstrated an in vivo role that these subunits may play in infectious capability and differentiation of covid-19 [57] . mechanistically, covid-19 is found to be linked to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, a membrane-bound aminopeptidase highly expressed in lung, intestinal, and heart tissue. beyond being implicated in hypertension and diabetes, ace-2 further functions as a receptor for coronaviruses [58•] . covid-19 translocates into lung parenchyma via damaging epithelial cells, resulting in respiratory symptoms, with symptom severity worsening in patients with cardiovascular disease. ace2 secretion is noted to be elevated in cvd patients due to increased reliance on angiotensin-receptor blockers for management of hypertension. at the receptor level, the receptor-binding domain of sars-cov spike protein specifically recognizes ace2, which contributes to both crossspecies and human-to-human transmission [59, 60] . documented variability is demonstrated between various strains of sars-cov in terms of binding affinity and viral attachment, which is preserved across both humans and animal models of disease transmission [61] . the preserved domains across mers/sars may contribute to the heightened inflammatory response and cytokine milieu that leads to severe pneumonia [62] .on a molecular level, specific associations and descriptive characteristics of the patients identified cytokine abnormalities in icu-level patients versus non-icu-level admissions. compared with non-icu patients, icu patients had higher plasma levels of il-2, il-7, il-10, g-csf, ip-10, mcp-1, mip-1a, and tnf-a [63•]. though this cytokine thumbprint is being linked to covid-19 infection, ards similarly showcases elevations in inflammatory markers, questioning origin and role of virally mediated hyperinflammation [64] .multiple treatments are being assessed in various trials including antivirals, anti-inflammatories, immunotherapies, and cardiovascular medications for the treatment of covid-19.although some these therapies have potential to provide benefit, there are numerous potential cardiac toxicities and drugdrug interactions that may be harmful to cardio-oncology patients, which is critically relevant since a high percentage of covid-19 patients have cardiovascular comorbidities [65] [66] [67] [68] . an appraisal of these agents and their potential cardiotoxicities-of which there is no current proven efficacy at this time-is beyond the scope of this review. however, some agents are actively used in the treatment of cardiovascular disease and/or cancer-related conditions, and the unique disease states of the cardio-oncology population may yield insights into the mechanisms of covid-19 pathophysiology.for instance, the idea of using medications that have already been well-studied and target host responses by boosting host immunity was in discussion during prior significant outbreaks and epidemics including ebola and influenza [69, 70] . ace inhibitors (acei), angiotensin-receptor blockers (arb), and statins are of particular importance during this current pandemic.there has been a theoretical uncertainty in regard to the safety of acei/arb use in patients with covid-19 based on the ace2 viral entry mechanism [71, 72] . the virus gains cellular entry by attaching to the ace2 receptor [72] . ace2 expression and activity have shown to be increased in by acei/arb use [73] . although there is theoretical risk that ace2 upregulation may increase the susceptibility of infection, other conflicting evidence indicates that upregulation of ace2 in fact has a more protective effect. studies in mouse models have shown that ace2 is protective against acute lung injury and blocking the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system pathway decreases lung failure [74, 75] . based on the review of the literature to date, the heart failure society of america recommends continuation of acei/arb use for patients that are prescribed them for heart failure, hypertension, and ischemic disease [76••] . abrupt discontinuation of medications is not recommended and can worsen clinical stability especially in patients with existing cardiovascular conditions [71] .additionally, statins have long been shown to have antiinflammatory properties through multiple studies. for instance, simvastatin has been shown to decrease pulmonary inflammation in human subjects [77] . although the benefits for cardiovascular patients have been numerous from a lipid lower standpoint, it is important to note that the ability of statins to decrease inflammation also improves mortality [78] . a retrospective analysis of patients from the veterans administration showed that statin use, acei use, or arb use each independently improved 30 day mortality of patients > 65 years old who were hospitalized for pneumonia [79] . however, in the era of the covid-19 pandemic, studies are needed to evaluate its role in covid-19-related illness.although cancer patients have been considered immunosuppressed as a result of their underlying malignancy and cytoreduction therapies, patients that undergo immunotherapy including immune checkpoint inhibitors (icis) or car-t cell therapy may have different immuno-physiology that responds to covid-19 differently [80] . anti-pd-1/pd-l1 and anti-ctla-4 icis have been approved by the fda for use in a variety of cancers. these drugs primarily work by enhancing a patient's immune response to tumors through inhibiting negative regulators of t cell function [81] . car-t cell therapy involves reprogramming a patient's own t cells to directly target their specific tumor [82] .an adverse effect that can occur with either anti-pd-1 therapy or car-t cell therapy involves cytokine release syndrome (crs) which is similar to the cytokine storm phenomenon that occurs in patients with severe covid-19 [80, 82, 83] . crs occurs as a result of hyperimmune activation in response to tumor death, whereas cytokine storm in covid-19 patients occurs as a result of t cell hyperactivation from immune dysregulation [80, 84] . similar markers are elevated in both phenomena, including il-6, tnf-alpha, and ifn-λ, of which il-6 has also been shown to be a mortality predictor in covid-19 patients [27, 64, 80, 84] . covid-19 patients that develop cytokine storm syndrome are at risk of developing ards and multi-organ failure [84, 85] . immunosuppression with tocilizumab, an il-6 inhibitor, is used to treat crs associated with car-t cell therapy [80, 86] . additionally, tocilizumab immunosuppression is used to treat immune-related adverse events (iraes) from pd-1 inhibitors that are refractory to steroids; iraes also occur as a result of hyperimmune activation [80, 87] . moreover, the cytokine storm observed with covid-19 has also been noted to be similar to that of secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) which is also treated with immunosuppression [64] .current trials are underway with using tocilizumab and sarilumab (another il-6 inhibitor) to treat covid-19 patients [88] [89] [90] . although immunotherapy may be thought to reinstate a cancer patient's immunocompetence, there is potential for synergy from crs and the covid-19 cytokine storm pathogenesis which can further worsen a patient's mortality risk. further unfavorable synergy between ici immunerelated adverse events (iraes) can also be seen potentially between the pneumonitis that icis can cause and the lung involvement with covid-19 [80] . pneumonitis occurs in < 10% of patients being treated with anti-ctla-4 and anti-pd-1 icis and is potentially life-threatening [81] . therefore, if combined with lung injury from covid-19, there is a theoretical potential for poor outcomes.there are potential cancer treatments that may counteract the pathogenesis of covid-19, such as ccr5 treatments and tyrosine kinase inhibitors (tkis) [91] [92] [93] . the ccr5 receptor is a g protein-coupled receptor selectively expressed on macrophages, t cells, eosinophils, dendritic cells, and microglia and is implicated in chemokine-mediated signaling [94] . this receptor has historically been targeted for hiv antiviral therapy, in the setting of disrupting viral entry, specifically through small molecule inhibition with maraviroc and vicriviroc, and monoclonal antibody treatment with leronlimab [95] . moreover, multiple cancers have been shown to overexpress ccr5 which has been linked to a cancer's metastatic potential. ccr5 therapies are currently being studied in metastatic colorectal and breast cancers [91, 94] . due to its immune system restorative properties, leronlimab is being investigated for compassionate use in the treatment of covid-19 patients [96, 97] . studies examining receptor blockade in leronlimab preliminarily have shown decreases in il-6, restoration of cd4/cd8 ratios, and reduction in overall covid-19 viremia [98] . these collective findings suggest possible therapeutic role in establishing immune reconstitution in patients that are critically ill and may provide dual benefit in patients with shared cancer diagnoses.tkis like sunitinib and erlotinib that specifically inhibit aak1, a protein regulator that allows passage of the virus into cells, have theorized utility [92] . sunitinib is an antivascular endothelial growth factor (vegf) tki which is used in first-line for treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma [99] . erlotinib is an anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (egfr) tki which is used in first-line treatment for metastatic egfr-mutant non-small cell lung cancer [100] . both these tkis have shown to reduce the infectivity of dengue and ebola through in vivo studies with murine models which showed decreased viremia and mortality with treatments. moreover, in vitro studies in cultured cells and hepatitis c in this same study showed that use of these tkis reduced intracellular trafficking and inhibited viral entry [101] . however, the high doses required to achieve this effect may potentially exhibit harm to patients [92, 93] . regardless, there is potential for cancer patients receiving these therapies to achieve dual benefit as referenced before, but warrant further investigation. further studies are warranted in tracking the outcomes of cancer patients with covid-19 and the type of treatments they received.patients with underlying hypertension, diabetes, and cancer are at higher risk for developing thrombotic events. coagulopathy in coronavirus infection is now associated with high mortality and manifests with high d-dimer elevations [102] . lung inflammation and impaired pulmonary gas exchange contributes to cytokine storm, which leads to spike in d-dimer and pro-inflammatory response, with impaired endothelial function. tissue factor (tf), expressed by tumor cells, contributes to thrombosis, metastasis, tumor growth, and tumor angiogenesis, leading to release of pro-coagulant microparticles into the circulation and triggering thromboembolism in patients with cancer [103] . tf on circulating tumor cells leads to coating of cells with fibrin that traps them within microvasculature, thereby contributing to worsening endothelial dysfunction [104] . in patients with pre-existing cancer diagnoses, shared covid infection as well as hypoxia places them at even greater risk of developing and incurring thrombotic events [105] . early heparin initiation is posited to delay the spike in inflammatory biomarkers and may reduce contributions to pro-coagulopathic state [106] . a retrospective study from china examined 449 patients classified as having severe covid-19 infection, of which 272 had one or more chronic underlying diseases, such as hypertension and heart disease. patients were assigned to receive various forms of heparin, with those treated with heparin having a lower mortality rate (40% vs. 64.2%, p = 0.029) [107] . data regarding initiation and choice of anticoagulation remains limited, and further randomized clinical trials are necessary to determine prophylactic and treatment strategies for cardio-oncology patients infected with covid-19, as they represent a population with elevated theoretical risk for suffering from thromboembolic events.the covid-19 pandemic has added a significant layer and complexity of how patient care is being delivered due to concerns of bidirectional transmission, with no protective algorithm widely in place to dictate ongoing management of cancer patients [108••] . initiating cancer treatments, such as targeted immunotherapies and chemotherapy, require special consideration in the covid-19 era. as previously described, compromised immune systems render patients with cancer at higher risk for acquiring covid-19 infection and the sequelae that may ensue. cancer treatment centers and cardiooncologists must now consider not only the patient but also the integral healthcare workers who are regularly interfacing with high-risk exposures. devising strategies to ensure robust testing services and clearance mechanisms to protect patient and healthcare personnel is one of many methods now employed to continue ongoing treatments [48, 109, 110] . though there are no clear evidence-based modifications in systems of care to reduce transmission risk while balancing high-standard cardio-oncology care, various strategies are proposed ( table 2) . life-prolonging surgeries and procedures can slowly be pursued and continued, although the risks of delaying any such advanced treatments-including bone marrow transplantation and chimeric antigen receptor treatmentneed to be weighed carefully. covid-19 screening and testing prior to these surgeries/procedures, while not infallible, should be considered if available due to rising concern for asymptomatic carriers. following completing anti-cancer treatments, patients may additionally benefit from receiving immune system restorative treatments, such as filgastrim.additionally, the transition to telemedicine to conduct interval cardiovascular and oncologic appointments can potentially protect patients from unnecessarily harmful nosocomial exposures [111, 112] . certain chronic conditions (i.e., hypertension, stable/compensated congestive heart failure) may not necessarily require a face-to-face visit, whereas highly symptomatic patients should still be seen in the cardio-oncology clinic, preferably on the same day as their cancer outpatient visits. deferring primary prevention assessments, for example, cholesterol monitoring, unless otherwise indicated can augment protective mechanisms in place. cardiovascularrelated blood draws, if necessary, should be coincided with cancer-related treatments.in addition, the specter of cardiotoxicity related to certain cancer treatments also requires a reexamination of risk and benefit with respect to frequent cardiac monitoring due to previously mentioned concerns. peri-chemotherapeutic events and development of cardiomyopathy, ischemia, and life-threatening arrhythmias are further worsened by simultaneous covid infection. reducing reliance on frequent cardiac imaging in otherwise asymptomatic patients and providing in-mail ambulatory rhythm monitors for patients symptomatic with possible arrhythmias will further assist in mitigating exposure risk. limited cardiacimaging protocols (i.e., focused just on ventricular function and/or pericardial disease) if necessary for symptomatic patients or those necessitating cardiotoxicity surveillance can also be devised to reduce exposure time in the healthcare setting. in addition, for patients at low risk of cardiotoxicity and/or with prior serial-documented normal cardiac function, it can be considered to defer serial cardiac imaging in certain treatments (i.e., anti-her2 without anthracyclines, braf-mek treatments), in multidisciplinary discussions with oncology if the patient is asymptomatic [113] .the covid-19 pandemic has caused an unprecedented global impact on healthcare delivery, and its trajectory continues to remain unclear. vulnerable patient populations include those with cardiovascular disease and cancer, and the cardiooncology patient, having possessed both these risk factors, may unfortunately be at significantly increased risk of experiencing worse outcomes related to covid-19 infection. as of this writing, there are no known studies focusing on the cardio-oncology population, and there remain many opportunities to not only study the epidemiology of this unique but also significant group of patients. clinical trials are ongoing, but rigorous, randomized high-quality science is warranted to study the efficacy of previously mentioned treatments; they also may potentially reveal critical mechanistic insights into covid-19's pathophysiology, which overlap with cardiovascular and cancer disease states [114] . in addition, the abrupt and possibly permanent alteration of cardiovascular and cancer systems of care-with the dramatic rise of telemedicine and other changes-to mitigate transmission risk in the covid-19 era also warrants close study to evaluate clinical outcomes. much remains unknown about how the pandemic will affect the cardio-oncology population and how they will be cared for, but what is certain is that ongoing, close multidisciplinary care and communication between the cardiac and cancer care providers of these patients remains more critical than ever in order to guarantee the best care possible. bmt bone marrow transplantation, car-t chimeric antigen receptor therapy, hcw healthcare workers, ppe personal protective equipment, cvd cardiovascular disease, cad coronary artery disease, chf congestive heart failure, lvef left ventricular ejection fractiona worldwide outbreak of a respiratory illness, first identified in wuhan, china, is ongoing. the disease is caused by a novel coronavirus, sars-cov-2 and on february 11, 2020, was officially named the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) by the world health organization(who) [1, 2] . many of the covid-19 patients during the early outbreak in wuhan, reportedly had some link to a large seafood and animal market, suggesting an animal-to-person spread of the virus. however, a growing number of patients reportedly have not had exposure to animal markets, indicating that a person-to-person spread is occurring [3, 4] .in the present investigation, clinical characteristics of 225 patients with covid-19 have been collected. all patients were admitted between january 20 and february 14, 2020 the study included 225 covid-19 patients admitted to the department of infectious diseases, hanchuan city people's hospital, between january 20 and february 14, 2020. the subjects were selected according to the novel coronavirus infection pneumonia diagnosis and treatment standards (the fifth edition) (national health committee) and their general information, clinical symptoms, laboratory data, and ct data were collected for further analysis.blood tests were performed on the day of admission in all patients. they included blood cell differential count, c-reactive protein (crp), procalcitonin (pct), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr), alanine aminotransferase (alt), aspartate aminotransferase (ast), total bilirubin (tbil), serum creatinine (cr), and blood urea nitrogen (bun).all patients were subjected to chest ct imaging using the somatom definition as 64 instrument and the results were analyzed by the syngovia software (siemens, berlin, germany) one day before the admission.total rna was extracted from exfoliated cells of the pharynx or the nasal cavity with throat swabs or sputum using trizol (sigma-aldrich, st. louis, mo, usa) [5] . a one-step real-time pcr kit (vr-11-120) for the detection of 20219-ncov orf1ab/n gene was purchased from shanghai huirui biotechnology (shanghai, china).the pcr reactions were performed using the roche 480 thermocycler (roche molecular systems, branchburg, nj, usa). the pcr program consisted of 50°c for 15 min, 95°c for 5 min, 45 cycles of 95°c for 10 sec, 55°c for 45 s, and was terminated by dissociation.data were analyzed using the sigmastat software (spss inc., chicago, il, usa). the count data are expressed as a rate (%) and compared using the χ2 test. the difference was considered statistically significant when p < 0.05.the patients were diagnosed on the basis of clinical manifestations and laboratory findings. all subjects were positive for sars-cov-2 virus rna detected by rt-pcr. the patients included 120 males and 105 females and had had no contact with the wuhan huanan seafood market. their average age was 50 ± 14 years. the major clinical symptoms were fever (84.44 % of patients), cough (56.44 % of patients), dyspnea (4.00 % of patients), expectoration, fatigue, chills, headache, chest pain, and pharyngalgia (3.56 %-22.67 %). hypertension was present in 20.89 % of subjects. severe covid-19 was diagnosed in 37 (16.44 %) patients. the antimicrobial agent moxifloxacin was used in 65.78 % of cases. moreover, 31.56 % of patients received ribavirin, 59.11 % of patients received abidol, and 61.33 % of patients received oseltamivir. methylprednisolone was administered in 44.44 % of cases, and anti-inflammatory drugs and supportive care were used for some patients. one or two weeks later, patients' respiratory symptoms began to improve, the infiltrates in the lung began to absorb gradually, and the counts of white blood cells (wbcs) and lymphocytes returned to normal values. twenty of non-severe covid-19 patients recovered and were discharged. as of february 29, 2020, there were only two cases of death (0.89 %) with an underlying disease or bacterial co-infection.at admission, the counts of wbcs and lymphocytes were normal or decreased in 86.67 % and 99.11 % of patients, respectively. crp was increased in 86.22 % of patients (mean, 60.4 ± 57.5; normal range, 0-10 mg/l), pct was increased in 10.67 % of patients (mean, 0.87 ± 0.56; normal range, 0-0.5 mg/l), and esr was increased in 90.22 % of patients (mean, 55.8 ± 25.3; normal range, 0-15 mm/h). alt, ast, tbil, cr, and bun were within normal ranges.ct results documented that all patients had lung infiltrates. multiple patchy glassy shadows were present in both lungs, particularly in the peripheral areas, in 86.22 % of covid-19 patients. with the progression of the disease, the lesions increased and their scope in size or number expanded; glassy shadows co-existed with solid or stripe shadows (fig. 1 ).hypertension was found more frequent in the severe covid-19 group than in the non-severe group (45.95 % (n = 188) vs. 15.96 % (n = 37), x 2 = 16.824, p < 0.0001), and there is no significant sexual difference in morbidity between male group and female group (20.8 % (n = 120) vs 11.4 % (n = 105), x 2 = 3.605, p > 0.05)december 2019 in wuhan, china, and then spread to the suburbs, the rest of china, and the entire world [6] [7] [8] [9] . fever, cough, multiple patchy glassy shadows on ct images of the peripheral and posterior lungs, and normal or decreased white blood cells are the common clinical feature of covid-19, while some of patients showed severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) or death. early epidemic investigation showed that the wuhan huanan seafood market may be the first identified source of infection 7 , but solid data have shown the possibility of a person-to-person spread [10, 11] . none of the patients included in the current study had any direct or indirect connection with the huanan seafood market. it has been known that the sars coronavirus utilizes the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor to enter the cell [12] . ace2 receptor is a relatively new member of the renin-angiotensin system, and the maintenance of normal ace2 levels in the lung promotes resistance against inflammatory lung disease [13] . sars-cov-2 is a novel coronavirus and the mechanism by which sars-cov-2 viruses enter and damage the cells is still unclear. the studies of huang et al. [14] and zhang et al. [15] have found that, respectively, 6 of 41(15 %) and 42 of 140 (30 %) covid-19 patients have hypertension. in the present investigation, the incidence of hypertension was 45.95 % (17of 37patients) in the severe covid-19 group compared to 15.96 % (30 of 188 patients) in the non-severe group. this finding is consistent with the notion that hypertension is a high risk for covid-19 patients. however, the mechanism underlying this link is unknown. the possibility can be raised that high blood pressure may damage ace2 receptor-expressing endothelial or alveolar epithelial cells in the lung.hanchuan is a smaller city with a population of 1,000,000, located 45 km from wuhan. patients with covid-19 in this type of city near wuhan have not been previously described in detail. the present investigation provides clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings of emerging sars-cov-2 coronavirus pneumonia in humans, and can represent the real-world scenario of the epidemics in the suburbia after the initial breakout of covid-19 in the epicenter of wuhan, china.fever, cough, and conspicuous ground-grass opacity lesions in the lungs apparent in ct images combined with a normal or decreased count of wbcs are highly suspected clinical features of covid-19 pneumonia found in patients from a city near wuhan without a history of epidemic exposure. these clinical characteristics of covid-19 are very similar to those identified in wuhan, but the lower mortality can be attributed to better supplies of medical devices, a better understanding of the disease, and possibly lower levels of toxic substances in the environment. defining the role of these factors will require further studies. the study confirmed that hypertension is a high-risk factor of the disease. the collected data provide insights on covid-19 caused by sars-cov-2 in a smaller city near wuhan, china.this study was approved by the human ethics committee and the research ethics committee of hanchuan city people's hospital, hubei, china. data records were deidentified and completely anonymous, so informed consent was waived.the datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.the authors declare that they have no known competing interest.no funding was received for this work. 1 . chest ct imaging on day 0 (one day before the admission), day 8, and day 23. image obtained on day 0 shows slight opacities in the left and right upper lobes. evolution to a mixed pattern of ground-glass opacities and consolidation is apparent on day 8. on day 23, healing of the consolidations and ground-glass opacities is evident.. viral entry into the host results in activation of innate immune mechanism together with the synthesis and secretion of inflammatory mediators. interaction of specific viral components with pattern recognition receptors of the host immune system activates cellular signalling pathways that culminate in the production of various cytokines. these cytokines elicit host response like extravasation of leukocytes and activation, proliferation and cell differentiation of adaptive and innate immune system (7, 8) . interleukin (il)-1α/β, il-18 and il-6, tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, interferon (ifn)-α/β, transforming growth factor(tgf)-β are the major cytokines while ccl-2/monocyte chemoattractant protein (mcp)-1, mcp-3, ccl-3/macrophage inflammatory protein (mip)-1α, ccl-5 (chemokine (c-c motif) ligand 5)/rantes (regulated on activation, normal t cell expressed and secreted) and ifn-γinducible protein-10 (ip-10)/cxcl10 (c-x-c motif chemokine 10) are the chemokines released during an influenza virus-induced infection (9, 10) . these cytokines exert host antiviral responses in different ways. ifn-α/β is a type 1 interferon that can inhibit viral replication thus inducing a potent antiviral state in the host (11) , while tnf-α triggers the immune cells localization at infection site and activation of caspases to promote apoptosis (12) . il-1 is a pleiotropic cytokine, which enhances inflammatory cell infiltration by increasing membrane permeability through activation of mast cells and subsequent release of histamine, a vasodilator (13) . il-6 mediates monocyte differentiation to macrophages and enhances mononuclear cell infiltration to the inflammation loci (14) . moreover, synergistically il-6 and tgf-β induces maturation of naive helper t cells (cd4+) to t helper 17 (th17) cells which are potential effectors against pathogens. interestingly, il-6 also hinders the treg expansion by tgf-β (15, 16) . enhancement of type 1 immunity, activation of natural killer t cells (nkt) cells thus forming an early line of defence against viral infection are some of the biological actions of il-18 during viral infection (17, 18) .although these cytokines are released either as host protection or response against viral entry, exacerbated cytokine release can adversely affect the host by overreacting to its own system/ organs named as 'cytokine storm 'and was observed in both sars and mers infection resulting in the associated severe complications and multiple organ failure (19) . studies have established that similar hypercytokinemia/cytokine storm is also taking part in sars-cov2/covid-19 infection. in this review we highlight the pathology and pathogenesis of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f mers cov, sars cov and sars cov2, with main focus into the role of cytokines in pathology and its relation with co-morbidities of covid-19 infection (20) .epidemic outbreak in 2002-2003 by sars-cov had a case fatality ratio of 14% to 15%, which was higher in older age group (greater than 50%) and less than 1% in younger age group sars cov entry to the cells is mediated by ace2 (angiotensin converting enzyme 2) receptor which is extremely expressed in lung, kidney, heart, liver and tongue. viral spike protein binds to the receptor, followed by viral fusion with the cell membrane, which involves priming of s protein by proteases of the cell surface and finally ends up in entry and replication of the virus inside the cell (24) . it has been shown that ace2 has protective role in ali (25) . ace2 play a key role in renin-angiotensin system (ras) that maintains blood pressure and water electrolyte balance. decreased expression of ace2 negatively affects ras system followed by increased microvascular permeability and inflammation (26) . ace2 expression has also been found to be down regulated by sars cov infections, which further augments the intensity of lung injury (27) . moreover, increased viral load, excessive immune cell infiltration and increased innate immune response by pro-inflammatory mediators also lead to widespread lung injury in sars, suggesting both cytokine storm and direct cytopathogenic effect of the virus cause the physiological decompensation observed in sars cov infection (28) .profiling of systemic cytokine levels in individuals suffering from sars-cov disease showed elevated concentrations of t helper 1 (th1) cytokines like ifn-γ, il-2 and il-12.additionally, cytokines that promote inflammation like il-6, il-1, mcp-1, ip-10, cxcl9/mig (monokine induced by gamma interferon), il-18, tgf-β and il-8 were alsoincreased (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) . interestingly, sars patients showed no change in blood il-10 and il-4 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f levels (33) . increased amount of mig, mcp-1, ip-10, il-6, il-8 and il-18 in blood correlated with disease severity in sars patients (30, 31 interstitial infiltrates were observed in chest radiography of mers-cov infected individuals.laboratory investigation showed increased concentration of ldh and aspartate aminotransferase (ast), low eosinophil and platelet count and decreased albumin level (38) . another major cytokine that mediate organ damage in cytokine storm is il-6. excessive secretion of il-6 results in activation of coagulation pathway conversion of naive t cells, increase in vascular permeability and reduced cardiac function contribute to the increased disease severity (62, 63) . sars patients also showed increased levels of il-6 which correlated with disease progression (30) . increased levels of th17 cd4 t cells seen in covid-19 patients can be explained by high levels of il-6, which is implicated in t helper 17 (th17) cells development (16, 64) . interestingly, spike protein of sars cov induced activation of nf-κb signalling resulting in il-6 and tnf-α secretion in murine macrophages (65) . later in another study reported that inhibiting nf-κb signalling was demonstrated with decreased il-6 levels and increased animal survival in sars (66) . these studies implicate il-6 to be a key contributor to the patho-physiology of the cytokine-storm seen in both the sars cov infections. one of the proposed mechanisms for decreased t cells in covid-19 infection could be mediated by increased levels of il-6 and increased interaction between fas and its ligand.moreover, an increased number of lymphocytes were observed in patients sars cov2 infection when treated with tocilizumab, the il-6 receptor antagonist (67, 68) . yet more studies are required for speculating the exact mechanism of sars cov2 induced lymphopenia, and although the occurrence of copd in covid-19 patients was reported as 3.2% (74), the rate of disease severity and the mortality rate was markedly high with 60% and 63% respectively the death rate of covid-19 patients with cvd was 10.5% (92) . the and observational studies, it has been shown that bcg vaccination could reduce the neonatal as well as childhood death rate (116, 117) . retrospective cross-sectional study conducted in sub-saharan african children of below 5 years demonstrated a positive association of bcg vaccination and lower threat of malaria (118) . additionally, epidemiological studies have also established the protective role of bcg against respiratory tract infections in children which are predominantly virus-mediated (119, 120) . vaccination with bcg enhanced ifn-γ and il-10 level, thus providing immunity against respiratory tract infection even in elderly age group (121) . this is because, bcg also provides some non-specific immune assistance like immunity against pathogens other than mycobacteria like virus and parasites and reduces the occurrence of allergy. this is attained through a mechanism termed as trained immunity which is the immunological recall of the innate immune system via epigenetic reprogramming (122) . innate immune cells like monocytes, nk cells and macrophages undergo epigenetic modifications of histones that include methylation and acetylation, enhances gene expression of il-6, tnf-α and il-1β upon bcg vaccination. thus, the trained phenotype of innate immune cells results an increase in secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines on exposure to non-specific pathogen, enhancing host protection (123, 124) . it has been experimentally shown that healthy subjects immunized with bcg show increased production of tnf-α and il-1β in response to bacterial and non-bacterial stimulants. increased h3k4me3 (trimethylation of histone h3 at lysine 4) exposed promoter regions of these pro-inflammatory cytokines leading to their increased expression (125) . in another study bcg vaccination reduced viremia in experimental human yellow fever virus infection model by inducing trained immunity by epigenetic modification of monocytes, resulting in increased production of il-1β (126) . moreover, bcg could enhance heterologous th1/th17 responses by inducing the long-lasting release of il-22, ifn-γ, and il-17 thereby attaining non-specific immune response to infections (127) . in line with this, several in vivo studies in murine models were also reported. bcg immunized mice expressed antimicrobial peptides and bestowed protection against malarial parasitemia (128) .additionally, prior bcg vaccination in influenza virus challenged mice were found to have considerable protection via secretion of antibody or activation of cell-mediated immunity (129) . a study conducted in mice model, to understand the effect of bcg against various viral infections like herpes simplex type 1, influenza a2 and encephalomyocarditis viruses showed increased resistance of bcg immunised mice against these viruses compared to control mice j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f (130) . specifically, bcg vaccinated newborn mice were shown to be more resistant againstherpes simplex type 2 infection (131). based on these observations it has been proposed that bcg vaccine has the potential to act as a protective agent against sars cov2, as it provides antiviral immunity (132) . sars-cov2 virus enhances the generation of il-6, ifn-γ, tnf-α and il-1β in mild to severely infected patients (48) . as discussed earlier, the trained immunity of bcg vaccine involves the release of these cytokines, thus providing an antiviral state and earlier protection against sars-cov2 (figure 3 ). ozdemir malini laloraya: conceptualization, writing-reviewing and editing, supervision.none.the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. since its origin in china, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection has become a pandemic and spread to 209 countries as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a very rapidly emerging disease, organ-specific studies related to it have been reported apart from respiratory findings, some studies have highlighted inflammatory consequences in the heart, kidney, and/or liver as well cardiac involvement in covid-19 seems to be a result of an inflammatory storm in response to the infection moreover, direct viral invasion of cardiomyocytes, as well as a myocardial injury due to oxidative stress, may account for acute cardiac injury in covid-19 nevertheless, the mechanism of heart injury in covid-19 is not clear yet however, multiple studies that highlight the clinical features, laboratory findings, and prognosis of acute myocardial injury (ami) in covid-19-affected individuals have been published in this review, we have summarized the findings of all those studies as well as the clinical features and management of cardiac injury discussed by some case reportscardiac manifestations of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): a comprehensive reviewfebruary 11, the coronavirus study group of the international committee on taxonomy of viruses named the new virus 'sars-cov-2'. on march 11, the disease was declared a pandemic by the who [3] .over the last three months, the disease has spread rapidly from 282 cases to over 2.1 million cases worldwide [3] . the basic reproduction number (r 0 ) is an indicator of the transmissibility of a virus. it shows the expected number of new infections generated by an infected individual in a susceptible population. if r 0 is more than 1, the number of new cases is likely to increase [4] . the mean r 0 for sars-cov-2 is 3. 28 (1.4-6.49), which is comparable to sars, but the more widespread and rapid rise in the number of cases indicates higher transmissibility of sars-cov-2 [4] .as covid-19 is a very rapidly emerging disease, new evidence and information are being reported daily. however, due to the emergence of such a large number of studies, disease-and organ-specific reviews are necessary to provide an updated and comprehensive summary of all literature for physicians who currently cannot spare their precious hours to go through vast online databases. hence, we searched pubmed, embase, scopus, google scholar, sciencedirect, wiley, and coronavirus collections of all major publishing groups to identify literature related to cardiac involvement in covid- 19 . in this review, we summarize the cardiac manifestations of covid-19 and their prognoses.in december 2019, people in wuhan, china, started visiting local hospitals with pneumonialike symptoms due to unknown causes. many of the index cases' history linked them to exposure to the huanan seafood wholesale market. china notified the who about the outbreak on december 31, 2019, and closed the huanan market on january 1, 2020, for cleaning and disinfection [3] . on january 7, 2020, scientists were able to isolate and identify the sequence of 2019-ncov. all genome sequences from different patients were almost identical, indicating the recent emergence of disease in humans [5] .since its origin in china, the sars-cov-2 infection has become a pandemic and spread to 209 countries. according to the latest who covid-19 situation report (april 18, 2020), 2,160,207 cases and a total of 146,088 deaths have been reported so far. an overwhelming number of 6,710 new deaths were reported in the last 24 hours. the three countries with the highest number of cases (till april 18, 2020) are the united states, (665,330), spain (188,068), and italy (172,434) [3] . an increase in percentage mortality over time has been observed in the who covid-19 status reports from january 21 to april 18, 2020 ( figure 1) [3] .the x-axis shows the number of patients and y-axis shows the days covid-19: coronavirus disease 2019coronaviruses (covs) are a broad family of viruses that primarily affect the respiratory system. four genera of cov have been identified: alpha, beta, gamma, and delta. sars-cov-19, a ribonucleic acid (rna) virus, belongs to subgenus sarbecovirus of the genus beta-cov. a total of six other covs that can infect humans have also been identified. other widely known members of the cov family that were identified earlier include sars-cov and the mers-cov, both belonging to the beta genus and capable of causing life-threatening respiratory infections. the other four are human coronavirus (hcov)-229e, hcov-nl63, hcov-hku1, and hcov-oc43, which cause milder disease [2, 5, 6] .the gross structure of sars-cov-2 identified in patients in wuhan appeared spherical with some degree of pleomorphism on electron micrographs [2] . the diameters of viral particles were between 60 to 140 nm and the size of spikes was about 9-12 nm, which appeared like a crown [2] . the strain of sars-cov-2 is 29.9 kb [7] . open reading frames (orfs) vary in number from 6-11 in the cov genome. the first orf has two-thirds of viral rna, which encodes for non-structural proteins and translates two polyproteins (pp1a and pp1b), while the structural and accessory proteins are encoded by other orfs. the four essential structural proteins include (1) spike (s) glycoprotein, (2) nucleocapsid (n) protein, (3) matrix protein, and (4) envelope (e) protein [8] [9] [10] .sars-cov and mers-cov have genomes of 27.9 kb and 30.1 kb, respectively [11] . the sars-cov-2 is more closely related to two sars-like covs derived from bats (bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21), with up to 88% similarity in identity, but distant from sars-cov and mers-cov (identity 79% and 50% respectively) [2, 5] . this evidence suggests possible origin from bats [5] .based on its origin and spread in the wuhan market, where there was an abundance of all sorts of animals, it is highly possible that covid-19 has a zoonotic origin and it transmitted to humans through an intermediate host [10] . identification of sars-like covs in bats, which were similar to sars-cov-2, shows the possibility that bats can be a reservoir host for its progenitor [12] . it also indicates that mammals are likely to be a link between humans and covid-19 [13] . based on recent research, there are two species of snake that could also be a possible reservoir for sars-cov-2 [14] . however, no study has yet found any substantial evidence of a reservoir of sars-cov-2 other than birds and mammals. human-to-human transmission of sars-cov-2 is possible and accounts for the majority of cases now [3, 10, 14] .sars-cov-2 is highly infective and transmission of the disease is through direct contact with an affected individual or through respiratory droplets produced by coughing or sneezing. there is recent evidence of possible vertical transmission from a mother to her newborn [15] . a recent study by luo et al. has also shown that the virus is unlikely to be weakened in high temperatures and humidity and cluster transmission is possible even at conditions that were earlier thought to be unsuitable for viral transmission [16] .the higher infectivity of sars-cov-2 can also be understood through its higher viability in the air as well as on different surfaces [17] . sars-cov-2 can remain viable in air for more than three hours, and on plastic and steel for more than 72 hours. on copper and cardboard, the viability of sars-cov-2 is less than four hours and 24 hours, respectively [17] . this high viability time period on different surfaces can lead to indirect transmission of sars-cov-2 to healthy individuals if they come into contact with objects used on covid-19 patients, such as stethoscope or thermometer [18] . there have been no cases of fecal-oral transmission to date, and airborne transmission is possible in situations where there is aerosol production such as bronchoscopy, open suctioning, nebulization, tracheostomy, intubation, or cardiopulmonary resuscitation [18] [19] [20] . aerosol generation from the fecal matter of affected individuals, such as by flushing toilets or treatment of excreta in rural areas, may cause viral spread [21] .sars-cov-2 uses angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor (ace2-r) for entry into the cells. s protein of the virus binds to ace2-r. this binding causes a conformational change in s protein and leads to fusion of viral envelope with the host cell membrane, and sars-cov-2 rna is released into the host cell. genome rna is translated into polyproteins (pp1a and pp1b), which are further broken into proteinases. other viral proteins are produced by the translation of subgenomic messenger rna (mrna). in the endoplasmic reticulum (er) and golgi apparatus, the viral genome and proteins are assembled into virions. the newly formed virions are transferred to the cell membrane and released out of the cell [22] . ace2 is found in the lower respiratory tract in humans, and the virus can be transmitted to the airway directly by respiratory droplets or touching of the nose after touching an infected surface [18, 22] . initial clinical presentation of the disease is usually asymptomatic or mild with symptoms such as cough, sore throat, rhinorrhea, headache, fever, shortness of breath (sob), nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and fatigue. in some patients, the disease can progress to pneumonia, respiratory failure, acute cardiac injury (aci), multi-organ failure (mof), and ultimately death [23, 24] .a recently published study by huang et al. reported detailed symptoms of 41 patients affected by covid-19 [24] . symptoms at onset commonly included fever (98%), cough (76%), and myalgia/fatigue (44%). less common presenting symptoms were the production of sputum (28%), headache (8%), hemoptysis (5%), and diarrhea (3%). as the illness progressed, dyspnea, leukopenia, and lymphopenia developed in 55%, 25%, and 63% of the patients, respectively. all admitted patients developed pneumonia with bilateral pulmonary involvement (multiple consolidations and bilateral ground-glass opacity) visible on ct scan. a total of 15% of the admitted patients expired. complications developed by patients included acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) (29%), rnaaemia (15%), aci (12%), secondary infection (10%), and complications requiring intensive care unit (icu) admissions (32%) [24] .level of inflammatory chemokines and cytokines such as interleukin (il) 1-β, il1ra, il7, il8, il9, il10, basic fibroblast growth factor 2 (bfgf2), granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (gcsf), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf), interferon-gamma (ifnγ), interferon-inducible protein 10 (ip10), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp1), macrophage inflammatory proteins (mip) 1α, mip1β, platelet-derived growth factor subunit b (pdgfb), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (tnfα), and vascular endothelial growth factor a (vegfa) were elevated in both icu and non-icu patients [24] . pro-inflammatory cytokines, namely il2, il7, il10, gcsf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnfα, were only elevated in icu patients, suggesting a possible association with increased disease severity [24] .covid-19 can lead to cardiac involvement and injury via the following possible mechanisms:(1) indirect injury due to increased cytokines and immune-inflammatory response, (2) direct invasion of cardiomyocytes by sars-cov-2, and (3) respiratory damage from the virus causing hypoxia leading to oxidative stress and injury to cardiomyocytes [25] [26] [27] . these mechanisms are graphically represented in figure 2 , which is adapted from [27] . along with the presence of ace2 in the respiratory tract, it is also found in the heart, and sars-cov-2 can use ace2 to enter the cells [27, 28] . the mechanism of heart injury in covid-19 is still not entirely clear, i.e., it is unclear as to whether binding of sars-cov-2 alters the expression of ace2 or causes abnormality in the regulation of the renin-angiotensinaldosterone system (raas) [27] . however, multiple studies analyzing acute myocardial injury (ami) in covid-19-affected individuals have been published. ami was detected by high levels of serum c-reactive protein (crp), creatine kinase (ck), and troponins. affected individuals often had a history of chronic diseases such as diabetes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), hypertension, and coronary artery disease (cad). ami was also associated with a longer hospital stay [24, [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] . critically ill patients had a higher likelihood of myocardial injury, which was associated with poor outcomes and an increased risk of in-hospital mortality [32, 37, 39, 41 ].multiple studies that highlight the clinical features, laboratory findings, and prognosis of ami in covid-19-affected individuals have been published so far. these studies are discussed below.in a single-center retrospective case series, wang et al. delineated the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of novel coronavirus-infected pneumonia (ncip) among 138 consecutively hospitalized patients at zhongnan hospital, wuhan [29] . epidemiological, demographic, clinical, laboratory, radiological, and treatment data were collected from january 1 to 28, 2020. the authors then compared the outcomes of critically ill and non-critically ill patients. among all the patients, 54.3% (n=75) were male with a median age of 56 years. comorbidities were found in 46.4% (n=64) of the patients, among whom cardiovascular disease (cvd) was appreciated in 14.5% (n=20). among all the icu-bound patients (n=36), 25% (n=9) were reported to have cardiovascular comorbidity. the median heart rate (hr) of all patients and those in the icu was found to be 88 beats per minute (bpm) and 89 bpm, respectively. similarly, the mean arterial pressure (map) of all patients and patients bound to icu was recorded as 90 mmhg and 91 mmhg, respectively. aci was appreciated in 7.2% (n=10), 22.2% (n=8), and 2% (n=2) in all, icu bound, and non-icu-bound (n=102) patients, respectively (p<0.001). furthermore, arrhythmia was found in 16.7% (n=23), 44.4% (n=16), and 6.9% (n=7) in all, icu-bound, and non-icu-bound patients, respectively (p<0.001). to recapitulate, the authors established a mortality rate of 4.3% [29] .huang et al. investigated the clinical features of patients infected with 2019-ncov in wuhan, china [24] . out of a total 41 hospital-admitted patients identified as having laboratoryconfirmed covid-19, the majority (n=30, 73%) were men and less than half had underlying comorbidities such as diabetes (n=8, 20%), hypertension (n=6, 15%), and cvd (n=6, 15%). the median age was 49 years. aci (n=5, 12%) was the third most common complication in these patients after ards and rnaemia. out of 13 patients admitted to icu, four (31%) had an aci and five died. the study concluded that severe respiratory illness with 2019n-cov infection with deteriorating complications was associated with icu admission and a higher mortality rate [24] .zhang et al. retrospectively evaluated the clinical characteristics of 82 hospitalized patients who died of covid-19 from january 11 to february 10, 2020, in the renmin hospital, wuhan [30] . in this study, the majority of the deceased patients were male (65.9%, n=54), with a higher mortality rate found among older individuals. significantly, 80.5% (n=66) of non-survivors were >60 years of age. a major bulk (76.8%, n=62) of the deceased individuals had some existing comorbidity, and among them, 20.7% (n=17) had heart disease. cardiac damage was found in 89% (n=73) of patients, while cardiac failure (cf) (14.6%, n=12) was the third most common cause of death after acute respiratory failure (arf) (69.5%, n=57) and sepsis syndrome/mof (28%, n=23). along with other abnormal laboratory findings, levels of crp (>10 u/l), cardiac troponin t (tnt, >0.04 pg/ml), ck (>200 u/l), myoglobin (>110 μg/l), lactate dehydrogenase (ldh, >250 u/l) and creatine kinase myocardial band (ck-mb, >5 ng/ml) were found to be much higher in 100% (n=58), 86.7% (n=52), 34.7% (n=25), 60% (n=42), 93% (n=68), and 30% (n=21) of the deceased cases, respectively. the authors concluded that either the virus itself or the storm of released cytokines in its response might have aggravated damage to vital organs, including the heart [30] .in a retrospective, single-center study of medical records, hui et al. investigated the correlation between clinical features and aci among patients affected with covid-2019 pneumonia [31] . in this study, records of 41 consecutive cases of covid-19 (19 males and 22 females) from beijing youan hospital in china between january 21 and february 03, 2020, were studied, including two deaths. in view of the 6th guidance provided by the national health commission of china, 4.88% (n=2), 78.05% (n=32), 9.75% (n=4), and 7.32% (n=3) of the patients were labeled as light, mild, severe, and critical cases, respectively. the median age of the patients was found to be 47 years, and adult males were found more prone to develop a severe infection. underlying comorbidities such as hypertension, cad, diabetes mellitus (dm) type 2, and tumor were found in 24.4% (n=10) of the patients, while severe and critical cases were notably substantial in the cardiac-related chronic disease group. moreover, as compared to the normal value of troponin i (tni), a 40-fold increase in its peak value and a higher crp level (191 mg/l) was recorded among critical patients, which translated into a higher risk of cardiac injury. atrial fibrillation (afib) with hr inclining up to 160 bpm was recognized in 4.88% (n=2) of patients; all of them were under critical category and eventually died. reduced epicardial adipose tissue (eat) density was shown on the ct scans of severe (-96.08 hu) and critical (-98.77 hu) cases, indicating cardiac inflammation. the authors concluded that patients under light and mild categories rarely exhibited cardiac injury, whereas it was found more commonly among severe and critical patients, where tachycardia, elevated levels of tni, and low eat density were regarded as the main risk factors. to intercept fatality among covid-19 patients, the authors suggested close monitoring of the cardiac functioning of all patients, especially the severe and critical ones, and to seek possible interventions for patients evincing features of abnormal cardiac injury [31] .wu et al. conducted a single-center retrospective cohort study to explore whether heart injury occurs in covid-19 and if it aggravates mortality later [32] . among 188 patients with covid-19, the mean age was 51.9 years (range: 21-83 years) and 119 (63.3%) were male. older patients and patients with comorbidity (especially hypertension) tended to have increased highsensitivity troponin i (hs-tni) levels on admission, and a high mortality rate was associated with high hs-tni on admission (≥6.126 pg/ml). further, it was noticed that high hs-tni levels were associated with increased inflammatory levels [neutrophils, il-6, crp, procalcitonin (pct)] and decreased immune levels [lymphocytes, monocytes, cluster of differentiation (cd)4+, and cd8+ t cells]. raised ck-mb levels tended to occur only in male patients and current smokers and were associated with higher mortality, increased inflammatory levels, and decreased lymphocytes. similarly, increased ldh and α-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (α-hbdh) tended to occur in older and hypertensive patients and were associated with higher mortality rates, increased inflammatory, and decreased immune levels. subsequently, hs-tni (p=0.05) and ldh levels (p=0.022) on admission day were negatively correlated with survival days. hence, it was concluded that heart injury signs arise in covid-19, especially in older patients, hypertensives, and male patients with current smoking habits. elevated levels of heart injury indicators are associated with higher mortality and shorter survival days. the authors suggested that covid-19 might attack the heart by inducing an inflammatory storm and patients with signs of heart injury must be identified primarily and carefully treated by cardiologists [32] .to investigate the clinical characteristics and eventual prognosis of covid-19 patients with already existing cvd, peng et al. retrospectively analyzed 112 patients who visited the union hospital (wuhan) from january 20 to february 15, 2020 [33] . depending on the clinical severity of the disease, all the patients were grouped into two categories: critical (n=16) and general (n=96). in comparison with the general group, lymphocyte count [0.74×10 9 /l (0. [130 (102-415) ] was found to be much lower in the same category. keeping in view either the critical and general groups or the survivor and non-survivor groups, medication with ace inhibitor and angiotensin receptor blocker (arb) did not impact the morbidity and mortality related to covid-19 in patients with any preexisting cardiac disease. hence, the authors concluded that a higher risk of mortality existed among covid-19 patients with already existing cardiac disease/s where fulminant inflammation, lactic acid accumulation, and thrombotic events are regarded as the main exacerbating factors [33] .a cross-sectional study by chen et al. evaluated the cardiovascular damage in patients with covid-19 [34] . a total of 150 covid-19 cases were included from tongji hospital (wuhan) and the patients were divided into groups of mild cases (n=126) and critical care cases (n=24). age, hypersensitive crp (hs-crp), and serum creatinine levels of the patients were observed to be higher in critical care cases than in mild cases (all p<0.05). critical care patients had a higher prevalence of males, elevated n-terminal pro-b-type natriuretic peptide (nt-probnp) and cardiac troponin i (ctni), hypertension, and coronary heart disease (chd) (all p<0.05). elevated ctni [odds ratio (or): 26.909, 95% ci: 4.086-177.226, p=0.001] and chd (or: 16.609, 95% ci: 2.288-120.577, p=0.005) were found to be the independent risk factors of critical disease status according to multivariate logistic regression analysis. the authors concluded that covid-19 could significantly affect heart function and lead to myocardial injury. the two crucial independent determinants of clinical disease status in patients with covid-19 were the past medical history of chd and an increased level of ctni [34] .xu et al. investigated the clinical characteristics and risk factors of ami in covid-19 patients [35] . a total of 53 consecutive laboratory-confirmed and hospitalized covid-19 patients were included in the study. out of 42 (79.25%) patients with cardiac complications, the majority (n=30) had elevated cardiac enzymes followed by diastolic dysfunction (n=20), tachycardia (n=15), electrocardiography abnormalities (n=11), and ami (n=6). all patients with ami were aged >60 years, and five of them also had two or more comorbidities (hypertension, diabetes, cvd, and copd). furthermore, it was noticed that the severity of novel coronavirus pneumonia (ncp) was higher in these patients than in patients with non-definite ami (p<0.001). three of these ami patients died while two remained hospitalized in the icu. covid-19 patients with ami had higher mean systolic pressure than other groups (p<0.001). according to multivariate analysis, the major risk factor for cardiac abnormalities in covid-19 patients were elevated crp levels (p<0.001, or: 1.186; 95% ci%: 1.047-1.344), ncp severity (p<0.001, or: 2.896; 95% ci: 1.266-6.621), and underlying comorbidities (p<0.001, or: 4.336; 95% ci: 1.11-38.55). the occurrence of hypertension was higher in the ami group (n=4, 66.67%). similarly, cvd was more frequently found in ami patients (n=4, 66.67%), all of whom had a history of cad with one having prior coronary artery bypass grafting (cabg). other comorbidities like diabetes and copd were found in all patients with a significant occurrence in ami patients (diabetes: n=2; copd: n=2) compared to other groups. about 30 covid-19 patients exhibited elevated cardiac markers; out of them, ami and non-definite ami patients had higher cardiac markers than other groups (p<0.05). d-dimer levels on admission were also elevated in the ami patients (median=1.65 µg/ml) and patients with abnormal cardiac markers (median=0.79 µg/ml), and were subsequently higher than those in patients with normal cardiac markers (median=0.55 µg/ml; p<0.001). among 24 patients exhibiting echo abnormalities, a higher frequency was found in ami patients, manifesting as left ventricular (lv) wall thickening and diastolic dysfunction, left atrial enlargement, lv enlargement, and mitral, aortic and triple valve regurgitation [35] .liu et al. conducted a single-center retrospective study to analyze the association of cardiovascular manifestations with in-hospital outcomes of covid-19 cases [36] . case details of 41 consecutive hospitalized health staff with confirmed covid-19 were collected at the central hospital of wuhan, china. the mean age of the population was 39.1 ± 9.2 years. about 24 (58.5%) cases had cardiovascular manifestation (cvm). patients with cvm had comparatively lower baseline lymphocyte count (p<0.001), had more incidence of positive nucleic acid detection of throat swab (p=0.011) and received more oxygen support (p<0.001). similarly, the rate of in-hospital effects was significantly higher in the cvm group (p=0.001). multivariate logistic regression analysis indicated that the coexistence of cvm and ncp was not independently associated with in-hospital adverse effects (or: 2.23, 95% ci: 0.24-20.27, p=0.478). however, a tendency of significance was noticed in baseline lymphocyte count between the two groups in the model (or: 0.15, 95% ci: 0.02-1.26, p=0.081) [36] .he et al. analyzed the clinical characteristics of severe or critically ill patients with covid-19 and evaluated the impact of the complicated myocardial injury on the prognosis of these patients [37] . fifty-four patients who met the criteria of severe or critical conditions of covid-19 were included in this retrospective study. the median age of patients was 68; 24 (44.4%) patients had hypertension, 13 (24.1%) had diabetes, eight (14.8%) had chd, and three (5.6%) had previous cerebral infarction. it was noticed that 24 (44.4%) patients were complicated with myocardial injury and 26 (48.1%) patients died during the hospital stay. patients with myocardial injury had higher in-hospital mortality rates than those without myocardial injury (n=14, 60.9% with myocardial injury vs. n=8, 25.8% without myocardial injury, p=0.013). moreover, patients with significant myocardial injury exhibited significantly higher levels of crp (153.6 ng/l vs. 49.8 ng/l) and nt-probnp (852.0 ng/l vs. 197.0 ng/l) than patients without myocardial injury (all p<0.01). this study postulated that severe or critically ill covid-19 patients have a higher prevalence of myocardial injury, and these patients face a significantly higher risk of in-hospital mortality. hence, it is vital to monitor and manage the myocardial injury during hospitalization for severe or critically ill covid-19 patients [37] .in another retrospective comparison of the clinical features of recovered versus deceased patients with covid-19, deng et al. collected data from two hospitals in wuhan [38] . out of the total enrolled covid-19 patients, 109 died during hospitalization, whereas 116 recovered. the median age was higher in the deceased group as compared to the recovered group (69 years vs. 40 years, p< 0.001). levels of creatinine (89.00 μmol/l vs. 65.00 μmol/l, p< 0.001) and crp (109.25 mg/l vs. 3.22 mg/l, p < 0.001) were found to be significantly higher in the deceased group versus the recovered one. complications were recorded to be higher among the deceased group in which aci (59.6% vs. 0.8%, p< 0.001) was found to be much higher as compared to the recovered group [38] .to investigate the epidemiological and clinical features of patients infected with covid-19 and cardiac injury, liu et al. collected and analyzed data of medical records from january 10 to february 24, 2020 [39] . among 291 patients from guangzhou eighth people's hospital, 5.2% (n=15) had a cardiac injury. patients with cardiac injury were comparatively older than those without injury; the median age was found to be 65 years. there was a male predominance among cardiac injury patients, as 73.3% (n=11/15) of them were male. hypertension (46.6%, n=7) and chd (20%, n=3) were the most predominant comorbidities among individuals presenting with a cardiac injury. moreover, common symptoms of covid-19 like fever (73.3%, n=11), cough (46.7%, n=7), headache or fatigue (33.3%, n=5), and dyspnea (26.6%, n=4) without any complaints of chest pain and palpitations were appreciated in this group. patients who had cardiac injury showed relatively higher systolic blood pressure (bp) (132 mmhg vs. 124 mmhg), tni (0.07 ug/l vs. 0.003 ug/l), and bnp (245.5 pg/ml vs. 18.5 pg/ml) levels when compared with those without cardiac injury. nevertheless, the levels of crp were found to be raised among all patients with cardiac injury (n=15/15). among all the enrolled patients, ards (20%, n=3) and severe pneumonia (73.3%, n=11) were reported more commonly in cases with a cardiac injury, which complicated the disease. the authors concluded that cardiac injury can be commonly found among patients with covid-19, where it worsens the clinical outcomes and, hence, should be regarded as a potential prognostic risk indicator [39] .zhou et al. studied the clinical characteristics of myocardial injury in patients with covid-19 [40] . a total of 34 patients with covid-19 were included in this study who were further divided into two groups: patients with severe covid-19 (n=26) and those with very severe covid-19 (n=8). the median age was 63 years in the severe covid-19 group and 67 years in the very severe group. the authors noted significantly increased ctni (46.8 ng/l vs. 4.8 ng/l), ck (199 u/l vs. 88 u/l), α-hbdh (453 u/l vs. 245 u/l), and ldh (513 u/l vs. 287 u/l) in the very severe group as compared to the severe group. the percentage of very severe patients with elevated ctni levels was markedly higher as all eight patients with very severe disease exhibited increased ctni while only one patient with severe disease had raised ctni levels (p<0.001). this study concluded that patients with very severe covid-19 have a higher percentage of increased ctni levels and their mortality rate can be improved by protecting them from myocardial injury [40] .to explore the association between cardiac injury and mortality in patients with covid-19, shi et al. conducted a single-center cohort study at renmin hospital of wuhan university, china [41] . they included a total of 416 hospitalized patients with covid-19 in the final analysis, with a median age of 64 years. about 82 patients (19.7%) were declared to have a cardiac injury. in comparison with patients without cardiac injury, these individuals were older (p<0.001), had more comorbidities such as hypertension (p<0.001), had higher leukocyte counts (median: 9,400) and higher levels of crp (median: 10.2), pct (median: 0.27), ck-mb (median: 3.2), myohemoglobin (median: 128), hs-tni (median: 0.19), nt-probnp (median: 1,689), aspartate aminotransferase (ast, median: 40), and creatinine (median: 1.15), and had a higher proportion of multiple mottling and ground-glass opacity in radiographic findings (64.6%). patients with cardiac injury required a greater proportion of non-invasive mechanical ventilation (p<0.001) or invasive mechanical ventilation (p<0.001). similarly, complications like ards (p<0.001), acute kidney injury (aki, p<0.001), electrolyte disturbances (p=0.003), hypoproteinemia (p=0.01), and coagulation disorders (p=0.02) were higher in patients with a cardiac injury. a higher mortality rate (p<0.001) was noticed in patients with cardiac injury (51.2%) than those without cardiac injury (4.5%). additionally, patients with cardiac injury were at a higher risk of death, both during the time from onset of symptoms (hr: 4.26, 95% ci: 1.92-9.49) and from admission to endpoint (hr: 3.41, 95% ci: 1.62-7.16) according to cox regression model. the study concluded that cardiac injury is a prevalent condition among hospitalized patients with covid-19 in wuhan, china, and it is associated with a higher risk of in-hospital mortality [41] .in order to depict the clinical characteristics of 113 deceased patients owing to covid-19 infection, chen et al. retrospectively evaluated a case series among a cohort of 799 confirmed cases of covid-19 admitted to tongji hospital from january 13 to february 12, 2020 [42] . in comparison with the recovered cases, deceased patients were mostly male (73%, n=83) with a median age of 68 years. among all those who died, chronic hypertension (48%, n=54) and other cardiovascular abnormalities (14%, n=16) were the predominant comorbidities. vital signs revealed higher median systolic bp (137 mm hg), arterial pressure (≥140 mm hg), and hr (101.0 bpm) among deceased patients. apart from other abnormal laboratory findings, considerably higher levels of crp, ck, ldh, ctni (40.8 pg/ml), and nt-probnp (800 pg/ml) were appreciated among the deceased patients. moreover, eight deceased patients exhibited more than 1,000 pg/ml ctni whereas two of them had more than 10,000 pg/ml. the disease was more frequently complicated among the deceased patients with the occurrence of aci (n=72/94) and hf (n=41/83) in 77% and 49% of the individuals, respectively. it was also observed that individuals with cardiovascular comorbidity were more susceptible to the development of cardiac complications. however, cardiac injury and hf were still more common among deceased patients as compared to the recovered ones, regardless of any history of cardiac disease. the authors concluded that aci and hf were among the most common complications that affected the prognosis of critically ill patients [42] .to evaluate the association of underlying cvd and myocardial injury with fatal outcomes in patients with covid-19, guo et al. conducted a retrospective single-center study [43] . a total of 187 patients with confirmed covid-19 were selected, and their demographic data, laboratory findings, comorbidities, and treatments were analyzed regardless of elevation in tnt levels. overall, 66 (35.3%) patients had underlying cvd manifested as hypertension, chd, and cardiomyopathy, while 52 (27.8%) patients exhibited myocardial injury as indicated by elevated tnt levels. patients with cvd and elevated tnt levels had a higher mortality rate (69.44%) than other groups, i.e., patients without underlying cvd and normal tnt (7.62%), patients with underlying cvd and normal tnt (13.33%), and patients without underlying cvd but elevated tnt (37.5%). similarly, patients with underlying cvd were more likely to present with elevated tnt than those without cvd (54.5% vs. 13.2%). plasma tnt levels depicted a significantly positive linear correlation with plasma hs-crp (β=0.530, p<0.001) and nt-probnp levels (β=0.613, p<0.001). similarly, plasma tnt and nt-probnp levels elevated significantly during hospitalization (median: 0.307 for plasma tnt; median: 1,902 for plasma nt-probnb) and indicated impending death (median: 0.141 for serum tnt; median: 5,375 for serum nt-probnp) as compared with admission values (median: 0.0355 for serum tnt; median: 796.90 for serum nt-probnp) in the patients who died. however, no significant changes in tnt and nt-probnp were observed in survivors. patients with elevated tnt developed frequent malignant arrhythmias and required more glucocorticoids (71.2% vs. 51.1%) and mechanical ventilation (59.6% vs. 10.4%) as compared to those with normal tnt levels. the mortality rate of patients with and without the usage of acei or arb was 36.8% and 26.5%, respectively. these observations concluded that there is a significant association between myocardial injury and fatal outcome of covid-19 while the patients with underlying cvd without myocardial injury have a relatively favorable prognosis [43] . figure 3 provides a summarized flowchart of all studies discussed above [24, [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] ].a few case reports have also depicted the distinctive involvement of the cardiovascular system in covid-19 infection. the first case to report the cvm of covid-19 was presented by zeng et al. [44] . the article highlighted fulminant myocarditis as a complication of covid-19 in a 66year-old patient with no known comorbidity, who presented with fever, cough, dyspnea, and chest tightness. during hospitalization, myocardial enzymes showed elevated tni (11.37 g/l), myoglobin (390.97 ng/ml), and nt-probnp (22,600 pg/ml). electrocardiogram (ecg) showed sinus tachycardia with no st-segment elevation. however, an enlarged lv (61 mm), diffuse myocardial dyskinesia along with low left ventricular ejection fraction (lvef, 32%), pulmonary hypertension (44 mmhg), and decreased inferior vena cava (ivc) collapse rate were noticed on bedside echocardiography. severe pneumonia, ards, fulminant myocarditis, and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (mods) were considered as differentials. there was no improvement in the patient's condition with supportive treatment. the ventricular septum thickened to 14 mm, and il-6 increased by 272.40 pg/ml. extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) was used to reduce the cardiopulmonary burden, which showed a reduction in tni (0.10 g/l), nt-probnp (750 pg/ml), and il-6 (7.63 pg/ml). the lvef gradually recovered to 68%, and the lv and wall regained their normal thickness after treatment [44] .inciardi et al. highlighted cardiac involvement as a complication of covid-19 without symptoms and signs of interstitial pneumonia in a 53-year-old patient [45] . ecg of this patient showed diffuse st elevation. elevated hs-tnt and nt-probnp levels were also detected. findings on chest radiography were normal. cardiac mri showed increased wall thickness with diffuse biventricular hypokinesis, predominantly in the apical segments, and severe lv dysfunction (lvef of 35%). short tau inversion recovery (stir) and t2-mapping sequences depicted marked biventricular myocardial interstitial edema and a diffuse late gadolinium enhancement involving the entire biventricular wall. a circumferential pericardial effusion, especially around the right cardiac chambers, was also observed. these findings were consistent with acute myopericarditis, and the patient was treated with dobutamine, antiviral drugs, steroids, chloroquine, and medical treatment for hf, with progressive clinical and instrumental stabilization [45] . similarly, bilateral pericardial and pleural effusion as a complication of covid-19 infection has been reported by albarello et al. [46] . 2019-ncov infection may also involve other organs like heart, vessels, liver, and kidney, as demonstrated by yao et al. [47] . the minimal invasive autopsies in three covid-19 cases revealed degeneration and necrosis of parenchymal cells, the formation of hyaline thrombus in small vessels, and pathological changes of chronic diseases in other organs and tissues, while no evidence of coronavirus infection was observed in these organs. the authors suggested conducting further studies to investigate the mechanism of underlying extra-pulmonary pathological changes of this disease [47] . further, cui et al. highlighted multiple organ damage and rapid disease changes in a 55-day-old infant diagnosed with covid-19 pneumonia [48] . laboratory investigations on the day of admission revealed mildly abnormal myocardial zymogens with altered liver function tests (lfts). with the deterioration of the patient's condition, an increase in tni (0.025 μg/l) was noticed, which indicated myocardial injury. intravenous sodium creatine phosphate was added to her regimen for the protection of her heart. later, the myocardial zymogen and liver function improved with supportive treatment, and the patient was discharged [48] . a summary of all the important findings of the aforementioned case reports is given in table 1 . female acute myocardial inflammation in a covid-19 patient who recovered from the influenza-like syndrome and developed fatigue and signs and symptoms of heart failure a week after upper respiratory tract symptoms albarello et al. [46] we can conclude that aci is common in covid-19, especially among adult males, where it is regarded as a potential prognostic risk indicator. higher levels of cytokines, il, cardiac injury markers such as troponin and ck, and crp are usually appreciated in these patients. consequently, myocarditis, ventricular dysfunction with or without pericardial effusion, and subsequently, hf cumulatively increase the mortality rate. hence, careful monitoring and immediate management plan to avoid or treat cardiac injuries are vital to achieving a decline in the number of deaths due to hf secondary to covid-19.importance: data are lacking whether patients with hypertension who are taking angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) or angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) have increased severity or risk of mortality during hospitalization for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). objective: to investigate the association between aceis/arbs and severity of illness and mortality in patients with hypertension hospitalized for covid-19 infection. design, setting, and participants: retrospective, single-center case series of the 1178 hospitalized patients with covid-19 infections at the central hospital of wuhan, china, from january 15 to march 15, 2020. main outcomes and measures: covid-19 was confirmed by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and epidemiologic, clinical, radiologic, laboratory, and drug therapy data were analyzed in all patients. the percentage of patients with hypertension taking aceis/arbs was compared between those with severe vs nonsevere illness and between survivors vs nonsurvivors. results: of the 1178 patients with covid-19, the median age was 55.5 years (interquartile range, 38-67 years) and 545 (46.3%) were men. the overall in-hospital mortality was 11.0%. there were 362 patients with hypertension (30.7% of the total group; median age, 66.0 years [interquartile range, 59-73 years]; 189 [52.2%] were men), of whom 115 (31.8%) were taking acei/arbs. the in-hospital mortality in the patients with hypertension was 21.3%. the percentage of patients with hypertension taking aceis/arbs did not differ between those with severe and nonsevere infections (32.9% vs 30.7%; p = .65) nor did it differ between nonsurvivors and survivors (27.3% vs 33.0%; p = .34). similar findings were observed when data were analyzed for patients taking aceis and those taking arbs. conclusions and relevance: this study provides clinical data on the association between aceis/arbs and outcomes in patients with hypertension hospitalized with covid-19 infections, suggesting that aceis/arbs are not associated with the severity or mortality of covid-19 in such patients. these data support current guidelines and societal recommendations for treating hypertension during the covid-19 pandemic.association of renin-angiotensin system inhibitors with severity or risk of death in patients with hypertension hospitalized for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) infection in wuhan, chinaimportance data are lacking whether patients with hypertension who are taking angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (aceis) or angiotensin receptor blockers (arbs) have increased severity or risk of mortality during hospitalization for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). objective to investigate the association between aceis/arbs and severity of illness and mortality in patients with hypertension hospitalized for covid-19 infection. design, setting, and participants retrospective, single-center case series of the 1178 hospitalized patients with covid-19 infections at the central hospital of wuhan, china, from january 15 to march 15, 2020. main outcomes and measures covid-19 was confirmed by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and epidemiologic, clinical, radiologic, laboratory, and drug therapy data were analyzed in all patients. the percentage of patients with hypertension taking aceis/arbs was compared between those with severe vs nonsevere illness and between survivors vs nonsurvivors. results of the 1178 patients with covid-19, the median age was 55.5 years (interquartile range, 38-67 years) and 545 (46.3%) were men. the overall in-hospital mortality was 11.0%. there were 362 patients with hypertension (30.7% of the total group; median age, 66.0 years [interquartile range, 59-73 years]; 189 [52.2%] were men), of whom 115 (31.8%) were taking acei/arbs. the in-hospital mortality in the patients with hypertension was 21.3%. the percentage of patients with hypertension taking aceis/arbs did not differ between those with severe and nonsevere infections (32.9% vs 30.7%; p = .65) nor did it differ between nonsurvivors and survivors (27.3% vs 33.0%; p = .34). similar findings were observed when data were analyzed for patients taking aceis and those taking arbs. conclusions and relevance this study provides clinical data on the association between aceis/arbs and outcomes in patients with hypertension hospitalized with covid-19 infections, suggesting that aceis/arbs are not associated with the severity or mortality of covid-19 in such patients. these data support current guidelines and societal recommendations for treating hypertension during the covid-19 pandemic.association of renin-angiotensin system inhibitors with severity or risk of death in patients with hypertension hospitalized for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) infection in wuhan, china.hypertension so that we could have an active comparator, other antihypertensive agents. also, to provide information about the association in inpatients, we conducted a study of the association of ace inhibitors and arbs on mortality among people with hypertension who were hospitalized with covid-19. we stratified all our assessments by insurance groups due to substantial differences between the two populations.we conducted 2 studies of patients with hypertensionthe first study included individuals who tested positive for sars-cov-2 as an outpatient and the second included patients hospitalized with covid- 19 . in addition to a diagnosis of hypertension, we prespecified our study population to include individuals that were receiving at least 1 antihypertensive agent. further, to account for medical comorbidities, we created robust propensity score matched cohorts of patients treated with ace inhibitors, arbs and other antihypertensive agents. we evaluated the success of our matching algorithms through explicit assessments of covariate balance across all comparisons and evaluation of exposure groups on falsification endpoints.due to systematic differences among enrollees in medicare advantage and commercial insurance programs, and the enhanced risk of adverse outcomes with covid-19 among older individuals who are overrepresented in medicare, [10] [11] [12] [13] we evaluated the association of these drugs with outcomes in analyses stratified by insurance groups.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprintwe used de-identified administrative claims for medicare advantage and commercially insured members in a research database from a single large us health insurance provider. the database contains medical (emergency, inpatient, outpatient) and pharmacy claims for services submitted for third party reimbursement, available as international classification of diseases, tenth revision, clinical modification (icd-10-cm) and national drug codes (ndc) claims, respectively. these claims are aggregated after completion of care encounters and submission of claims for reimbursement.there were two additional data sources that included information on covid-19 and could be linked to the claims. first, the limited outpatient testing dataset included information on sars-cov-2 test results for members who underwent outpatient testing for sars-cov2 at 49 hospital-based, free-standing outpatient and third-party labs in all states across the united states, with over 90% of tests submitted by third-party lab vendors. second, the inpatient covid-19 dataset included a daily-updated record of covid-19 inpatient admissions for all insurance enrollees with claims information, representing those admitted to a hospital with a primary or secondary diagnosis of covid-19 (etable 1), along with their current disposition (admitted, discharged, transferred, expired, or unknown).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint we constructed cohorts of patients for each of the two studies. first, for the outpatient study, we identified outpatients who tested positive for sars-cov-2. we included individuals at least 18 years of age, with at least 6 months of enrollment in medicare advantage or commercial insurance from january through december 2019 and available claims data, a diagnosis of hypertension in one or more claims and receiving one or more anti-hypertensive agents, and tested positive for sars-cov-2 positive in an outpatient setting. between march 6, 2020 and may 3, 2020 (efigure 1). thedatabase that satisfied the inclusion criteria. we evaluated the association of ace inhibitors and arbs, respectively, on the risk of hospitalization in this outpatient cohort compared with patients on other antihypertensive medications.second, for the second inpatient study, we identified an inpatient cohort of adults hospitalized with covid- 19 . this included all patients (age ≥18 years) with at least 6 months of health insurance enrollment in 2019 with available claims data, a diagnosis of hypertension in one or more claims, were receiving one or more anti-hypertensive agents, and were hospitalized with a principal or secondary diagnosis of covid-19 between january 5, 2020 and may 10, 2020 (efigure 2). we evaluated the association of ace inhibitors and arbs, respectively, on the mortality of hospitalized individuals in this cohort compared with patients on other antihypertensive medications.for both studies, a diagnosis of hypertension was based on icd-10 codes (etable 1), and drug treatment for hypertension was defined by the receipt of one or more agents included in the 2017 american heart association hypertension . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint guidelines. 14 these include first-line agents of ace inhibitors, arbs, thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics, and dihydropyridine and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, as well as second-line agents of beta-adrenergic antagonists, alpha blockers, centrally acting alpha agonists, loop diuretics, potassium sparing diuretics, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, and direct vasodilators (individual drugs listed in etable 2). the information on the latter was derived from pharmacy claims and was defined by a cumulative supply greater than 30 days between july 1, 2019 and december 31, 2019.we identified 2 mutually exclusive exposure groups (1) patients receiving ace inhibitors, and (2) those receiving arb, with or without other agents. we used an active comparator for these analyses that included all remaining patients with a diagnosis of hypertension who received one or more anti-hypertensive agents from drug classes other than ace inhibitor or arb. these agents include all first and second line antihypertensive agents based on the 2017 aha guidelines for hypertension, 14 with the use of individual agents defined by one or more pharmacy claims for at least 30 days of medication supply for the agent between july and december 2019. in sensitivity analyses, we restricted the control group to individuals receiving at least one first line anti-hypertensive agent from drug classes other than ace inhibitor or arb.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020 we combined information from inpatient and outpatient claims in 2019 to identify potential confounders of the association of the ace inhibitors and arb use and patient outcomes. we included patient age, sex, race, conditions that would represent potential indications for selective use of ace inhibitors or arbs (diabetes, myocardial infarction, heart failure and chronic kidney disease), and each of the additional comorbidities included in the charlson comorbidity index (peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, hemi-or paraplegia, dementia, chronic pulmonary disease, rheumatologic disease, diabetes with chronic complications, malignancy, metastatic solid tumor, mild liver disease, moderate-to-severe liver disease, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or human immunodeficiency virus). the icd-10 codes corresponding to these variables are included in etable 1 (appendix). race was available only for medicare advantage members. we included information on the total number of anti-hypertensive agents prescribed to patients using pharmacy claims. finally, regional clustering of cases was identified using location of sites submitting claims for laboratory testing for sars-cov-2 and hospital site for in-hospital outcomes.in the outpatient study, the primary outcome was inpatient hospitalization for covid-19, defined as a hospitalization with a principal or a secondary diagnosis of covid-19 in a linked inpatient dataset (etable 1). we assessed mortality during this inpatient hospitalization as a secondary outcome.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in the inpatient study, the primary outcome was in-hospital mortality. in addition, we evaluated a secondary composite outcome of death or discharge to hospice and hospital length of stay.in both outpatient and inpatient studies, we created propensity score-matched cohorts of patients with hypertension, treated with ace inhibitors, arbs or other antihypertensive medications. for this, we constructed a non-parsimonious multivariable logistic regression model with receipt of ace inhibitors, arb or other antihypertensive as the dependent variable. for example, we modeled the receipt ace inhibitor or another other anti-hypertensive (excluding arb) to determine each patient's likelihood of receiving these agents based on their measured clinical characteristics. we applied this strategy to different pairs of treatment comparisons (ace inhibitor vs others, arb vs others, and ace inhibitor vs arb). briefly, we performed 1:1 matching between recipients based on propensity scores with a caliper width of one-tenth of the standard deviation of the logit of the propensity score. 4 we pursued 100 iterations to find the lowest mean absolute standardized difference among matched variables. we matched our cohorts on age, gender, race, insurance type, conditions that may lead to selective use of ace inhibitors and arbs (i.e., diabetes, myocardial infarction, heart failure and chronic kidney disease), each of the comorbidities in the charlson comorbidity index, and the number of anti-hypertensive agents used for the patient. to account for regional clustering of care practices and response to the covid-19. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint pandemic, we explicitly accounted for census region of lab testing site or inpatient facility in our models.we evaluated the performance of propensity score matching using several strategies. first, we assessed the propensity score distributions in the unmatched and matched cohorts and calculated an equipoise metric to summarize the degree of overlap in characteristics of patients receiving these drugs. 15, 16 this represents the proportion of individuals in the unmatched groups that had a propensity score between 0.3 and 0.7, representing a state of equipoise between the two drugs. a value greater than 0.5 implies two drugs are in empirical equipoise, with a higher a value indicating a lower likelihood of confounding by indication. 15 next, we evaluated the standardized difference between matched covariates before and after propensity score matching.specifically, we evaluated whether our matching algorithm achieved a standardized difference of <10% between matched cohort suggestive of adequately matched groups. 16,17 second, we evaluated the success of our matching algorithm using a priori defined negative control outcomes. we chose two negative control or falsification endpointsclaims for gastroesophageal reflux disease and ingrown nail -that are unlikely to be affected by the treatment assignment and a directional effect would represent covariate imbalance. 16 third, we evaluated whether our propensity matched cohort were also adequately matched on other therapeutic classes for nonantihypertensive agents that were not directly included in the matching algorithm. these strategies were designed to evaluate the potential for residual confounding after creating propensity score matched cohorts. finally, we evaluated our observations for robustness by assessing treatment effects in 100 iterations of the propensity score . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint matching algorithm, evaluating whether our findings were consistent across these iterations that varied on the degree of matching of individual covariates.we describe differences between patients treated with ace inhibitors and arbs compared with other anti-hypertensive agents, and between those treated with ace inhibitors using chi square test for categorical variables and t-test for continuous variables. as the duration of follow up was expected to vary across individuals in both outpatient and inpatient covid-19 cohorts, we evaluated their effects in time-to-event analyses with cox-proportional hazards models in both unadjusted and propensity score-matched cohorts. to reduce bias from residual differences in matched covariates in our evaluation of patient outcomes, we included the covariates included in our propensity score matching algorithm as independent variables in these models. 18 we repeated these analyses without this additional covariate adjustment.for the outpatient study, the index date was represented by the day of positive covid-19 test as an outpatient, the period of the study was measured in days from the positive covid-19, and the outcome of interest was hospitalization. for the inpatient study, the index date was represented by the first day of hospitalization with covid-19, the period of the study was measured in days from admission, and the outcome of interest was death. since hospitalization could end with either patient's death or being discharged alive, we created a cause-specific cox proportional hazards model, which is a competing risk analysis. [19] [20] [21] both analyses were censored at the end of the observation period on may 10, 2020.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint given systematic differences between patients enrolled in medicare advantage and commercial insurance, particularly with older age, higher comorbidity burden, and higher risk of covid-19 complications among medicare advantage enrollees, we evaluated quantitative and qualitative interactions between insurance type and treatment groups for the assessment of our outcomes. we also created propensity score-matched cohorts within the each of the two insurance subgroups.analyses were performed using open source r 3.4.0 (cran) and python 3.8.2.all hypothesis tests were 2-sided, with a level of significance set at 0.05, except for interaction tests where the level of significance was set at 0.10. given the exploratory nature of study, statistical tests were not adjusted for multiple testing. the yaleaffairs exempted this study from other review as all activities were limited to retrospective analysis of de-identified data and accessed in accordance with health insurance portability and accountability act regulations. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint median age of these individuals was 69.0 years and 52.5% were women. of medicare advantage patients, 29.6% were african american. patients receiving ace inhibitors or arbs were more likely to be men, have diabetes with or without chronic complications, and be receiving more than 1 antihypertensive drugs ( table 1) . they were less likely to have chronic heart failure or moderate-to-severe renal disease, compared with patients receiving other anti-hypertensive treatments. patients receiving ace inhibitors were similar to those receiving arbs but had a higher rate of dementia and peripheral vascular disease ( table 1) . we matched 441 patients receiving ace inhibitors to 441 patients receiving other antihypertensive agents (efigure 5), achieving <10% standardized differences for all covariates (figure 1) . similarly, we matched 412 patients receiving arb to 412 patients receiving other antihypertensive agents (efigure 5). the equipoise for comparisons of ace inhibitors to other drugs, and for ace inhibitors to arb were above 0.5, but were lower for the arb comparisons ( table 3) .among 12,566 patients who were hospitalized for covid-19 with linked claims data, 7,933 had had a diagnosis of hypertension and had an outpatient prescription for at least one antihypertensive drug (efigure 2). the inpatient cohort included patients from 47 states in the us (efigure 3). of the included patients, 92.0% were medicare advantage enrollees. the median age of hospitalized individuals was 77.0 years, 54.6% were women; 29.9% of medicare advantage enrollees were african american.differences between hospitalized patients treated with ace inhibitors, arbs and other agents are included in table 2 . in the inpatient cohort, 1731 patients receiving ace . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint inhibitors and 1560 patients receiving arbs that were propensity score-matched to patients receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (efigure 5), with covariate standardized differences of <10% after matching (figure 1) . the equipoise for comparisons of ace inhibitors to other drugs, and for ace inhibitors to arb were above 0.5, but were lower for the arb comparisons ( table 4) .in the outpatient cohort, over a median 30 (iqr 19, 40) days from sars-cov-2 testing, patients receiving ace inhibitors were less frequently hospitalized than those receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (10.7% vs 14.4%, p = 0.03). there was no significant association between arb therapy and hospitalization rates (12.7% vs 14.4% in individuals with other insurance, p 0.36). in propensity score-matched cohorts (efigure table 3 ). there were no differences in the a priori chosen falsification endpoints between propensity scorematched populations (etable 3).there were differences between the association of ace inhibitors and hospitalization risk across insurance groups (p for interaction, 0.09), with a lower risk of hospitalization in medicare advantage patients (hr, 0.61 [0.41, 0.93], p = 0.02) that was not observed in commercially insured individuals (hr, 2.14 [0.82, 5.60], p = 0.12).( table 3) .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in propensity score-matched analyses, arb use was not associated with significantly lower hospitalization risk than individuals receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (hr, 0.88 [0.61, 1.26], p = 0.48) (figure 2 ). there were no significant differences in hospitalization rates between propensity score matched cohorts of patients receiving ace inhibitor, compared with arb (hr 0.91, 0.65 to 1.29; p = 0.60).there were no significant interactions by insurance-type and the association of arb with outcomes (p-interaction = 0.55) among the individuals in the outpatient cohort who were hospitalized, there was no association with ace inhibitor or arb use with subsequent in-hospital mortality (etable 4).of the 7933 patients hospitalized with covid-19, 1128 (14.2%) died during hospitalization, 4722 (59.5%) were discharged alive, and 2083 (26.3%) were still hospitalized at the end of the observation period. a majority of deaths (90.1%) were among the medicare advantage population. the median length of stay (including patients who died as well as discharged alive) for covid-19 hospitalizations was 6 (iqr: 3 to 11) days, which was similar across patients who died (6 (iqr: 3 to 10) days) or discharged alive (6 (iqr: 3 to 11) days) during the observation period.overall, the proportion of covid-19 patients who died did not differ significantly in those on ace inhibitor therapy before hospitalization, compared with those on other anti-hypertensive agents (13.5% vs 13.9%, p = 0.68). in the propensity matched-cohort of patients receiving ace inhibitors before hospitalization, in-hospital mortality was not . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. table 4 ). similarly, arb did not have a significantly different risk of mortality compared with other anti-hypertensive agents (1.15 (0.95, 1.38); p = 0.15). there were no significant differences in mortality between patients receiving ace inhibitors and arbs in the overall population, without a significant interaction between insurance group and treatment assignment and patient outcome (figure 3, table 4 ).these findings were consistent in for our secondary outcome of in-hospital death or discharge to hospice (etable 4). there was also no association between treatment with ace inhibitor or arb on hospital length of stay (etable 5).sensitivity analyses that focused on individuals receiving at least one first line antihypertensive agent in the control group, and that varied the covariate adjustment strategies were consistent with the primary analysis (etables 6-8) . the 100 iterations of propensity score matching algorithm found a lower risk of hospitalization with ace inhibitors across all iterations, with a p-value of less than 0.05 in 97 of 100 iterations in the medicare advantage population.in this first national study of ace inhibitors and arbs in outpatients testing positive for sars-cov-2, we found that overall these drugs did not confer additional risk or benefit.however, among those in medicare advantage, ace inhibitors were associated with an almost 40% significantly lower risk of hospitalization for covid-19, an effect not observed with arbs. among those hospitalized for covid-19, we did not find a benefit or a harm of these medications. collectively, the findings do not support a change to the current use of these medications but, given the lack of effective therapies to mitigate the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint harm of the virus, this study does provide a rationale for testing the use of ace inhibitors in older patients to reduce the risk of severe sars-cov-2 infection.our design has several attributes that should provide confidence about the findings even though it is observational. our study was restricted to people with hypertension who were receiving at least one anti-hypertensive agent, thereby limiting our assessment to individuals receiving treatment for the same chronic illness, and therefore, equally likely to seek care for healthcare needs for covid-19. in all analyses, we explicitly compared individuals with equipoise for receiving either drug treatment.moreover, we did not find any evidence of confounding by disease severity in choice of therapy in our assessment of a priori defined falsification endpoints. further, our study included individuals from across the united states, thereby limiting the effect of hospital or regional care practices that may bias an evaluation of treatment effects.our observations extends the prior evidence of supporting safety of ace inhibitor treatment in covid-19. 4, 7, 9, 22 we show the safety of these agents in outpatient sars-cov-2 infected individuals, which complements the studies of those who were hospitalized. 4, 7, 22 also, ours is a national study, which complements the single center or single region studies. 23 our study does have an intriguing finding. in the subgroup of individuals enrolled in medicare advantage, we find that ace inhibitors were associated with a significantly lower risk of hospitalization following an infection with sars-cov-2 in the outpatient setting. these patients are older, more frequently have comorbidities, and were more vulnerable to severe covid-19 disease. 4, 7 these findings are particularly relevant as the medicare advantage group represented over 90% of all covid-19 hospitalizations . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in our inpatient cohort. also, interestingly, we did not find the same association for arbs despite clinical equipoise in the use of these drugs. our findings are consistent with prior evidence from randomized clinical trials that a reduced risk of pneumonia with ace inhibitors that is not observed with arb. 5 our study of in-hospital outcomes adds to the literature on studies that have reached contrasting conclusions regarding the role of ace inhibitor therapy and inhospital mortality among hospitalized covid-19 patients. we did not find a significant association with mortality, consistent with others that have not found such an association. 4, 23, 24 however, our findings contrast with certain studies that have found lower mortality in hospitalized covid-19 patients treated with ace inhibitors. 7, 22 notably, the studies that have evaluated mortality risk with covid-19 before have not consistently been designed to detect potential causal association of drug therapy with outcomes, 7 relied on case control designs, 22 pursued potentially biased assessment by using comparators not receiving any therapy, 4, 7 or are based on data from single health centers. 4,23 moreover, some have studied both ace inhibitors and arbs together despite potentially different mechanisms and effects on patient outcomes. 5 there some rationale for why there may be a specific ace inhibitor effect. there is preclinical evidence that suggests a possible protective role for ace inhibitors in covid-19. ace inhibitors, but not arbs, are associated with the upregulation of ace-2 receptors. 3, 25 these receptors modulate the local renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system interactions in the lung tissue. 26 the presence of ace2 receptors, therefore, exerts a protective effect against the development of acute lung injury in infections with sars coronaviruses, which lead to dysregulation of these mechanisms and endothelial . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. our study has important implications for 4 ongoing randomized trials as none of them align with the observations of our study. 6 of the 4 trials, 3 are testing the use of ace inhibitors or arbs in the treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients, and 1 is using a 10-day course of arbs after a positive sars-cov-2 test to prevent hospitalization. 6 however, our study suggests that the most appropriate strategy to test in a trial would be the prophylactic use of ace inhibitor to prevent hospitalization, which is not being tested in any current study.the findings of our study should be interpreted in light of the following limitations.first, the study is observational, and despite robust methods, and explicit assessments of residual confounding, understanding the potential protective role of ace inhibitors in covid-19 requires a dedicated randomized controlled trial. second, we do not know the proportion of patients receiving these antihypertensive agents that continued to be treated with these drugs during the illness and the association of their continued use or cessation with patient outcomes. third, all included data elements are contingent upon individuals seeking care for that ailment or filling a medication using their insurance provider and would not be captured if they chose to self-pay. however, we do not expect that any sizeable proportion of insured individuals would defer insurance coverage for their care. fourth, we cannot account for differences in timing of . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint presentation of patients relative to their symptom onset. however, we limited the effect of differential presentation by patients across exposure groups by focusing on patients receiving treatment for the same medical comorbidity, i.e. hypertension, and only varying the class of drugs. moreover, we included patients across the us and accounted for clustering of patients, thereby limiting the effect of local practice patterns that may affect hospitalization thresholds. therefore, it is unlikely patient's care seeking . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint ant ihypert ensi e agent s use roups before propensit y score m at ching roups aft er propensit y score m at ching . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint  inclusion criteria  icd-10 codes  hypertension  i10%, i11%, i12%, i13%, i15%, i16%, i67 g468, i690, g462, i606, g452, i682, i613, i634, i650, i668, i662, i670, g463, i679, i673,  h340, i607, i669, g464, i692, i699, g454, i691, i620, i660, i658, i605, i635, i608, g461,  i602, i616, g458, i676, i604, i699, i621, i600, i677, i672 hypertension so that we could have an active comparator, other antihypertensive agents. also, to provide information about the association in inpatients, we conducted a study of the association of ace inhibitors and arbs on mortality among people with hypertension who were hospitalized with covid-19. we stratified all our assessments by insurance groups due to substantial differences between the two populations.we conducted 2 studies of patients with hypertensionthe first study included individuals who tested positive for sars-cov-2 as an outpatient and the second included patients hospitalized with covid- 19 . in addition to a diagnosis of hypertension, we prespecified our study population to include individuals that were receiving at least 1 antihypertensive agent. further, to account for medical comorbidities, we created robust propensity score matched cohorts of patients treated with ace inhibitors, arbs and other antihypertensive agents. we evaluated the success of our matching algorithms through explicit assessments of covariate balance across all comparisons and evaluation of exposure groups on falsification endpoints.due to systematic differences among enrollees in medicare advantage and commercial insurance programs, and the enhanced risk of adverse outcomes with covid-19 among older individuals who are overrepresented in medicare, [10] [11] [12] [13] we evaluated the association of these drugs with outcomes in analyses stratified by insurance groups.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprintwe used de-identified administrative claims for medicare advantage and commercially insured members in a research database from a single large us health insurance provider. the database contains medical (emergency, inpatient, outpatient) and pharmacy claims for services submitted for third party reimbursement, available as international classification of diseases, tenth revision, clinical modification (icd-10-cm) and national drug codes (ndc) claims, respectively. these claims are aggregated after completion of care encounters and submission of claims for reimbursement.there were two additional data sources that included information on covid-19 and could be linked to the claims. first, the limited outpatient testing dataset included information on sars-cov-2 test results for members who underwent outpatient testing for sars-cov2 at 49 hospital-based, free-standing outpatient and third-party labs in all states across the united states, with over 90% of tests submitted by third-party lab vendors. second, the inpatient covid-19 dataset included a daily-updated record of covid-19 inpatient admissions for all insurance enrollees with claims information, representing those admitted to a hospital with a primary or secondary diagnosis of covid-19 (etable 1), along with their current disposition (admitted, discharged, transferred, expired, or unknown).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint we constructed cohorts of patients for each of the two studies. first, for the outpatient study, we identified outpatients who tested positive for sars-cov-2. we included individuals at least 18 years of age, with at least 6 months of enrollment in medicare advantage or commercial insurance from january through december 2019 and available claims data, a diagnosis of hypertension in one or more claims and receiving one or more anti-hypertensive agents, and tested positive for sars-cov-2 positive in an outpatient setting. between march 6, 2020 and may 3, 2020 (efigure 1). thedatabase that satisfied the inclusion criteria. we evaluated the association of ace inhibitors and arbs, respectively, on the risk of hospitalization in this outpatient cohort compared with patients on other antihypertensive medications.second, for the second inpatient study, we identified an inpatient cohort of adults hospitalized with covid- 19 . this included all patients (age ≥18 years) with at least 6 months of health insurance enrollment in 2019 with available claims data, a diagnosis of hypertension in one or more claims, were receiving one or more anti-hypertensive agents, and were hospitalized with a principal or secondary diagnosis of covid-19 between january 5, 2020 and may 10, 2020 (efigure 2). we evaluated the association of ace inhibitors and arbs, respectively, on the mortality of hospitalized individuals in this cohort compared with patients on other antihypertensive medications.for both studies, a diagnosis of hypertension was based on icd-10 codes (etable 1), and drug treatment for hypertension was defined by the receipt of one or more agents included in the 2017 american heart association hypertension . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint guidelines. 14 these include first-line agents of ace inhibitors, arbs, thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics, and dihydropyridine and non-dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, as well as second-line agents of beta-adrenergic antagonists, alpha blockers, centrally acting alpha agonists, loop diuretics, potassium sparing diuretics, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, and direct vasodilators (individual drugs listed in etable 2). the information on the latter was derived from pharmacy claims and was defined by a cumulative supply greater than 30 days between july 1, 2019 and december 31, 2019.we identified 2 mutually exclusive exposure groups (1) patients receiving ace inhibitors, and (2) those receiving arb, with or without other agents. we used an active comparator for these analyses that included all remaining patients with a diagnosis of hypertension who received one or more anti-hypertensive agents from drug classes other than ace inhibitor or arb. these agents include all first and second line antihypertensive agents based on the 2017 aha guidelines for hypertension, 14 with the use of individual agents defined by one or more pharmacy claims for at least 30 days of medication supply for the agent between july and december 2019. in sensitivity analyses, we restricted the control group to individuals receiving at least one first line anti-hypertensive agent from drug classes other than ace inhibitor or arb.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020 we combined information from inpatient and outpatient claims in 2019 to identify potential confounders of the association of the ace inhibitors and arb use and patient outcomes. we included patient age, sex, race, conditions that would represent potential indications for selective use of ace inhibitors or arbs (diabetes, myocardial infarction, heart failure and chronic kidney disease), and each of the additional comorbidities included in the charlson comorbidity index (peripheral vascular disease, cerebrovascular disease, hemi-or paraplegia, dementia, chronic pulmonary disease, rheumatologic disease, diabetes with chronic complications, malignancy, metastatic solid tumor, mild liver disease, moderate-to-severe liver disease, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or human immunodeficiency virus). the icd-10 codes corresponding to these variables are included in etable 1 (appendix). race was available only for medicare advantage members. we included information on the total number of anti-hypertensive agents prescribed to patients using pharmacy claims. finally, regional clustering of cases was identified using location of sites submitting claims for laboratory testing for sars-cov-2 and hospital site for in-hospital outcomes.in the outpatient study, the primary outcome was inpatient hospitalization for covid-19, defined as a hospitalization with a principal or a secondary diagnosis of covid-19 in a linked inpatient dataset (etable 1). we assessed mortality during this inpatient hospitalization as a secondary outcome.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in the inpatient study, the primary outcome was in-hospital mortality. in addition, we evaluated a secondary composite outcome of death or discharge to hospice and hospital length of stay.in both outpatient and inpatient studies, we created propensity score-matched cohorts of patients with hypertension, treated with ace inhibitors, arbs or other antihypertensive medications. for this, we constructed a non-parsimonious multivariable logistic regression model with receipt of ace inhibitors, arb or other antihypertensive as the dependent variable. for example, we modeled the receipt ace inhibitor or another other anti-hypertensive (excluding arb) to determine each patient's likelihood of receiving these agents based on their measured clinical characteristics. we applied this strategy to different pairs of treatment comparisons (ace inhibitor vs others, arb vs others, and ace inhibitor vs arb). briefly, we performed 1:1 matching between recipients based on propensity scores with a caliper width of one-tenth of the standard deviation of the logit of the propensity score. 4 we pursued 100 iterations to find the lowest mean absolute standardized difference among matched variables. we matched our cohorts on age, gender, race, insurance type, conditions that may lead to selective use of ace inhibitors and arbs (i.e., diabetes, myocardial infarction, heart failure and chronic kidney disease), each of the comorbidities in the charlson comorbidity index, and the number of anti-hypertensive agents used for the patient. to account for regional clustering of care practices and response to the covid-19. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint pandemic, we explicitly accounted for census region of lab testing site or inpatient facility in our models.we evaluated the performance of propensity score matching using several strategies. first, we assessed the propensity score distributions in the unmatched and matched cohorts and calculated an equipoise metric to summarize the degree of overlap in characteristics of patients receiving these drugs. 15, 16 this represents the proportion of individuals in the unmatched groups that had a propensity score between 0.3 and 0.7, representing a state of equipoise between the two drugs. a value greater than 0.5 implies two drugs are in empirical equipoise, with a higher a value indicating a lower likelihood of confounding by indication. 15 next, we evaluated the standardized difference between matched covariates before and after propensity score matching.specifically, we evaluated whether our matching algorithm achieved a standardized difference of <10% between matched cohort suggestive of adequately matched groups. 16,17 second, we evaluated the success of our matching algorithm using a priori defined negative control outcomes. we chose two negative control or falsification endpointsclaims for gastroesophageal reflux disease and ingrown nail -that are unlikely to be affected by the treatment assignment and a directional effect would represent covariate imbalance. 16 third, we evaluated whether our propensity matched cohort were also adequately matched on other therapeutic classes for nonantihypertensive agents that were not directly included in the matching algorithm. these strategies were designed to evaluate the potential for residual confounding after creating propensity score matched cohorts. finally, we evaluated our observations for robustness by assessing treatment effects in 100 iterations of the propensity score . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint matching algorithm, evaluating whether our findings were consistent across these iterations that varied on the degree of matching of individual covariates.we describe differences between patients treated with ace inhibitors and arbs compared with other anti-hypertensive agents, and between those treated with ace inhibitors using chi square test for categorical variables and t-test for continuous variables. as the duration of follow up was expected to vary across individuals in both outpatient and inpatient covid-19 cohorts, we evaluated their effects in time-to-event analyses with cox-proportional hazards models in both unadjusted and propensity score-matched cohorts. to reduce bias from residual differences in matched covariates in our evaluation of patient outcomes, we included the covariates included in our propensity score matching algorithm as independent variables in these models. 18 we repeated these analyses without this additional covariate adjustment.for the outpatient study, the index date was represented by the day of positive covid-19 test as an outpatient, the period of the study was measured in days from the positive covid-19, and the outcome of interest was hospitalization. for the inpatient study, the index date was represented by the first day of hospitalization with covid-19, the period of the study was measured in days from admission, and the outcome of interest was death. since hospitalization could end with either patient's death or being discharged alive, we created a cause-specific cox proportional hazards model, which is a competing risk analysis. [19] [20] [21] both analyses were censored at the end of the observation period on may 10, 2020.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint given systematic differences between patients enrolled in medicare advantage and commercial insurance, particularly with older age, higher comorbidity burden, and higher risk of covid-19 complications among medicare advantage enrollees, we evaluated quantitative and qualitative interactions between insurance type and treatment groups for the assessment of our outcomes. we also created propensity score-matched cohorts within the each of the two insurance subgroups.analyses were performed using open source r 3.4.0 (cran) and python 3.8.2.all hypothesis tests were 2-sided, with a level of significance set at 0.05, except for interaction tests where the level of significance was set at 0.10. given the exploratory nature of study, statistical tests were not adjusted for multiple testing. the yaleaffairs exempted this study from other review as all activities were limited to retrospective analysis of de-identified data and accessed in accordance with health insurance portability and accountability act regulations. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint median age of these individuals was 69.0 years and 52.5% were women. of medicare advantage patients, 29.6% were african american. patients receiving ace inhibitors or arbs were more likely to be men, have diabetes with or without chronic complications, and be receiving more than 1 antihypertensive drugs ( table 1) . they were less likely to have chronic heart failure or moderate-to-severe renal disease, compared with patients receiving other anti-hypertensive treatments. patients receiving ace inhibitors were similar to those receiving arbs but had a higher rate of dementia and peripheral vascular disease ( table 1) . we matched 441 patients receiving ace inhibitors to 441 patients receiving other antihypertensive agents (efigure 5), achieving <10% standardized differences for all covariates (figure 1) . similarly, we matched 412 patients receiving arb to 412 patients receiving other antihypertensive agents (efigure 5). the equipoise for comparisons of ace inhibitors to other drugs, and for ace inhibitors to arb were above 0.5, but were lower for the arb comparisons ( table 3) .among 12,566 patients who were hospitalized for covid-19 with linked claims data, 7,933 had had a diagnosis of hypertension and had an outpatient prescription for at least one antihypertensive drug (efigure 2). the inpatient cohort included patients from 47 states in the us (efigure 3). of the included patients, 92.0% were medicare advantage enrollees. the median age of hospitalized individuals was 77.0 years, 54.6% were women; 29.9% of medicare advantage enrollees were african american.differences between hospitalized patients treated with ace inhibitors, arbs and other agents are included in table 2 . in the inpatient cohort, 1731 patients receiving ace . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint inhibitors and 1560 patients receiving arbs that were propensity score-matched to patients receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (efigure 5), with covariate standardized differences of <10% after matching (figure 1) . the equipoise for comparisons of ace inhibitors to other drugs, and for ace inhibitors to arb were above 0.5, but were lower for the arb comparisons ( table 4) .in the outpatient cohort, over a median 30 (iqr 19, 40) days from sars-cov-2 testing, patients receiving ace inhibitors were less frequently hospitalized than those receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (10.7% vs 14.4%, p = 0.03). there was no significant association between arb therapy and hospitalization rates (12.7% vs 14.4% in individuals with other insurance, p 0.36). in propensity score-matched cohorts (efigure table 3 ). there were no differences in the a priori chosen falsification endpoints between propensity scorematched populations (etable 3).there were differences between the association of ace inhibitors and hospitalization risk across insurance groups (p for interaction, 0.09), with a lower risk of hospitalization in medicare advantage patients (hr, 0.61 [0.41, 0.93], p = 0.02) that was not observed in commercially insured individuals (hr, 2.14 [0.82, 5.60], p = 0.12).( table 3) .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05. 17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in propensity score-matched analyses, arb use was not associated with significantly lower hospitalization risk than individuals receiving other anti-hypertensive agents (hr, 0.88 [0.61, 1.26], p = 0.48) (figure 2 ). there were no significant differences in hospitalization rates between propensity score matched cohorts of patients receiving ace inhibitor, compared with arb (hr 0.91, 0.65 to 1.29; p = 0.60).there were no significant interactions by insurance-type and the association of arb with outcomes (p-interaction = 0.55) among the individuals in the outpatient cohort who were hospitalized, there was no association with ace inhibitor or arb use with subsequent in-hospital mortality (etable 4).of the 7933 patients hospitalized with covid-19, 1128 (14.2%) died during hospitalization, 4722 (59.5%) were discharged alive, and 2083 (26.3%) were still hospitalized at the end of the observation period. a majority of deaths (90.1%) were among the medicare advantage population. the median length of stay (including patients who died as well as discharged alive) for covid-19 hospitalizations was 6 (iqr: 3 to 11) days, which was similar across patients who died (6 (iqr: 3 to 10) days) or discharged alive (6 (iqr: 3 to 11) days) during the observation period.overall, the proportion of covid-19 patients who died did not differ significantly in those on ace inhibitor therapy before hospitalization, compared with those on other anti-hypertensive agents (13.5% vs 13.9%, p = 0.68). in the propensity matched-cohort of patients receiving ace inhibitors before hospitalization, in-hospital mortality was not . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. table 4 ). similarly, arb did not have a significantly different risk of mortality compared with other anti-hypertensive agents (1.15 (0.95, 1.38); p = 0.15). there were no significant differences in mortality between patients receiving ace inhibitors and arbs in the overall population, without a significant interaction between insurance group and treatment assignment and patient outcome (figure 3, table 4 ).these findings were consistent in for our secondary outcome of in-hospital death or discharge to hospice (etable 4). there was also no association between treatment with ace inhibitor or arb on hospital length of stay (etable 5).sensitivity analyses that focused on individuals receiving at least one first line antihypertensive agent in the control group, and that varied the covariate adjustment strategies were consistent with the primary analysis (etables 6-8) . the 100 iterations of propensity score matching algorithm found a lower risk of hospitalization with ace inhibitors across all iterations, with a p-value of less than 0.05 in 97 of 100 iterations in the medicare advantage population.in this first national study of ace inhibitors and arbs in outpatients testing positive for sars-cov-2, we found that overall these drugs did not confer additional risk or benefit.however, among those in medicare advantage, ace inhibitors were associated with an almost 40% significantly lower risk of hospitalization for covid-19, an effect not observed with arbs. among those hospitalized for covid-19, we did not find a benefit or a harm of these medications. collectively, the findings do not support a change to the current use of these medications but, given the lack of effective therapies to mitigate the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint harm of the virus, this study does provide a rationale for testing the use of ace inhibitors in older patients to reduce the risk of severe sars-cov-2 infection.our design has several attributes that should provide confidence about the findings even though it is observational. our study was restricted to people with hypertension who were receiving at least one anti-hypertensive agent, thereby limiting our assessment to individuals receiving treatment for the same chronic illness, and therefore, equally likely to seek care for healthcare needs for covid-19. in all analyses, we explicitly compared individuals with equipoise for receiving either drug treatment.moreover, we did not find any evidence of confounding by disease severity in choice of therapy in our assessment of a priori defined falsification endpoints. further, our study included individuals from across the united states, thereby limiting the effect of hospital or regional care practices that may bias an evaluation of treatment effects.our observations extends the prior evidence of supporting safety of ace inhibitor treatment in covid-19. 4, 7, 9, 22 we show the safety of these agents in outpatient sars-cov-2 infected individuals, which complements the studies of those who were hospitalized. 4, 7, 22 also, ours is a national study, which complements the single center or single region studies. 23 our study does have an intriguing finding. in the subgroup of individuals enrolled in medicare advantage, we find that ace inhibitors were associated with a significantly lower risk of hospitalization following an infection with sars-cov-2 in the outpatient setting. these patients are older, more frequently have comorbidities, and were more vulnerable to severe covid-19 disease. 4, 7 these findings are particularly relevant as the medicare advantage group represented over 90% of all covid-19 hospitalizations . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint in our inpatient cohort. also, interestingly, we did not find the same association for arbs despite clinical equipoise in the use of these drugs. our findings are consistent with prior evidence from randomized clinical trials that a reduced risk of pneumonia with ace inhibitors that is not observed with arb. 5 our study of in-hospital outcomes adds to the literature on studies that have reached contrasting conclusions regarding the role of ace inhibitor therapy and inhospital mortality among hospitalized covid-19 patients. we did not find a significant association with mortality, consistent with others that have not found such an association. 4, 23, 24 however, our findings contrast with certain studies that have found lower mortality in hospitalized covid-19 patients treated with ace inhibitors. 7, 22 notably, the studies that have evaluated mortality risk with covid-19 before have not consistently been designed to detect potential causal association of drug therapy with outcomes, 7 relied on case control designs, 22 pursued potentially biased assessment by using comparators not receiving any therapy, 4, 7 or are based on data from single health centers. 4,23 moreover, some have studied both ace inhibitors and arbs together despite potentially different mechanisms and effects on patient outcomes. 5 there some rationale for why there may be a specific ace inhibitor effect. there is preclinical evidence that suggests a possible protective role for ace inhibitors in covid-19. ace inhibitors, but not arbs, are associated with the upregulation of ace-2 receptors. 3, 25 these receptors modulate the local renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system interactions in the lung tissue. 26 the presence of ace2 receptors, therefore, exerts a protective effect against the development of acute lung injury in infections with sars coronaviruses, which lead to dysregulation of these mechanisms and endothelial . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. our study has important implications for 4 ongoing randomized trials as none of them align with the observations of our study. 6 of the 4 trials, 3 are testing the use of ace inhibitors or arbs in the treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients, and 1 is using a 10-day course of arbs after a positive sars-cov-2 test to prevent hospitalization. 6 however, our study suggests that the most appropriate strategy to test in a trial would be the prophylactic use of ace inhibitor to prevent hospitalization, which is not being tested in any current study.the findings of our study should be interpreted in light of the following limitations.first, the study is observational, and despite robust methods, and explicit assessments of residual confounding, understanding the potential protective role of ace inhibitors in covid-19 requires a dedicated randomized controlled trial. second, we do not know the proportion of patients receiving these antihypertensive agents that continued to be treated with these drugs during the illness and the association of their continued use or cessation with patient outcomes. third, all included data elements are contingent upon individuals seeking care for that ailment or filling a medication using their insurance provider and would not be captured if they chose to self-pay. however, we do not expect that any sizeable proportion of insured individuals would defer insurance coverage for their care. fourth, we cannot account for differences in timing of . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint presentation of patients relative to their symptom onset. however, we limited the effect of differential presentation by patients across exposure groups by focusing on patients receiving treatment for the same medical comorbidity, i.e. hypertension, and only varying the class of drugs. moreover, we included patients across the us and accounted for clustering of patients, thereby limiting the effect of local practice patterns that may affect hospitalization thresholds. therefore, it is unlikely patient's care seeking . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint ant ihypert ensi e agent s use roups before propensit y score m at ching roups aft er propensit y score m at ching . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.17.20104943 doi: medrxiv preprint investigations reported that hypertension, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases were the most prevalent comorbidities among the patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). hypertension appeared consistently as the most prevalent risk factors in covid-19 patients. some investigations speculated about the association between renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) and susceptibility to covid-19, as well as the relationship between raas inhibitors and increased mortality in these patients. this raised concern about the potential association between hypertension (and its treatment) and propensity for covid-19. there are only a few follow-up studies that investigated the impact of comorbidities on outcome in these patients with conflicting findings. hypertension has been proven to be more prevalent in patients with an adverse outcome (admission in intensive care unit, use of mechanical ventilation, or death). so far, there is no study that demonstrated independent predictive value of hypertension on mortality in covid-19 patients. there are many speculations about this coronavirus and its relation with different risk factors and underlying diseases. the aim of this review was to summarize the current knowledge about the relationship between hypertension and covid-19 and the role of hypertension on outcome in these patients.covid-19 and arterial hypertension: hypothesis or evidence?in december, 2019, a novel coronavirus disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) emerged in wuhan, hubei province of china. the disease has rapidly spread from wuhan to other areas. as of march 25, 2020, 414 ,179 cases have been reported in 180 countries and areas from 6 continents, with the current crude case fatality rate (cfr) of 4.5%. 1 thus, with accumulating cases and high cfr, covid-19 has posed a great challenge to public health.according to a recent report, 91.1% of patients infected with sars-cov-2 were diagnosed pneumonia during hospitalization, including 15.7% of them with severe disease. 2 however, the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms by which this virus causes disease remain unclear. sars-cov-2 and sars-cov are both coronaviruses, and the two viruses share 79% identity in nucleotide sequence. 3 early studies has established that sars-cov uses this retrospective study complied with the declaration of helsinki and was approved by the hubei provincial hospital of traditional chinese medicine (hphtcm)'s ethical review board (clinical ethical approval no. hbzy2020-c15-01). hphtcm is responsible for the treatments of covid-19 assigned by the wuhan government. patients with confirmed covid-19 according to the guideline of sars-cov-2 (the fifth trial version of the chinese national health commission) admitted into hphtcm from january 5 to february 22, 2020, were included for initial screen. 23 covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension were retrospectively allocated into two subgroups, arbs/aceis and non-arbs/aceis group, according to their usage of antihypertensive drugs. age-and sex-matched cases were randomly selected from the remaining covid-19 patients without hypertension as non-hypertension controls. the clinical outcomes (ie, discharges, mortality, length of stay)were monitored up to march 3, 2020, the final date of follow-up. in addition, the medication history of 1942 hypertension patients that were admitted to hphtcm from november 1 to december 31, 2019 before covid-19 outbreak were also reviewed for external comparison.written informed consent was waived by the ethics commission of the hospital for emerging infectious diseases.the medical records of patients were analyzed by the research team of hphtcm. disease onset was defined as the date when the symptom was noticed. data on the use of aceis and arbs prior to admission and during hospital stay were collected. other information including demographic data, medical history, exposure history, comorbidities, symptoms, all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint signs, laboratory findings, and treatment measures (ie, antiviral therapy, corticosteroid therapy) were extracted from electronic medical records and were recorded with standardized data collection forms. the data were reviewed by a trained team of physicians. assessment of disease status followed the guideline of sars-cov-2 (the fifth trial version of the chinese national health commission): mild type, with slight clinical symptoms but no imaging presentations of pneumonia; common type, with fever, respiratory tract and other symptoms, imaging findings of pneumonia; severe type, with any of the following conditions: respiratory distress, respiratory frequency ≥30 times/minutes, finger oxygen saturation at rest ≤93%, or oxygenation index [pao 2 / fio 2 ]≤300 mmhg (1 mmhg=0.133 kpa); critical type, with any of the following conditions: respiratory failure requires mechanical ventilation, shock, combined with other organ failure requires intensive care unit care and treatment. 21 laboratory parameters, including complete blood count, c-reactive protein (crp), arterial blood gas analysis, myocardial injury markers, coagulation profile, serum biochemical tests (including renal and liver function, lactate dehydrogenase), procalcitonin (pct), b-type natriuretic peptide (bnp), were measured according to the manufacturer's instructions.data analysis was performed using spss (statistical package for the social sciences, version 23). categorical variables were reported as absolute (relative frequencies) and compared by χ² tests or fisher's exact tests. continuous variables were expressed as mean (sd) if they are normally distributed or median (interquartile range, iqr) if they are not and compared by independent group t tests or mann-whitney u tests, respectively. p<0.05 was considered as all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint statistically significant.after the initial screen, 462 covid-2019 patients were allocated to two groups, the hypertension group that includes 126 patients with preexisting hypertension, and the non-hypertension group comprising 125 age-and sex-matched patients that were randomly selected from the remaining patients without hypertension (figure 1 covid-19 patients with hypertension was further allocated into two subgroups based on the usage of arbs/aceis as antihypertensive drugs: 43 in the arbs/aceis subgroup and 83 in the non-arbs/aceis subgroup (figure 1). the median ages of patients in the two subgroups were 67 (iqr, 62-75) and 65 (iqr, 57-72) years, respectively. there were no major differences in characteristics between the two subgroups except for the higher usage of antibiotics in the non-arbs/aceis subgroup. baseline characteristics are shown in table 1.the age distribution and complication ratio of hypertension group and non-hypertension all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is compared with non-hypertensive controls, covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension had lower arterial partial pressure of oxygen (10.1 [7.6-11.3] vs 11· 3 [8· 9-13· 8]; p=0· 001), all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is (table 3) .this retrospective investigation, to our knowledge, is the first case-control study aimed to examine the correlation of arbs/aceis between the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 infection in patients with preexisting hypertension. the major finding of this report is that arbs/aceis treatment was associated with reduced inflammatory response and mitigated disease progression in covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension compared to other antihypertensive treatment.hypertension is the leading cause of mortality globally. 31.2% of adults were estimated to have hypertension worldwide in 2010. 24 since the emerge of sars-cov-2 infection, hypertension has been frequently observed as a major comorbidity in covid-19patients. 2, 17, [20] [21] [22] we reported here that 27.2% (126 of 462) of the covid-19 patients admitted to hphtcm have preexisting hypertension. this incidence is similar to those reported by all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is 2, 17 this discordance could be explained by the age difference, the latter two studies had a median age of 47 and 48 years respectively, compared to 67 years from our report.covid-19 patients with hypertension appeared to have a higher death rate and were more frequently seen in severe cases. 17 we also examined the death rate and the incidence of critical cases in our cohort. compared with non-hypertension controls, covid-19 patients with hypertension had a higher death rate ( [14 of 125] ), but these differences failed to reach statistical significance. however, we did find that patients remained in hospital had a significantly longer disease course in covid-19 patients with hypertension than those without (36.7±12.4 vs 31.6±7.7; p=0.024). therefore, our results, together with those from other groups, provided ample evidence that hypertension is a critical risk factor for the poor clinical outcome of covid-19 patients. indeed, this notion was further supported by laboratory testing results. covid-19 patients with hypertension had much lower blood oxygen index (p<0.001), as well as higher blood urea (p=0.020) and alt (p=0.022) than those without hypertension.the mechanisms by which hypertension results in the poor clinical outcome of covid-19 remain obscure. we found that compared with non-hypertension controls, covid-19 patients with hypertension have markedly increased levels of inflammatory hs-crp (p=0.024), procalcitonin (p=0.017) and il-6 (p=0.017), suggesting that dysregulated inflammatory response might contribute. in fact, hypertension has been well-known for its capacity in all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint stimulating adaptive response and inducing the elevated production of inflammation cytokines. 25, 26 at ii, an effector peptide of the ras, which is responsible for the pathophysiology of hypertension, 27 has also been demonstrated to be capable of inducing the production of il-6, il-1β, tnfα, ifnγ, il-17 and il-23 in multiple animal models. 28 not surprisingly, treatment of hypertension patients with aceis and arbs, which functional through reducing the level of at ii and increasing the expression of ace2, effectively downregulated the production of inflammatory cytokines. 29 increased levels of inflammatory cytokines has also been observed in covid-19 patients with or without hypertension as a coexisting illness. huang et al reported that the plasma concentrations of il-1β, il-1ra, ifnγ, tnfα and other cytokines were significantly higher in both icu patients and non-icu patients with sars-cov-2 infection than in healthy adults.further comparison found that il-2, il-7, il-10, ip-10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnfα were higher in icu patients than non-icu patients. 19 elevated concentration of il-6 were also demonstrated in covid-19 patients with severe and critical disease compared with those with mild and common illness. 30, 31 based on these evidence, a multicenter, randomized controlled trial was recently registered on chinese clinical trial registry (chictr2000029765) to evaluate the efficacy and safety of il-6r blockade with tocilizumab in the treatment of covid-19.as mentioned above, inhibiting dysregulated inflammatory response represents a promising therapeutic strategy for both covid-19 and hypertension patients. therefore, aceis and arbs that are capable of reducing the production of inflammatory cytokines are potential candidate drugs for treatment of covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension, as all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint suggested by several groups. 12, 32 however, the clinical evidence is still missing. in this report, we found that in the 43 covid-19 patients with hypertension treated with arbs/aceis before and after diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection, the concentrations of inflammatory crp and procalcitonin were significantly lower compared with those treated with non-arbs/aceis. arbs/aceis treatment also resulted in a lower death rate and less critical cases in these patients. we did not find the concentrations of il-6 in the arbs/aceis group to be significantly different from that in the non-arbs/aceis controls, which suggests that arbs/aceis treatment alone might not be efficient in modulating the production of this cytokine. however, combining of arbs/aceis and il-6r blockade could presumably have a synergic effect in regulating the elevated inflammatory response in covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension, which could be tested in future clinical trials.arbs/aceis treatment has been reported to increase the expression of ace2, 33,34 which is also the cellular receptor for sars-cov-2 infection. 8 arbs/aceis treatment did not pose an added risk for sars-cov-2 infection in our study cohort. ace2 was reported to bind to sars-cov-2 with approximately 10-to 20-fold higher all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint affinity than that bind to sars-cov. this finding, together with the fact that people from different races, with different ages and sexes were all susceptible to sars-cov-2 infection, suggest that physiological expression of ace2 may be already sufficient for sars-cov-2 infection, and further upregulation might not increase the risk.arbs and aceis are both antihyperhensive drugs discovered to maintain the blood pressure.thus, arbs/aceis treatment could result in hypotension in healthy subjects, which may prevent their application in covid-19 patients without hypertension. alternatively, novel therapeutic options using ace2 as target will be promising in treating sars-cov-2 infection without affecting blood pressure.our study has several limitations. first, due to the retrospective nature of this study and the fact that it was conducted in a single hospital, interpretation of our findings might be limited by the sample size and selection bias. we also realize that there are additional risk factors may not be well-controlled despite as many confounders as possible were corrected for.nevertheless, as far as we know, this is the largest retrospective cohort study designed to examine the usage of arbs/aceis and its effect on covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension. second, the severity and disease course were not identical among these patients, which resulted in the difficulty in collecting laboratory indicators at the same time point, we therefore selected the most extreme values beyond the normal range of laboratory indicators that could reflect the severity of condition for comparison. however, this strategy might still cause biases in presenting laboratory indicators. third, the expression of ace2 and other inflammatory factors were not determined in this study due to the sample availability and limited technical resources in our hospital, this limitation prevented us from further exploring all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint the mechanisms by which arbs/aceis regulate the inflammatory status of covid-19 patients with hypertension.the evidence presented in this study supports the use of arbs/aceis over other antihypertensive drugs in treating covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension. large prospective studies are required to confirm this finding, and to explore the mechanisms by which arbs/aceis regulate the inflammatory response and prevent disease progression.these efforts might eventually lead to the development of novel therapeutic agents targeting ace2 to treat non-hypertensive covid-19 patients without affecting blood pressure.we declare no competing interests.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint novelty and significance: hypertension has been reported to be the leading coexisting illness of covid-19 patients, and these patients were frequently treated with arbs/aceis to control their blood pressure. the effects of arbs/aceis on the pathogenesis of covid-19 has yet to be defined. we conducted the first and the largest case series to evaluate the effect of arbs/aceis on the pathogenesis of covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension. we found that without increasing the risk for sars-cov-2 infection, arbs/aceis outcompeted other antihypertensive drugs in containing exaggerate inflammatory response and curbing disease progression in covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension.our results support the use of arbs/aceis over other antihypertensive drugs in treating covid-19 patients with preexisting hypertension. large prospective studies are required to confirm this finding, and to explore the mechanisms by which arbs/aceis regulate the inflammatory response and prevent disease progression.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint . p values were from t tests or mann-whitney u tests. p <0.05 was considered statistically significant (in bold).all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 2 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 3 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission. the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 31.20038935 doi: medrxiv preprint 