the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has become a global pandemic. till 31 march 2020, there were more than 82 600 confirmed cases in the mainland china and 855 000 cases worldwide, leading to over 42 000 cases of death, causing heavy economic loss and continually threatening life safety.the infection with sars-cov-2 seems to spread more easily than other diseases, including seasonal influenza. calculations of r0 (the number of people on an average one infected person will pass on the virus) suggest a range of 2 to 2.5. 1 recently, "asymptomatic infection," also known as "hidden coronavirus infections" (https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/02/labs-scramblespot-hidden-coronavirus-infections#) or "covert coronavirus infections" there are two classes of asymptomatic cases with sars-cov-2 infection: first, cases with little or mild symptoms within the incubation period but with symptoms onset in the coming 14-day quarantine period or typical changes on the chest-radiograph. the other refers to the patient with no symptoms all the time but tested positive for viral nucleic acid or antibodies.asymptomatic cases are often screened for close contacts both in the clinic and in community, such as cohabiting family members of covid-19 patients or suspected patients or individuals who have exposed to covid-19 patients within a short distance and relatively long time. other circumstances include screening for clustering occurrence or tracing the source of infection.currently, asymptomatic cases are not included in the confirmed patients in everyday-report according to the "novel coronavirus pneumonia diagnosis and treatment protocol (7th edition, trial)."once found, the patient will be put into medical isolation for up to 14-days, if the patient has symptoms onset within the isolation period, he/she will be reported as a confirmed case immediately.evidence is accumulating on the existence of many asymptomatic or and cases who had not yet developed symptoms at the time of data collection but became symptomatic later. as predicted using a statistical model, the estimated total number of true asymptomatic cases was at 113.3 and the estimated asymptomatic proportion (among all infected cases) was 17.9%. another study reported that the asymptomatic ratio was estimated at 30.8% among evacuees tested positive for sars-cov-2 using the information on japanese nationals that were evacuated from wuhan, china. 2 in this study, the length of observation was long enough to cover the covid-19 incubation period. 3, 4 a recent study reported a familial cluster with three asymptomatic cases. studies from single-center reported 4% to 6% cases with sars-cov-2 did not develop any symptom during the course of the disease. 5, 6 thus, there is very little probability that the virus-positive asymptomatic individuals will develop symptoms later, the ratio is slightly smaller than that of influenza, which was estimated at 56% to 80%. recently, a preprint published on medrxiv analyzed the evolving epidemiology before and after nonpharmaceutical interventions put into effect using an seir model. the study indicated at least 59% of infected cases were unascertained in wuhan which in- with the existence of disagreement in the actual number of asymptomatic cases and their infectivity, larger observational studies including serological tests with a longer period are needed. 15 currently, for asymptomatic patients to follow strict quarantine is of great importance in the control of the covid-19 epidemic. if various feasible measures are taken to control the transmission, then the outbreak could be ended as soon as possible.the authors declare that there are no conflict of interests. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9922-9627since outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 in december 2019, the coronavirus has spread over the world at an unprecedented rate. by april 2, 2020, more than 150 countries have been affected by covid-19 with a total of close to one million confirmed cases and over 47,000 deaths. the covid-19 has been declared as an international public health emergency by the world health organization (who).during the incubation period, a percentage of coronavirus carriers may have no symptoms or minimal symptoms and thus often go undetected. these covert coronavirus carriers may not even be aware of the infection themselves, who however would be confirmed as positive cases if tested using the reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr). if the percentage of asymptomatic carriers is large and if their transmissibility of coronavirus is as high as the symptomatic cases, this would pose a great threat to the public. therefore, it is critical to determine the percentage and transmissibility of asymptomatic coronavirus carriers in the population.it has been reported that the viral load detected in the asymptomatic patients was similar to that in the symptomatic patients, which suggests the potential transmissibility of asymptomatic patients. 2 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20050740 doi: medrxiv preprint ningbo, china, on the transmission rates of the coronavirus by the symptomatic and asymptomatic cases. the estimated transmission rates for the symptomatic and asymptomatic patients were 0.063 and 0.041 respectively, and the chi-squared test yielded a p-value of 0.288, which indicates that there is no statistically significant difference between the two transmission rates. they further investigated the transmission rates for different relationships and different types of contact with the infected patients including both symptomatic and asymptomatic cases and concluded that the differences in the transmission rates are statistically significant across different relationships and types of contact respectively. the closer the contact with the infected patients, the higher chance of infection.however, in their original statistical analysis 1 , the chi-squared tests were unduly used because the counts in some cells of the contingency tables are rather small and even zeros, which violates the assumptions of a chi-squared test and thus casts doubt on the validity of the hypothesis test. moreover, when comparing the transmission rates of symptomatic and asymptomatic cases, chen et al 4 included the cases associated with a super-spreader who mainly transmitted the disease in an air-conditioned bus and a buddhism activity gathering. however, this may reduce the generalization of the findings as the super-spreader should be regarded as an outlier and removed from the primary analysis.from january 21st to march 6th 2020, there were 157 symptomatic cases and 30 asymptomatic cases in the ningbo covid-19 data 1 . these infected cases resulted in 2147 close contacts with them, among which 2001 exposures were caused by the symptomatic cases and 146 by the asymptomatic cases. the average number of close contacts by the symptomatic cases is 13 and that by the asymptomatic cases is 5, and the difference is statistically significant with a p-value of 6×10 -6 from a permutation test . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20050740 doi: medrxiv preprint described in algorithm 1. the larger number of close contacts by the symptomatic cases may be due to the medical attentions they received after the confirmed diagnosis.to allow for small cell counts including zeros in the contingency table, fisher's exact tests 5 are used to investigate the difference in the transmission rates between the symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. we consider two scenarios: one combines the numbers of symptomatic and asymptomatic cases as the total number of infected patients, leading to a 2×2 table; and the other separates them, leading to a 2×3 table, as shown in the top panel of table 1 .from the results summarized in table 1 , we conclude that there is no significant difference in the transmission rates between the symptomatic and asymptomatic cases, either including or excluding the cases associated with the super-spreader. however, the tests excluding the cases associated with the super-spreader yield larger p-values, 0.842 when combining the numbers of symptomatic and asymptomatic cases and 0.107 when separating them. as a result, there is no evidence in the data to rule out the transmissibility of asymptotic carriers in comparison with symptomatic cases.the odds ratio, estimated transmission rates and their difference between symptomatic and asymptomatic cases as well as the corresponding 95% confidence intervals are presented in the bottom panel of table 1 . the odds of transmitting the coronavirus to a healthy individual by a symptomatic patient is 1.2 times of that by an asymptomatic patient, which however is not statistically significant as the 95% confidence interval covers one. furthermore, as the 95% confidence intervals for the difference of transmission rates cover zero, we conclude there is no difference in the transmissibility of coronavirus through close contacts between symptomatic and asymptomatic cases, which is consistent with the findings using fisher's exact tests.the transmission rates under different relationships with the infected cases are significantly different with both p-values <10 -6 whether combining the symptomatic . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20050740 doi: medrxiv preprint and asymptomatic cases or not. with regard to different types of contact, the transmission rates are also significantly different with p-values <10 -6 . as expected, the more close contacts with the infected cases, the higher likelihood to contract the coronavirus.in summary, we provide a more in-depth analysis of the ningbo covid-19 data to examine the difference in the transmissibility of coronavirus for symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. we adopt more appropriate statistical methods, such as fisher's exact tests, which require no assumptions on the cell counts in the contingency table. we provide the odds ratio, estimated transmission rates, as well as the corresponding 95% confidence intervals, and the conclusions remain the same that there is no statistically significant difference in the transmissibility of coronavirus between symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20050740 doi: medrxiv preprintaccording to the world heath organization (who), 1,878,489 confirmed cases (119,044 confirmed deaths) of novel coronavirus disease 2019 (2019-ncov) has been reported throughout the world, as of april 15, 2020, including 11,439 confirmed cases (377 deaths) from india [1] . the outbreak was first announced by the "health commission of hubei province", china, a cluster of unexplained cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology (unknown cases) [2] , which is lethal, was first identified in wuhan, the capital city of hubei and seven largest city of china, on december 31, 2019 [3] [4] [5] . later on, the novel coronavirus disease was called officially as covid-19 by who [1] . the epidemic was announced a major public concern worldwide on january 30, 2020 by the world health organization [2] . coronavirus, an enveloped virus described by a single-stranded, positive-sense rna belonging to the family of coronaviridae and the nidovirales order and extensively disseminated among humans as well as mammals [6] . the ongoing coronavirus epidemic has been announced a pandemic by the world health organization (who) on january 30, 2020, and the govt. of india has announced 21 days nationwide lockdown from march 25, 2020 to april 14, 2020, to prevent stage-iii spreading of the virus or human-to-human transmission.coronavirus causes typically mild infections but sometimes lethal communicable disorders leading to severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and in present covid-19 pandemic, and in general it can be thought as sarsr-cov [7] , which is mostly observed in bats-could create a future disease outbreak [8, 9] . the most important modes of transmission of coronavirus are respiratory droplets and contact transmission (contaminated hands) and it has incubation period 2-14 days [3, 10] . from the confirmed cases of coronavirus, the symptoms range from fever, sneeze, or even a runny nose, dry cough fatigue breathing problem and lung infiltration to severely ill and dying [10] . shared surfaces are also an important risky since the virus clings on to surfaces and propagates as soon as another person touches the shared surface. the virus also can remain active for about 3 hours after aerosolization (droplets carrying virus mixed with air), on plastic for fifteen hours, and on metallic surfaces for five-six hours.the continuing coronavirus outbreak has been announced a widespread by the world health organization, as of march 16, 2020, the united nations' public health agency has authenticated 1,67,511 confirmed cases, including 6,606 deaths across 151 countries throughout the world [1, 3] .as countries start shutting down borders, cutting off international marketing and quarantining their cial places as well as contacts of cases (quarantine, surveillance, contact tracing) [17] .the route of an outbreak can be described by a series of important factors, but some of which are extremely difficult to understand at present coronavirus disease. the basic reproduction number r 0 is one of the most crucial quantities in infectious diseases, as r 0 measures how contagious a disease is. r 0 designates the number of secondary infections infected by one infected individual in a whole susceptible class, or more specifically the area under epidemic curve. for r 0 < 1, the disease is expected to stop spreading, but for r 0 = 1 an infected individual can infect on an average 1 person, that is, the spread of the disease is stable. the disease can spread and become epidemic if r 0 must be greater than 1. r 0 can help us to understand the effectiveness of the disease, that is, under what condition the disease can stop or spread ? the values for r 0 in china is around 2.5 in the primary stage of the outbreak of coronavirus [18] .the spread of coronavirus outbreak depends on the infectivity of the virus and the availability of susceptible individuals. mathematical modeling play a vital role to better understand the disease dynamics and designing policies to manage quickly spreading infectious diseases in lack of effective vaccine or specific antivirals [19] . recently, many mathematical model have already been studied to understand the complicated dynamics of novel coronavirus, and some of these are cited in our references [3, 5, 12, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] . a novel coronavirus model has been established by chen et al. [20] and find the basic reproduction number. imai et al. [21] studied a computational model for novel coronavirus disease 2019 in wuhan, a city of china and their model mainly focused on human-to-human transmission. tang et al. [5] established a compartmental model for coronavirus by incorporating symptomatic ill class to obtain the patients' epidemiological status.they obtained the basic reproduction number 6.47, which is very high for the infectious diseases.nadim et al. [23] studied a mathematical to investigate the coronavirus disease, where they performed stability analysis and they validated their model with the data from hubei, the city of china. their model is originally established by gumel et al. [7] for severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak. wu et al. [25] established a coronavirus model by considering four classes, namely susceptible, exposed, infected and recovered to study the human-human transmission dynamics based on the data from december 31, 2019 to january 28, 2020. they computed the reproduction number approximately 2.68 for coronavirus disease.the conventional models governing the outbreak of infectious diseases mainly depend on the interplays among susceptible, infected and exposed classes. moreover, the other aspects, such as vaccination, huge news coverage, educational campaigns and rapid information flow can create great psychological effects on the population, and thus remarkably change the publics' behavior and affect the implementation of individuals' intervention and control strategies [26] . it is mainly the awareness program due to media which make the individuals enlighten regarding the disease to take safeguards such as vaccination, wearing protective masks, social distancing etc., to minimize their risks of being infected [27, 28] . how long and how effectual media related impact persists is thus an important issue for future outbreak, and quantifying this impact through a modeling process falls within the scope of our investigation. several mathematical models have been incorporated with the assumption that the media related awareness has an impact on reducing the contact rate of susceptible and infected population [26, [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] . influenced by those literatures we develop and analyze a mathematical model for coronavirus to study the impact of media related awareness program.to obtain a better insight into the important factors related with the control of novel coronavirus in a community and throughout the world, we investigate a dynamic model to study the epidemic of coronavirus and its control in four mostly affected states, namely maharashtra, delhi, kerala, west bengal and the overall india. we estimated most important parameters, namely β s , ξ a , q a , α h ξ h , ξ i and γ i by using least square method. we calculate the basic reproduction for our model for four different states as well as the india.here, we extend the classical deterministic susceptible-exposed-infectious-removed (seir) compartmental model refined by introducing contact tracing-hospitalization strategies to study the epidemiological properties of coronavirus . we calibrate our mathematical model using data gained form confirmed cases of coronavirus in india and estimated the basic reproduction number for the disease transmission. in order to make our mathematical model more realistic, we consider the following assumptions:• the model involves a net inflow rate of susceptible individuals λ s per unit time,• the model has no zoonotic infections of coronavirus, considering only the epidemic spread through human beings,• there is no effective control measures before april 10, 2020,• the model involves some demographic effects by accepting a proportional natural mortality in each of the sub-populations.in the underlying dynamic model, the total population n(t) is classified into six subpopulations (classes), namely susceptible s(t), exposed e(t), asymptomatic a(t), clinically ill or symptomatic i(t), hospitalized h(t) and recovered r(t), respectively.the coronavirus outbreaks in the population throughout the world and so the news concerning coronavirus epidemics through different media including television, social networking sites and newspaper as well as educational programs from government, non-government organization and local bodies. the source of information density of media is assumed to be proportional to the number of symptomatic/infective individuals and will alter as the symptomatic population alters.herein, m(t) denotes the cumulative density of media in individual such that m(t) = 0, for i(t) = 0. this is mimic to the mathematical model developed by d'onofrio et al. [27] , in the case of non-delayed model and mimics to the media variable as incorporated there. this media creates the behavioral alteration in the susceptible populations to save themselves from contracting infection. as for example, government of senegal has taken an initiative through sms campaign to spread the information regarding ebola awareness [34] . albeit individuals are informed through media, not everyone responses to it due to insufficiency of resources, irresponsive nature and economic condition etc. therefore a part of susceptible individuals with news regarding coronavirus, responding to the news for corona symptoms and altering their behavior to avoid infection, and will move to the recovered individuals. the rate of behavioral response through media has been considered to be a function of both the densities for susceptible populations and media, that is, f (s(t), m(t)). moreover, we assume that the source of media is a function of i(t), that is, f m (i(t)), as the source of media depends on the density of symptomatic populations. a schematic representation of the above biological mechanism of coronavirus in human upon which our model is based is shown in the figure 1 . the dynamics of novel coronavirus model is governed by the following system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations:the susceptible individual is recruited into the population with a constant inflow rate λ s and decreased by a natural mortality mortality rate δ s . here, β s α a represents the transmission coefficient of the asymptomatic individuals to susceptible, β s α i is the transmission coefficient of symptomatic infected classes to the susceptible, and β s α h denotes transmission coefficient of the hospitalized classes to susceptible population. we consider β s is the disease transmission coefficient for both the infectiousness of covid-19 and contact rates, with adjustment factors α a (for asymptomatic classes), α i (for symptomatic classes) and α h (for hospitalized individuals).albeit, coronavirus is supposed to be spread completely by symptomatic populations, a very lower rate of transmission by asymptomatic populations cannot even be ruled out. the adjustment parameter α a ≥ 0 take into accounts for varying levels of hygiene preventions through asymptomatic, an analogous explanation can be drawn to the adjustment parameters α i and α h during symptomatic and hospitalization, respectively. as the asymptomatic, symptomatic and hospitalization programmes and hygiene preventions during asymptomatic, symptomatic and hospitalization were executed and enriched progressively after an epidemic of coronavirus, the spreading coefficients α a β s , α i β s and α h β s , asymptomatic, symptomatic and hospitalized rates could be modeled as a time-dependent parameters in computations. moreover, the interplay among susceptible and infected population (asymptomatic, symptomatic and hospitalized) is modeled utilizing standard homogeneous mixing incidence [35, 36] , in the form of total individuals. the rate of change of susceptible individuals can be represented by the following ordinary differential equation (ode):b. dynamics of exposed individuals e(t)the population who are exposed individuals but not yet developed clinical symptoms of coronavirus. the exposed individual is declined by asymptomatic individuals at the rate γ e and natural death at the rate δ e . the constant per-capita rate γ e modeled progression from the exposed individuals (e) to either the asymptomatic individuals (a) or symptomatic individuals (i); the constant q a (0 < q a < 1) represents budget for the rate of progress of population who move to either the asymptomatic partially-infectious class (a) or symptomatic class (i) at the per-capita rate γ e . the corresponding model dynamics for exposed population can be presented by the following ode:asymptomatic populations were exposed to the coronavirus but not infectious for the community.the exposed classes move to the asymptomatic classes at the rate γ e by a constant portion (1 − q a ).the asymptotic individuals progress to the recovered class at the per-capita rate ξ a and natural mortality rate δ a . the rate of change of asymptomatic individuals is govern by the following ode:the symptomatic individuals are produced after the progression of clinical symptoms of coronavirus (diagnosed by the clinicians) by the asymptomatic individuals. the exposed individuals move to the symptomatic classes at the per-capita rate γ e by a constant portion q a . the symptomatic or clinically ill individuals progress to the hospitalized or isolated class (h) at the percapita rate γ i and natural mortality rate δ i . it can be assumed that γ i , the per-capita rate at which symptomatic or clinically ill classes seek clinical attention and are therefore put into the hospitalized class, is bigger than γ e , the per-capita rate at which the exposed individuals progress to the asymptomatic classes. the clinically ill classes (class i) are moved to the recover classes without being diagnosed at the per-capita rate ξ i . the transmission dynamics of symptomatic populations are governed by the following ode: f. dynamics of recovered individuals r(t)it can be assumed that the recovered population have enduring immunity against coronavirus albeit to date this has neither been confirmed nor contradicted. the asymptomatic, symptomatic and hospitalized individuals recover from the coronavirus at the per-capita rates ξ a , ξ i and ξ h , respectively. the recovered individuals die at the per-capita rate δ r . the rate of change of recovered individuals can be written by the ode: we assume that the source of media related information index is proportional to the number of symptomatic individuals. the function f m (i) represents the growth of information index rate, which depend on the symptomatic individuals. while the coronavirus outbreaks, the world health organization (who), health agencies, social media, government and non-government organization become dynamic to spread the information or media awareness in concerning the prevalence of coronavirus.as for the function f m (i), one can consider any function satisfying f m (0) = 0 and f ′ m (i) > 0 [33] . the most easiest example is f m (i) = α m i with α m ∈ (0, 1), that is, i is linear function of the present prevalence of the coronavirus, which could represent for instance current standardized incidence of serious cases of the coronavirus [27] . one more example could be f m (i) = αmi 1+βmi , where i indicates the nonlinear increasing function for the prevalence of the coronavirus, which could be considered as a measure of the perceived risk for the infection rather than the original one [28, 37] . here α m represents the source rate of the information index and β m is half saturation constant. thus, we consider the following ode model for media awareness program:based on the above biological assumptions and schematic representation of coronavirus (see the figure 1 ) together with specific forms, we formulate a mathematical model of novel coronavirus with media awareness given by the following seven-dimensional nonlinear system of odes:the model is satisfied the following positive initial conditions:since the model system (8) monitors the dynamics of human population, all state variables are assumed to be positive.the basic reproduction number, symbolized by r 0 , is 'the expected number of secondary cases produced, in a completely susceptible population, by a typical infective individual' [38, 39] . the dimensionless basic reproduction number provides a threshold, which play a crucial role in determining the disease persists or dies out from the individual. in a more general way r 0 can be stated as the number of new infections created by a typical infective population at an infection free equilibrium. r 0 < 1 determines on average an infected population creates less than one new infected population during the course of its infective period, and the infection can die out. in reverse way, r 0 > 1 determines each infected population creates, on average, more than one new infection, and the disease can spread over the population. the basic reproduction number r 0 can be computed by using the concept of next generation matrix [38, 39] . in order to do this, we consider the nonnegative matrix f and the non-singular m−matrix v, expressing as the production of new-infection and transition part respectively, for the system (8), are described bythe jacobian matrix for the system (8), can be computed at an infection free state (e = a =represents the spectral radius for a next generation matrix f v −1 . thus, from the system (8), we get the basic reproductiona detailed elucidation on the computer simulations for the coronavirus model system (8) figure 2 designates the prcc results, which implies that the highest positively correlated parameters are the disease transmission coefficient rate β s , proportion rate of exposed individuals q a , the rate ξ h by which the hospitalized class converted to recovered class, the rate α h by which susceptible individuals converted to exposed class and the highly negatively correlated parameters are the rate ξ i by which symptomatic individuals become recovered, the rate γ i by which symptomatic individuals converted to hospitalized class, and the rate ξ a by which the asymptomatic individuals moved to recovered individuals, account for most uncertainty with respect to the symptomatic population. thus, our prcc analysis yields these 7 parameters β s , q a , ξ i , γ i , ξ h , α h and ξ a are the most effective parameters out of 17 parameters.therefore, we estimated the 7 parameters by using least square method.now, we have calibrated our coronavirus disease model (8) table iv ).the output of our model for daily new cases are shown in figure 3 . also, the observed daily new coronavirus cases are overlapped on the fig. 3 . it is also important to observe the total number of coronavirus cases in a province only. so, the observed daily cumulative confirmed coronavirus cases and the model simulation has been plotted in the fig. 4 .to assure the performance of our coronavirus system without media (8) where table iii .the fitting data enables us to quantify the basic reproduction number r 0 from the expression of (10 whereas the slope of the simulated curve is relatively high for the state kerala.to describe how best to diminish human impermanency and morbidity due to novel coronavirus, it is very essential to see the relative significance of various factors responsible for its transmission.the initial disease transmission is completely associated to the reproduction number r 0 , and we calculate the sensitivity indices with regard to r 0 , to the parameters for the system (8). the sensitivity indices describe us whether or not the infectious diseases will develop throughout the individulas. sensitivity analysis is mainly utilized to describe the robustness of the reproduction number r 0 to fluctuation in the system parameters. it also give us to identify the relative change in a state variable when a system parameter alters. the normalized forward sensitivity index for r 0 with respect to the parameter p is defined as follows:as we have the explicit expression for r 0 in (10), we obtain the analytical formulae for sensitivity indices of r 0 , γ r 0 p , to each of fourteen parameters stated in the table vi . as for example, the sensitivity index of r 0 with regards to β s isindependent of any parameters. this represents that r 0 is the increasing function with respect to β s . it implies that the probability of disease transmission has a high impact on coronavirus control and management. other parameters have their sensitivity indices are specified in the table vi .from the table vi , it can be noticed that some of the indices are positive and some of the indices are negative, which indicate that the indices having '+' signs increase the value of r 0 as one increase them and those having '-' signs decrease the value of r 0 , as they are increased.the most sensitive parameter is the disease transmission coefficient β s , where sensitivity index γ r 0 βs = 1 indicates that the increasing β s by 10% will increase r 0 by 10%. also, the sensitivity index of ξ a , that is, γ r 0 βs = − 0.844286 represents that increasing ξ a by 10% will decrease r 0 by 8.44286%. similarly, we can interpret the other parameters too.we plot the sensitivity indices of r 0 , for each of the model parameters using in the table vi has been shown in the figure 6 . in order to control the coronavirus outbreaks, we must target the most sensitive parameters who has the great impact in controlling the system dynamics. for instance, the disease transmission coefficient β s is the most effective parameter in controlling the coronavirus diseases, which can easily be identified from the figure 6 as well as in the table vi. to control the coronavirus outbreaks, the draw the contour plots for the r 0 with respect to the positively correlated parameters, namely disease transmission coefficient β s and the clinical outbreak rate q a for all the infected classes in the figure 7 . the contour plot represents the dependence of r 0 for the four states (kerala, delhi, west bengal, maharashtra) and the republic of india. contour plot indicates that for the higher values of β s and q a the reproduction number r 0 become high, which means the coronavirus may enter the stage-3 and it spread through the community. therefore, to control r 0 must be restrict the values of the transmission coefficient β s and the portion q a by which the exposed class become symptomatically ill. to keep the mortality rate as low as possible, we must be take the values of β s and q a as small as possible. the figure   6 and table vi represents that the adjust factors α a , α i and α h are positively correlated with the basic reproduction number r 0 . thus, we must have to reduce the adjust factors too. thus, we may conclude that to reduce the coronavirus disease outbreak we need to maintain social distancing, limit or stop taking fairs and theaters performances etc.to study the impact of media related awareness for the coronavirus disease we simulate our system (8) for four provinces, namely kerala, maharashtra, delhi, west bengal and the republic of india, with respect to the parameter values specified in the table i we also investigate the media related awareness for the novel coronavirus diseases for the republic of india and four provinces, namely kerala, maharashtra, west bengal and delhi, with respect to parameters listed in the table i and rest of the estimated parameters listed in the table   ii with initial individuals are listed in the table iv . the impact of media awareness effect for the daily cumulative confirmed cases of coronavirus diseases for symptomatic classes are shown in the to study the future outbreaks of coronavirus diseases, we simulate our system (8) for a long days of the infected individuals, namely asymptomatic individuals and symptomatic or clinically ill individuals for the parameters are listed in the table i and we have considered the estimated   parameters for the table ii in case of indian data only with initial population sizes are given in the table iv . the model simulation represented that the people from overall india can experience future epidemics if the control policies are not implemented more effectively, as shown in the figure 10 . the number of infected individuals (asymptomatic and symptomatic) are oscillate around 130 days and around 320 days. this can be interpreted as the reproduction number r 0 is always greater than unity in india (see the table v for india) . otherwise, we can say that the impact of media related awareness is a dynamic process and the media has a great impact in reducing the transmission of coronavirus outbreaks at the initial stage of an epidemic. the factors like low air temperature and as well low humidity has a great impact on the transmission of novel coronavirus [11] . moreover, to control the future outbreaks of novel coronavirus the media related awareness programme and the control strategy must be implemented properly. in this manuscript, we propose a compartmental epidemic model on novel coronavirus diseases by incorporating the effect of media awareness to predict and control the outbreak. in our model we noted that media awareness play a key role in generating public consciousness and encouraging disease measures [42] . in our proposed model, we consider two infectious individuals, namely asymptomatic and symptomatic individuals with former being a fast spreader of the coronavirus diseases. our model formulation is based on the work by gumel et al. [7] , where we estimate the system parameters based on the prcc sensitivity analysis at an early stage of the outbreak, in which the number of cumulative classes grow exponentially.we calibrated the proposed model to fit with the data from four different states, namely maharashtra, kerala, delhi, west bengal and the republic of india. the most important part is to perform the sensitivity analysis of 17 model parameters and its estimation. to identify the key input parameters which contributed to the symptomatic outcome, strongly assisted the implementation of an integrated policy for various measures, involving the epidemic during different phases of the diseases, we use the sensitivity analysis by using prcc techniques. prcc analysis yields the most sensitive parameters are β s , q a , γ i , α h , ξ a and ξ h out of 17 input parameters without incorporating media impact. then we estimated these 7 parameters based on the data from four different states and from the entire india. by fitting data on novel coronavirus cases during january 30, 2020 to march 31, 2020, in the four different states of india and the overall india to our proposed model, we were able to get estimates of the unknown parameters for our system.by fitting our proposed model (simply the classical model without considering media impact) system (8) with real data obtained from india covid-19 tracker (https://www.covid19india.org/), we were able to get acceptable estimations for the system parameters and curve fitting, as shown in the figures 3 and 4 . to ensure the performance of our system without media, we compute the numerical errors, namely e m ae and e rm se . within the reasonable set of parameters, the model simulations without incorporating media awareness, obtained relatively good fits to novel coronavirus data, as plotted in the figures 3 and 4 .from the basic reproduction number r 0 in table v , it can be compared that the province kerala is highly effective by coronavirus diseases compare to other three provinces and the republic of india. nevertheless, our model-based analysis also demonstrates that the basic reproduction number in india and four different provinces remains greater than unity. the estimation of basic reproduction number r 0 indicates that the strengthen control involvements are mandatory to reduce and/or eradicate the future coronavirus diseases. thus, in this scenario the public must have to give utmost priority to stay home quarantine and successful the lock-down to combat against coronavirus pandemic. in this situation, media related awareness is mandatory to aware each and every people such that they can maintain social distancing, wear mask to protect themselves and avoid cultural programme.from the sensitivity indices (see table vi and the figure 6 ) for the basic reproduction number r 0 , we observed that the disease transmission coefficient β s and the portion q a clinical outbreak rates in all infected classes are positively correlated with r 0 . this indicates that to reduce coronavirus diseases the social distancing is the most important factor and we reduce the values for β s and q a to control the diseases. as we know, for r 0 < 1 the diseases can be died out. thus, to keep control the value of r 0 we must reduce β s and q a . while investigating the contour plot, we observe that for the lower values for β s and q a , the reproduction number can be controlled and reduced to less than unity, as shown in the figure 7 . thus, if we are able to control the social distancing, then we are able to control the basic reproduction number r 0 and hence we are able to eradicate the coronavirus diseases. since r 0 quantifies the initial epidemic transmission, its sensitivity indices enable us to establish the relative significance of various parameters in coronavirus transmission.from the sensitivity of basic reproduction number r 0 , we can conclude that the most effective control measures are the isolation of all close contacts and strengthening the self-protection ability for susceptible individuals. (table ii) thus, our calibrated model predicted that the increasing pattern of coronavirus diseases will be continued if the people not aware about the diseases. thus, the public must have to take the precautions and the health care agencies should concentrate on successful implementation of control mechanisms to reduce and/or eradicate the disease.in order to study the long-term dynamics of our model, we observed the most interesting switching phenomena, as plotted in the figure 10 . maybe this is happen due to the impact of media awareness as it is a dynamic process on disease epidemic. also, the media awareness has a good impact in mitigating the disease transmission at an initial stage of an epidemic. it is worthy to mention that the media impact is not always remain efficacious for mitigating disease transmission throughout the epidemic [43] . a detailed understanding of media awareness during an outbreak can help in the progression of an implementable public health strategy. a particular interest to the designers of such strategies are the effects of media awareness on some significant epidemic features such as the size of the peak, its timing and the whole number of diseases. our proposed model and its simulation, like those in earlier investigations [26-33, 37, 42, 43] , allow that quantifying these media effects gives additional insights.our model simulation and prediction suggests that the novel coronavirus diseases has a potentiality to exhibit oscillatory dynamics in the future but can be controllable by maintaining social distances and effectiveness of isolation or hospitalization. our model forecasts that isolation or hospitalization of populations with coronavirus symptoms, under stringent hygiene safeguards and social distancing, be able to effectual control in a community and may even eliminate the diseases.our study also suggests that the size and duration of an epidemic can be considerably affected by timely implementation of the hospitalization or isolation programme. based on the model simulations and prediction to control the coronavirus diseases, we provide some particular inferences to face with emerging diseases:i. avoidance of mass gatherings, rallies, social distancing and implement extensive lock-down;ii. provide essential personal safeguard to the staff who are involved in emergency services;iii. timely give the statistics of the coronavirus diseases to the community, including the number of asymptomatic cases, symptomatic cases, hospitalized cases and so on;iv. increase the media awareness to aware the population, organize the targeted health care education and self-protection and remove the public mental disorder. table i and rest of parameters are estimated and   taken from the table ii for different states and overall india. the initial values are taken from the table iv . [44] δ e mortality rate of exposed individuals 0.1945 ×10 −4 day −1 [44] δ a mortality rate of asymptomatic individuals 0.1945 ×10 −4 day −1 [44] δ i mortality rate of symptomatic individuals 0.03 day −1 [45] δ h mortality rate of hospitalized individuals 0.1945 ×10 −4 day −1 [44] δ r mortality rate of recovered individuals 0.1945 ×10 −4 day −1 [44] γ e conversion rate from exposed to asymptomatic individuals 1/7 day −1 [1] γ i rate at which symptomatic individuals become hospitalized -estimated q a proportion of exposed individuals -estimated ξ a rate of recovery from asymptomatic individuals -estimated ξ i rate of recovery from symptomatic individuals -estimated ξ h rate of recovery from hospitalized individuals -estimated δ m degradation of media related information 0.06 [29] η m rate of media response (0, 1) [32] d m media related information index rate 0.017 day −1 [29] α m source rate of the information index (0, 1) [27, 33] at the end of december 2019, the novel coronavirus pneumonia began to spread in wuhan, china. the world health organization (who) officially named this disease coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) on february 11, 2020. at the same time, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) announced that the new coronavirus was named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). since the outbreak, covid-19 has brought major harm and challenges to more than 200 countries and regions around the world. to date, more than 3,000,000 cases have been confirmed worldwide and the cumulative deaths have exceeded 200,000. 1, 2 covid-19 initially has been divided into four types: mild, moderate, severe, and critical cases. 3 however, with the global outbreak of coronavirus, there is increasing evidence that many infections of covid-19 are asymptomatic, but they can transmit the virus to others. asymptomatic infections refer to the positive detection of nucleic acid of sars-cov-2 in patient samples by reverse transcriptasepolymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), but have no typical clinical symptoms or signs, and no apparent abnormalities in images, including lung computed tomography (ct). 4 the clinical characteristics of asymptomatic infections and other types of covid-19 are shown in table 1 . early recognition of an infected person and cutting off the route of transmission are key points to control covid-19. however, most asymptomatic infections do not seek medical assistance due to no obvious clinical signs and poor prevention awareness, which contribute to the rapid spread of covid-19. therefore, it is a great challenge to prevent and control this specific type of patient globally, which requires more attention worldwide.asymptomatic infections have the same infectivity as symptomatic infections. 5 it has been reported that a 53year-old uk patient with an asymptomatic covid-19 infection may cause 11 infections. 6 a report pointed out that one asymptomatic person who experienced 19 days from contact with the source of infection to rt-pcr confirmation may have infected 5 people. 7 these asymptomatic cases may play a role in the transmission and therefore pose a significant challenge to infection control.estimates of the incidence of asymptomatic infections will clarify the epidemiological potential of covid-19 transmission and understanding of the true universality of the disease. there are many studies on the incidence of asymptomatic infections (table 2) , but each study has its limitations. first of all, due to insufficient awareness of asymptomatic infections and limited detection capabilities in the early stage of the outbreak, china's 1.6% may be underestimated. 8 on the contrary, another study investigated 565 japanese citizens evacuated from wuhan at the end of january and found that the incidence of asymptomatic infections was 30.8%. 9 another example is the "diamond princess" cruise ship, which was isolated in japanese waters in early february due to covid-19 infection found that the incidence of asymptomatic infections was 51.7%. 10 some researchers suggested that the above two studies overestimated the incidence, but in fact, a person truly has a higher risk if he has close contact with diagnosed or suspected infected persons in a relatively confined space. incidence of asymptomatic infections from other studies had some shortcomings, such as those in korea 11 and washington, 12 which showed inaccurate results due to the small sample size. one case in wuhan tracked the prevalence of 1391 children under 15 years old who had been in close contact with infected or suspected cases. 13 the incidence of asymptomatic infections in the children is lower than that of the whole population, we propose that it is related to the special immune response and ace2 level in the children's bodies. 14 according to these studies, the ability of asymptomatic infections to spread the virus is not low, and these patients are likely to cause a new round of outbreaks. therefore, finding asymptomatic infections is the key point for early prevention and control of covid-19 worldwide.the incubation period is the approximate time from the first exposure to the virus until the clinical symptoms or signs onset, and patients can also transmit the virus in this period. 15 asymptomatic infections have no special incubation due to no clinical signs. however, a recent research found that the viral load detected in asymptomatic populations were similar to that in symptomatic patients, indicating that asymptomatic infections have the potential for transmission, which may occur early in the course of infection. 16 since the viral nucleic acid positivity refers to that the virus load in samples reaches a certain limit, but the infectivity mainly depends on whether the virus is in a reproductive state. 17 that is, sometimes, despite ongoing high viral loads, no live virus can be isolated, which means that viral nucleic acid positivity does not indicate infectivity. 18 it is also proved by a clinical study in which the recovered covid-19 patients who had no obvious clinical symptoms were detected to be positive for sars-cov-2 by hyper-sensitive viral nucleic acid re-examination methods, but these patients had not caused new infections. 19 due to the limited data from current studies, we think that it is necessary for us to be highly vigilant to asymptomatic infections. moreover, viral nucleic acid positivity has been reported not to be always considered, and more clinical studies are still needed to verify that. a previous study found that the median period of asymptomatic patients from viral nucleic acid positive to negative was 9.5 days, the longest was up to 21 days among the 24 asymptomatic cases. 20 then in another study found that the median period from contact to diagnosis and the last positive nucleic acid test was 19 days (8e24 days) and 21.5 days (10e36 days), respectively. 21 the median period from diagnosis to negative nucleic acid test was 7.5 days (2e20 days) with normal or atypical chest ct infections and 12.5 days (8e22 days) with typical ct findings. 21 however, an asymptomatic infection should be quarantined for 14 days until now, 22 more studies are still needed to assess the infectivity duration of asymptomatic cases. and if necessary, more attention should be paid to some special infectious individuals who need longer segregation due to the result of nucleic acid test.the most likely source of asymptomatic infections is close contacts of patients who have been diagnosed or suspected, and family clusters have been presented before. also, colleagues, friends, and people who coincide with the trajectories of diagnosed or suspected patients are all regarded as high-risk populations. familial cluster has made the epidemic challenging to prevent and control. some family members do not have any clinical manifestations, but the nucleic acid test result is positive, and this has become a major difficulty in the prevention and treatment of covid-19. in one case report, all three of the family members were diagnosed with covid-19, and only one family member had clinical symptoms. 23 another family cluster report showed that the first patient was in good health without clinical manifestations, including fever and cough, and denied having primary diseases. he went to the local hospital for treatment only because of urticaria. the patient stated that he had lived in the local area for a long time and had not been to the epidemic area. however, the investigation of the disease control experts found that the patient had close contact with his relatives in hubei province one week before the onset of symptoms. finally, by investigating the family members and close contacts of the patient, three pulmonary ct scans were normal, but the nucleic acid test results were positive. 24 family members of covid-19 patients, even without any symptoms, should be closely monitored and examined to rule out infection. these cases also highlight the need for a close epidemiological investigation to prevent the omission of possible sources of contamination.different individuals may have different clinical signs. studies have shown that asymptomatic infections are more common in populations of young and middle-aged individuals with functional performance status without underlying diseases. it was reported that asymptomatic cases were more common in middle-aged people in shenzhen (median age:49 years, 30.9% between 30 and 49 years) 25 and a few younger people in nanjing (median age:32.5 years). 20 above all, age and body condition may play an important role in the severity of covid-19, and this is related to different immune responses and other potential pathogenesis.similar to sars-cov, sars-cov-2 invades cells by using angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as its receptor. 26 because ace2-mediated angiotensin ii (ang ll) degradation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of severe lung failure after a viral infection, the severity of the virus infection is closely related to the maturity and binding capacity of ace2. 27 therefore, we supposed that a lower level of ace2 and weaker binding capacity with sars-cov-2 should be a major factor that leads to the absence of any clinical manifestations for asymptomatic infections. it has been reported that only a specific mild immune response is caused by the sars-cov-2 invasion in asymptomatic patients. 28 however, more clinical samples should be collected, and a relative examination of ace2 should be performed and compared for different types of covid-19 cases, as this would be helpful to explain its pathogenesis.the main mode of transmission of covid-19 is through droplet and contact transmission and high-concentration aerosols. droplet transmission occurs when nearby people ingest or inhale respiratory droplets (produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes). the successful isolation of live virus from throat swabs is a significant difference from sars, suggesting that viral replication in upper respiratory tissues is active and that sars-cov-2 is more effective than sars-cov in spreading through active shedding of pharyngeal viruses. 18 a german team found that some people with covid-19 had high levels of virus in their throat swabs when their initial symptoms were mild, meaning that the pathogen was quickly released and transmitted to others by coughing or sneezing (droplet transmission). 29 this means that protective measures, including wearing protective masks, can prevent infection with new coronavirus to a certain extent.most people with an asymptomatic infection do not seek medical assistance due to no obvious clinical signs and poor prevention awareness. more epidemiological methods, including close contact screening, cluster epidemic surveys, and follow-up surveys of the source of infection, were used to identify people with asymptomatic infections. the significance of asymptomatic infections as a source of infection depends on the distribution in the population and the amount and duration of virus elimination. however, clinical symptoms are hidden, and we can only rely on immunology or nucleic acid detection technology to obtain information about the infection; therefore, this kind of infectious source cannot be effectively identified, making it very difficult to prevent and control. nucleic acid testing should be performed in persons who have contacted diagnosed or suspected covid-19 patients. a person with an asymptomatic infection should be quarantined for 14 days. 22 after the quarantine period expires, in principle, those who have negative test results for two consecutive samples of nucleic acid (sampling interval of at least 24 h) can be released from quarantine. if symptoms occurred during quarantine, the person should be admitted immediately. however, due to the limitations of specimen collection and detection methods, the influence of the high false-negative rate of the rt-pcr should be paid attention to, which may lead to missed diagnosis or delay in effective diagnosis. 30 for this purpose, the combination of repeated nucleic acid detection and chest ct imaging examination should be effectively carried out for those highly suspected sars-cov-2 infections. 31the latest guidelines from the chinese health authorities indicate, 3 for the treatment of covid-19, suspected and confirmed cases should be treated in isolated hospitals with effective isolation and protection conditions. divided into (1) general treatment: close monitoring of vital signs and symptomatic support treatment. (2) antiviral therapy: patients with a positive nucleic acid test result can be given ainterferon, lopinavir/ritonavir, ribavirin, chloroquine phosphate, etc. (3) mechanical ventilation treatment and rehabilitation plasma treatment for severe patients. (4) traditional chinese medicine treatment.there is currently controversy regarding the treatment of asymptomatic infections. some researchers supported that antiviral therapy could fasten viral clearance on asymptomatic infections. 20, 24 while, it has been reported that isolation and close observation are enough for asymptomatic infections. in one report, lopinavir/ritonavir and abidol were not reported to be effective in improving symptoms or accelerating viral clearance. 32 it was also reported that despite the treatment of aerosolized interferon (ifn) a2b, and two tablets of lopinavir/ritonavir (200mg/ 50 mg) were used twice a day for 10 days, viral nucleic acid results were still positive, which showed that these antiviral drugs did not seem to be effective. in addition, side effects were observed after antiviral therapy, such as liver impairment. 33 therefore, antiviral treatments not suggested for asymptomatic infections now, maybe more clinical studies are needed to further confirm its effectiveness. until now, isolation and close observation are regarded as a better option for these asymptomatic infections.a few people with an asymptomatic infection may develop into symptomatic cases during isolation, but the vast majority will heal on their own. a study of 24 asymptomatic patients showed that all asymptomatic patients did not develop severe disease or death, of which 18 (75.0%) were virus cleared after antiviral treatment, 9 were discharged from the hospital, and 9 were kept in the hospital for observation. in particular, one case was positive again even after the nucleic acid test negative for twice. 20 they can only be discharged after having at least two consecutive negative nucleic acid test results (tested 24 h apart). 2 some patients turn positive again after being discharged, so further isolation treatment and continuous nucleic acid testing can also be recommended for discharged patients. it is recommended to continue the isolation management, and health examinations should be continued for 14 days after being discharged, and regular follow-up visits should be conducted in the 2nd and 4th weeks after being discharged. 3 this manuscript reviewed the epidemiological characteristics and prevention measures of people with an asymptomatic infection of covid-19. however, the research evidence is very limited, and the specific characteristics of asymptomatic infections need to be further clarified. in summary, rigorous epidemiological investigations and laboratory testing are helpful in identifying people with asymptomatic infection. to better prevent and control the risk of covid-19 disease, it is recommended to screen for high-risk populations such as close contacts, especially in one confined space with diagnosed or suspected infected patients, which will be helpful for early control this global epidemic effectively.(sars-cov-2). since the outbreak, covid-19 has brought major harm and challenges to more than 200 countries and regions around the world. to date, more than 3,000,000 cases have been confirmed worldwide and the cumulative deaths have exceeded 200,000. 1, 2 covid-19 initially has been divided into four types: mild, moderate, severe, and critical cases. 3 however, with the global outbreak of coronavirus, there is increasing evidence that many infections of covid-19 are asymptomatic, but they can transmit the virus to others. asymptomatic infections refer to the positive detection of nucleic acids of sars-cov-2 in patient samples by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), but have no typical clinical symptoms or signs, and no apparent abnormalities in images, including lung ct. 4 the clinical characteristics of asymptomatic infections and other types of covid-19 is shown in table 1 . early recognition of an infected person and cutting off the route of transmission are key points to control covid-19. however, most asymptomatic infections do not seek medical assistance due to no obvious clinical signs and poor prevention awareness, which contribute to the rapid spread of covid-19. therefore, it is a great challenge to prevent and control this specific type of patient globally, which requires more attention worldwide.asymptomatic infections have the same infectivity as symptomatic infections. 5 it has been reported that a 53-year-old uk patient with an asymptomatic covid-19 infection may cause 11 infections. 6 a report pointed out that one asymptomatic person who had been infected with viral nucleic acid for 19 days from contact with the source of infection may have spread to 5 people. 7 these asymptomatic cases may play a role in the transmission and therefore pose a significant challenge to infection control.estimates of the incidence of asymptomatic infections will clarify the epidemiological potential of covid-19 transmission and understanding of the true universality of the disease. there are many studies on the incidence of asymptomatic infections ( table 2) , but each study has its limitations. first of all, due to insufficient awareness of asymptomatic infections and limited detection capabilities in the early stage of the outbreak, china's 1.6% may be underestimated. 8 on the contrary, another study investigated 565 japanese citizens evacuated from wuhan at the end of january and found that the incidence of asymptomatic infections was 30.8%. 9 another example is the "diamond princess" cruise ship, which was isolated in japanese waters in early february due to covid-19 infection found that the incidence of asymptomatic infections was 51.7%. 10 some researchers suggested that the above two studies overestimated the incidence, but in fact, a person truly has a higher risk if he has close contact with diagnosed or suspected infected persons in a relatively confined space. incidence of asymptomatic infections from other studies had some shortcomings, such as those in korea 11 and washington 12 , which showed inaccurate results due to the small sample size. one case in wuhan tracked the prevalence of 1391 children under 15 years old who had been in close contact with infected or suspected cases. 13 the incidence of asymptomatic infections in the children is lower than that of the whole population, we propose that it is related with the special immune response and ace2 level in the children bodies. 14 according to these studies, the ability of asymptomatic infections to spread the virus is not low, and these patients are likely to cause a new round of outbreaks. therefore, finding asymptomatic infections is the key point for early prevention and control of covid-19worldwide.the incubation period is the approximate time from the first exposure to the virus until the clinical symptoms or signs onset, and patients can also transmit the virus in this period. 15 asymptomatic infections have no special incubation due to no clinical signs. however, a recent research found that the viral load detected in asymptomatic populations was similar to that in symptomatic patients, indicating that asymptomatic infections have the potential for transmission, which may occur early in the course of infection. 16 since the viral nucleic acid positivity refers to that the virus load in samples reaches a certain limit, but the infectivity mainly depends on whether the virus is in a reproductive state. 17 that is, sometimes, despite ongoing high viral loads, no live virus can be isolated, which means that viral nucleic acid positivity does not indicate infectivity. 18 it is also proved by a clinical study in which the recovered covid-19 patients who had no obvious clinical symptoms were detected to be positive for sars-cov-2 by hyper-sensitive viral nucleic acid re-examination methods, but these patients had not caused new infections. 19 due to the limited data from current studies, we think that it is necessary for us to be highly vigilant to asymptomatic infections. moreover, viral nucleic acid positivity has been reported not to be always considered, and more clinical studies are still needed to verify that. a previous study found that the median period of asymptomatic patients from viral nucleic acid positive to negative was 9.5 days, the longest was up to 21 days among the 24 asymptomatic cases. 20 then in another study found that the median period from contact to diagnosis and the last positive nucleic acid test was 19 days (8-24 days) and 21.5 days (10-36 days), respectively. 21 the median period from diagnosis to negative nucleic acid test was 7.5 days (2-20 days) with normal or atypical chest computed tomography (ct) infections and 12.5 days (8-22 days) with typical ct findings. 21 however, an asymptomatic infection should be quarantined for 14 days until now, 22 more studies are still needed to assess the infectivity duration of asymptomatic cases. and if necessary, more attention should be paid for some special infectious individuals who need longer segregation due to the result of nucleic acid test.the most likely source of asymptomatic infections is close contacts of patients who have been diagnosed or suspected, and family clusters have been presented before. also, colleagues, friends, and persons who coincide with the trajectories of diagnosed or suspected patients are all regarded as high-risk populations.familial clustering has made the epidemic challenging to prevent and control. some family members do not have any clinical manifestations, but the nucleic acid test result is positive, and this has become a major difficulty in the prevention and treatment of covid-19. in one case report, all three of the family members were diagnosed with covid-19, and only one family member had clinical symptoms. 23 another family cluster report showed that the first patient was in good health without clinical manifestations, including fever and cough, and denied having primary diseases. he went to the local hospital for treatment only because of urticaria. the patient complained that he had lived in the local area for a long time and had not been to the epidemic area. however, the investigation of the disease control expert found that the patient had close contact with his relatives in hubei province one week before the onset of symptoms. finally, by investigating the family members and close contacts of the patient, three pulmonary ct scans were normal, but the nucleic acid test results were positive. 24 family members of covid-19 patients, even without any symptoms, should be closely monitored and examined to rule out infection. these similar to sars-cov, sars-cov-2 invades cells by using angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) as its receptor. 26 because ace2-mediated angiotensin ii (ang ll) degradation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of severe lung failure after a viral infection, the severity of the virus infection is closely related to the maturity and binding capacity of ace2. 27 therefore, we supposed that a lower level of ace2 and weaker binding capacity with sars-cov-2 should be a major factor that leads to the absence of any clinical manifestations for asymptomatic infections. it has been reported that only a specific mild immune response is caused by the sars-cov-2 invasion in asymptomatic patients. 28 however, more clinical samples should be collected, and a relative examination of ace2 should be performed and compared for different types of covid-19 cases, as this would be helpful to explain its pathogenesis.the main mode of transmission of covid-19 is through droplet and contact transmission and high-concentration aerosols. droplet transmission occurs when nearby people ingest or inhale respiratory droplets (produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes). the successful isolation of live virus from throat swabs is a significant difference from sars, suggesting that viral replication in upper respiratory tissues is active and that sars-cov-2 is more effective than sars-cov in spreading through active shedding of pharyngeal viruses. 18 a german team found that some people with covid-19 had high levels of virus in their throat swabs when their initial symptoms were mild, meaning that the pathogen was quickly released and transmitted to others by coughing or sneezing (droplet transmission). 29 with an asymptomatic infection should be quarantined for 14 days. 22 after the quarantine period expires, in principle, those who have negative test results for two consecutive samples of nucleic acid (sampling interval of at least 24 hours) can be released from quarantine. if symptoms occurred during quarantine, the person should be admitted immediately. however, due to the limitations of specimen collection and detection methods, the influence of the high false negative rate of the rt-pcr should be paid attention to, which may lead to missed diagnosis or delay in effective diagnosis. 30 for this purpose, combination of repeated nucleic acid detection and chest ct imaging examination should be effectively carried out for those highly suspected sars-cov-2infections. 31the latest guidelines from the chinese health authorities indicate, 3 there is currently controversy regarding the treatment of asymptomatic infections.some researchers supported that antiviral therapy could fasten viral clearance on asymptomatic infections. 20, 24 while, it has been reported that isolation and close observation is enough for asymptomatic infections. in one report, lopinavir/ritonavir and abidol were not reported to be effective in improving symptoms or accelerating viral clearance. 32 it was also reported that despite the treatment of aerosolized interferon (ifn) α2β, and two tablets of lopinavir/ritonavir (200mg/50mg) were used twice a day for 10 days, viral nucleic acid were still positive, which showed that these antiviral drugs did not seem to be effective. in addition, side effects were observed after antiviral therapy, such as liver impairment. 33 therefore, antiviral treatments not suggested for asymptomatic infections now, maybe more clinical studies are needed to further confirm its effectiveness. until now, isolation and close observation is regarded as a better option for these asymptomatic infections.a few people with an asymptomatic infection may develop into symptomatic cases during isolation, but the vast majority will heal on their own. a study of 24 asymptomatic patients showed that all asymptomatic patients did not develop severe disease or death, of which 18 (75.0%) were virus cleared after antiviral treatment, 9were discharged from the hospital, and 9 were kept in the hospital for observation. in particular, one case was positive again even after the nucleic acid test negative for twice. 20 they can only be discharged after having at least two consecutive negative nucleic acid test results (tested 24 hours apart). 2 some patients turn positive again after being discharged, so further isolation treatment and continuous nucleic acid testing can also be recommended for discharged patients. it is recommended to continue the isolation management, and health examinations should be continued for 14 days after being discharged, and regular follow-up visits should be conducted in the 2nd and 4th weeks after being discharged. 3this manuscript reviewed the epidemiological characteristics and prevention measures of people with an asymptomatic infection of covid-19. however, the research evidence is very limited, and the specific characteristics of asymptomatic infections need to be further clarified. in summary, rigorous epidemiological investigations and laboratory testing are helpful in identifying people with asymptomatic infection. to better prevent and control the risk of covid-19 disease, it is recommended to screen for high-risk populations such as close contacts, especially in one confined space with diagnosed or suspected infected patients, which will be helpful for early control this global epidemic effectively. positive rt-pcr, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction; rr, respiratory rate; pa0 2, arterial partial pressure of oxygen; fi0 2, oxygen concentration; icu, intensive care unit. table 2 the incidence of asymptomatic infections of covid-19 in different studies. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is the causation agent of a novel respiratory infectious coronavirus disease (termed covid-2019), which has disseminated quickly among people. since its initial outbreak in wuhan, china was reported in december 2019, there have been 1279722 cases worldwide up to april 7, 2020 [1, 2] . covid-19 is highly contagious with rapid transmission, and people are general susceptible to this new coronavirus.patients with sars-cov-2 infection may show covid-19-related symptoms. asymptomatic carriers have also been found [3] . for instance, there are reports documenting a substantial fraction of truly asymptomatic individuals with covid-19 from the diamond princess cruise ship (approximately 18%) and japanese evacuees out of wuhan [4, 5] . there are a few other case reports in various journals in table 1 [3, [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] . these reports mainly focus on the estimated asymptomatic proportion, mode of transmission, some radiological findings, and solutions to identify and isolate asymptomatic patients. emerging evidence suggests that patients with clinical manifestations are contagious, with analysis of their clinical characteristics [11, 12] . however, there are few studies reported the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of asymptomatic patients. a few studies have described the clinical characteristics of asymptomatic patients, but some of the asymptomatic patients in these studies were asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis but later developed symptoms, so they cannot truly represent the clinical characteristics of asymptomatic patients [13, 14] . here, we identified a total of 26 persistently asymptomatic patients with positive test results for sars-cov-2 nucleic acid to determine the clinical characteristics and asymptomatic carrier transmission of covid-19 infection.a total of 26 hospitalized patients with a sars-cov-2 epidemiological history and positive sars-cov-2 nucleic acid test results were identified to analyze the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19infected asymptomatic carriers. these patients' sputum and throat swab were sampled for sars-cov-2 confirmation and tested using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr). an epidemiological history was defined as a close contact with a diagnosed or possible case of covid-19 or had a history of residence in or travel to wuhan. informed consent was obtained from each registered patient and this study was reviewed and approved by the medical ethics committee of zhengzhou university.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 5detailed information regarding the epidemiological history and information of other family members of each patient was obtained. we also collected information regarding patient age, sex, previous medical history, clinical manifestations, laboratory tests, chest computed tomography (ct) scans, treatment measures, and prognosis.normally distributed continuous variables are presented as mean ± standard deviation (sd) and were compared using the t-test. non-normally distributed data are described as the median and were analyzed using the rank sum test of two groups. categorical variables are show as percentages. all statistical analysis was performed using the spss software version 22.0.a total of 26 patients with asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection were collected in this study, of whom 16 (61.5%) were men and 10 (38.5%) were women. the median age was 29.5 years (2 to 80 years) and the age of 18 patients (69.2%) ranged from 20 to 60 years. two patients had a history of smoking (both for over 20 years), with an average of 20 cigarettes per day. two patients had a history of hypertension and one had coronary heart disease.regarding the source of the infection, six patients (23.0%) has a history of travel to wuhan, with no clear contact with a source of infection. exact contacts with confirmed or possible patients were found in eighteen cases (69.2%), and the contact history was unknown in two patients (7.8%). among patients with a clear source of infection, 10 cases (55.6%) had previously talked to or had a meal with a confirmed covid-19 patient, and eight cases (44.4%) lived with a confirmed patient. the sources of infection in these cases included confirmed patients with clinical symptoms (n=16, 88.8%), a possible covid-19 patient with clinical symptoms (n=1, 5.6%), and a confirmed patient without clinical symptoms (n=1, 5.6%). in addition, 22 cases (84.6%) were a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 6 found to be correlated with a local cluster. the close contacts of these 26 enrolled patients were traced, and only two sars-cov-2-infected patients were identified.in the six patients with a recent history of travel to wuhan, the median period from leaving wuhan to a covid-19 diagnosis was 15 days (14-19 days). in 18 patients with a clear source of infection, the median period from contact with a confirmed or possible case to the confirmed to diagnosis was 19 days (8-24 days). this period was longer than 14 days in 14 cases (77.8%) and over 20 days in four cases (22.2%) ( figure 1 ).the initial leukocyte counts were slightly lower than the normal value in two patients, slightly higher in one patient, and normal in the other patients. the lymphocyte count was normal in 26 patients. regarding coagulation function, there was an elevated platelet count in four patients, higher prothrombin time in one patient, and increased d-dimer in four patients. procalcitonin was slightly elevated in three cases, all of which were less than 1 ng/ml, and c-reactive protein was normal in 26 patients. additionally, investigations revealed three patients with reduced albumin, four patients with mildly abnormal transaminase, and two patients with slightly elevated creatinine levels. five patients had slightly lower serum sodium concentration and one patient had higher serum potassium concentration. lactate dehydrogenase and creatine kinase levels were slightly elevated in three patients and one patient, respectively. there was no statistical significance between the initial and following results for all the above indicators (p>0.05).being sars-cov-2-free was defined as two consecutive negative nucleic acid results with an interval of at least 24 hours. the period from diagnosis to being confirmed sars-cov-2-free was 10 days in 15 patients, 20 days in 23 patients, and more than 20 days in three patients (20 days, 20 days, and 22 days, respectively). the exact time of contact with a confirmed or possible covid-19 case was clear in 18 patients. the median period from contact to the last positive covid-19 nucleic acid test was 21.5 days (10 to 36 days) and in four patients this was over 30 days. in a case originating from wuhan, the period from leaving wuhan to the last positive covid-19 nucleic acid test was 35 days (figure 1 ). there were positive test results for sars-cov-2 following a negative result in two patients. in particular, in one patient, the sars-cov-2 nucleic acid tests repeatedly had positive and negative results (figure 1 ).a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 7chest ct scans were performed an average of 3-4 days after the initial ct examination and each patient had at least two ct scans. the results of the first ct scan of the 26 patients were as follows: nine patients (34.6%) with normal ct scans, 10 patients (38.5%) with typical manifestations (patch-like, ground-glass opacities distributed in the extrapulmonary zone), seven patients with changes in a unilateral lung, and three patients with changes in bilateral lungs. in seven patients (26.9%), ct scans showed atypical ct manifestations (chronic inflammation and small cord shadows), including a small strip shadows in three patients (11.5%), small nodular shadows in one patient, thickened bronchial vascular bundles in two patients, and a small manifestation of chronic inflammation in one patient.in patients with normal ct scans on admission, the chest ct manifestations did not significantly change during hospitalization and seven patients with atypical ct manifestations also showed no significant changes on chest ct scans. for patients with typical chest ct manifestations, improved chest cts were observed in seven patients and three patients showed improvement after an initial progression of lesions ( figure 2 ).patients with normal or atypical chest ct findings had a relatively short period from diagnosis to continuous negative covid-19 nucleic acid results, with a median period of 7.5 days (2-20 days). in patients with typical patchy or ground-glass opacities, the median period was 12.5 days (8-22 days). this difference was statistically significant (p <0.01). of the 10 patients with typical chest ct manifestations, seven patients showed improved chest ct results that synchronized with the negative sars-cov-2 nucleic acid test result, while three patients had a marked improvement in ct results without a negative sars-cov-2 nucleic acid test result. all patients were isolated and treated with one or more antiviral drugs. recombinant human alpha-1b interferon nebulized inhalation (5 million u bid for adults and 3 million u bid for children) was administered in 25 cases.twenty-two patients received oral lopinavir/ritonavir (400 mg/ 100 mg bid for adults, 200 mg/ 50 mg qd for children). five adult patients were treated with oral arbidol (200 mg tid) and one patient developed purulent tonsillitis during hospitalization and was treated with antibiotics.one patient developed nausea during hospitalization, which may have been caused by lopinavir/ritonavir. another case developed a transient fever, which was related to suppurative tonsillitis. this patient felt better after antibiotic treatment. neither of the two symptoms was associated with sars-cov-2 infection. the remaining cases were asymptomatic during hospitalization. discharge criteria for covid-19 were as follows: 1) normal body temperature for more than 3 days; 2) significantly improved respiratory symptoms; 3) significantly improved chest radiography; and 4) two consecutive negative sars-cov-2 nucleic acid test results (sampling interval at least 1 day). all 26 patients were discharged from the hospital. the period from admission to discharge was ranged from 10 to 24 days, with a median of 13 days.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 9sars-cov-2, a new coronavirus that recently appeared, has rapidly spread across many countries and regions around the world. this new coronavirus is reported to be more contagious than atypical pneumonia (sars) andmiddle eastern respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers) [15] [16] [17] . covid-19 is mainly seen a mild to moderate conditions, with a mortality rate of 3.2% [11] . isolating sources of infection is an important measure to control this current epidemic [2, 18] . infected individuals with clinical symptoms can be tracked according to their clinical symptoms, while those who are asymptomatic, especially those without an epidemiological history, are difficult to track. these asymptomatic cases may also capable of transmitting sars-cov-2, which could cause difficulties in covid-19 prevention and control. at present, there are few studies of asymptomatic disease, most of which focus on the proportion of asymptomatic patients and the evidence of asymptomatic transmission.the description of clinical features of asymptomatic patients is technically a description of asymptomatic disease at the time of diagnosis, with some patients going on to develop symptoms. there is also little research on asymptomatic epidemiology. the infectiousness and effect of the asymptomatic epidemiological characteristics and disease clinical characteristics of dynamic change are not clear. therefore, this study focused on persistently asymptomatic cases of covid-19.by tracing and isolating the contacts of people who were diagnosed or possible covid-19 patients, this study identified a total of 26 asymptomatic patients. asymptomatic carriers were found to be of any age, mainly concentrated in the 20-60 years age range and are characterized by local clusters. disease transmission from two asymptomatic patients was included in this study. infected patients may have clinical symptoms or may be asymptomatic. the study found that asymptomatic cases were mostly infected by symptomatic patients and a few were infected by asymptomatic patients. only two asymptomatic of the 26 enrolled asymptomatic patients infected others. therefore, we speculate that asymptomatic carriers may be less infectious than symptomatic patients.in asymptomatic carriers, there was a long period between contact with the infection source to diagnosis, with a median of 19 days. these asymptomatic carriers were identified only when they contacted diagnosed or possible covid-19 patients, suggesting the difficulty in detecting these asymptomatic carriers. the period from diagnosis to negative nucleic acid test tests was within 20 days for 23 (88.5%) patients ( figure 1 ). the duration of sars-cov-2 infection in asymptomatic patients is unclear. the median period from contact with diagnosed or possible cases to the last positive nucleic acid test was 21.5 days (10-36 days). most patients will miss the a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t real last positive assays since nucleic acid tests for sars-cov-2 were not performed every day, so this time might be shorter than the actual time. the period was longer than 30 days in four patients, of whom one patient talked with a covid-19 patient for 1 hour, without contact with any other confirmed or possible patients contacted, 35 days previously (figure 1 ). in addition, this period of 35 days was for a patient with a wuhanrelated history (figure 1) . therefore, asymptomatic patients may carry sars-cov-2 for more than one month, suggesting that this virus is carried in asymptomatic patients for a long period.in two patients, there was a positive nucleic acid test after an initial negative result and one patient had recurrent alternation of positive and negative results. this phenomenon may be caused by false-negative results of assays and detection can be affected by factors including the specimens, reagents, and operations. thus, positive nucleic acid tests cannot be used as the only criterion for covid-19 diagnosis. standardized operation and repeated verifications are required to improve the positive rate. patients with normal chest cts had a shorter period from diagnosis to being sars-cov-2-negative than those with typical ct changes. in some patients, conversion of nucleic acid test results from positive to negative was synchronized with an improvement in chest ct findings, but this change may also occur later than the improvement on ct. therefore, ct improvement cannot be used to indicate that a patient is not infectious.indices of blood cell counts, liver and renal function, and inflammation in asymptomatic patients did not change significantly during the disease. reduced lymphocyte and leukocyte counts are characteristics of clinically symptomatic covid-19, but these changes were not common in the asymptomatic patients in this study. chest ct in asymptomatic patients can be normal or present with typical ground-glass opacities, usually limited to a unilateral lung but sometimes occurring in bilateral lungs. three patients with asymptomatic infections developed lung infections during treatment and then improved. although these asymptomatic patients appear normal, some relatively light damage may have already been produced.this study also has some limitation. for example, only 26 patients were included in this study. in addition, this retrospective analysis did not include daily nucleic acid tests for sars-cov-2. large-scale prospective studies are needed to validate our findings.in summary, asymptomatic infections can occur at any age and appear to be correlated with local clusters of diseases. asymptomatic transmission may be less contagious but should still be recognized as an infection source for covid-19 transmission. there were no significant changes in the biochemical and inflammatory variables in these patients. however, changes on chest ct may occur in these patients. it is necessary to note a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t multiple patchy ground glass opacities can be seen in the right lung on february 6. the infection progressed more than before on february 11. on february 16, the signs of viral pneumonia in the right lung improved slightly, and on february 26, the chest ct improved.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p tthe emergence of the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) in 2012 had attracted an international attention as the virus had cause multiple healthcare associated outbreaks within the kingdom of saudi arabia [1, 2, 6, 8, 9, 13] and outside saudi arabia [4, 5, 22, 23] . as of december 7, 2018, the world health organization reported 2267 laboratory-confirmed cases worldwide and at least 804 related deaths in 27 countries [24] . despite the increase in the number of cases, the actual incidence of mers-cov among hospitalized patients with community acquired pneumonia is low. in a longitudinal study from 2012 to 2016, a total of 2657 patients were screened for mers-cov and only 20 (0.74%) tested positive [25] . the study showed that mers-cov was rare in admitted patients with community acquired pneumonia and influenza was more common than mers [25] . the explanation for the increased number of cases is the occurrence of multiple outbreaks as the hallmark of mers-cov transmission [26] . the main patterns of mers-cov transmissions are: sporadic community cases from presumed non-human exposure, family clusters resulting from contact with an infected family index case, and healthcare-acquired infections between patients and from patients to healthcare workers [5] . in addition, there were multiple occasions of transmission within the same family and that travel associated transmission of mers-cov poses a concern [27, 28] .there are reports of the role of asymptomatic individuals in the transmission of mers-cov, however, the exact role is not known [26] . many viral infections are associated with asymptomatic, subclinical, or very mild symptoms. in the case of poliomyelitis, 95% of those infected remain asymptomatic, yet they are still capable of spreading the virus (cdc). in one study, asymptomatic rhinovirus infection was four times https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmaid.2018.12.003 received 2 october 2018; received in revised form 7 december 2018; accepted 10 december 2018 as common as symptomatic infection [29] . another study found asymptomatic carriage of influenza virus to be 5.2-35.5% [30] . during the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak, a study examined the rate of positive healthcare workers (hcws) who were exposed to patients with sars before infection control measures were applied [31] . asymptomatic sars based on serology was 13% compared to severe disease in 82% and 4% of mild symptoms [31] . in this article, we systematically review the available literature on the occurrence of asymptomatic mers-cov infection and shed light on the possible role of those in the transmission of the virus.we searched medline and scopus databases for articles in accordance with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) guidelines (http://www. prismastatement.org) [32] . we included the following terms: #1: "middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus" or "mers" or "mers-cov" or "novel coronavirus" #2: "asymptomatic" # 3: "transmission" #4: #1 and #2 and #3.early in the course of the mers outbreak, the term mers was not yet coined and the term novel coronavirus was used. thus, we also conducted a focused search to identify any missed relevant publications.we included articles describing transmission of mers-cov in animals and humans from asymptomatic infection.initial screening of retrieved articles excluded articles which were: review articles, and those which did not include specific rates or cases of asymptomatic mers-cov infection. a total of 10 papers were retrieved and included in the final analysis and review ( fig. 1 , table 1 ) [6, [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] . we included studies in humans describing the incidence of asymptomatic mers [6, [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] and two additional studies in animals [42, 43] .in a rabbit model of mers-cov infection, mers-cov was detected in the lungs without significant histopathological changes and no symptoms [42] . in an evaluation of contacts of a positive dromedary camel, 2 (5.8%) of 34 dromedary contacts tested positive and were asymptomatic [43] .the proportion of asymptomatic mers probably remained unchanged, or even declined with implementation of personal protection measures; asymptomatic case identification increased by change in testing recommendations. this change had also resulted in the reduction of case-fatality rate from 65% mainly in severe cases to 44.5% in mixed population [44] . this reduction was partially related to an increase in the rate of asymptomatic individuals from 0% to 28.6% in early reports [44] . a summary of studies addressing asymptomatic mers cases in humans is shown in table 1 . in early cases from april 2012 to october 2013, there were 144 laboratory-confirmed mers-cov cases including 18 (12.5%) asymptomatic individuals [33] . in one study from saudi arabia, 4 (0.8%) of 520 asymptomatic hcws screened were positive [35] . in south korea, 3 (0.5%) of 591 asymptomatic hcws were detected positive via pcr screening [34] . in a recent study from saudi arabia, 17 out of 879 hcws tested positive for mers-cov and 53% of them were asymptomatic by pcr [41] .in a seroepidemiologic survey conducted in south korea, of 1610 asymptomatic hcws and non-hcws contacts only 1 non-hcw (0.06%) tested positive [36] . asymptomatic persons were identified in the jeddah outbreak. there were 64 (25%) asymptomatic of 255 individual tested including 41 hcws and 23 non-hcws [6] . in a total of 280 household contacts, 12 individuals were identified by pcr or serology of whom 11 (3.9%) were asymptomatic [37] . asymptomatic individuals were less likely to have underlying condition (42%) compared to 86% of fatal cases [45] . however, serologic evaluation of contacts and patients may underestimate the extent of the disease as antibodies wane over time and is related to disease severity [46] . of particular interest is that most of the identified pediatric cases were asymptomatic with no clear explanation [38] [39] [40] 47] . overall, the detection rate of mers cases among asymptomatic contacts when screened was less than 1% in the available studies included in this review ( table 1 ). the proportion of asymptomatic cases among all confirmed cases, widely differed in the available reports. the differences between the study setting and the populations studied did not allow any reliable comparison. according to the last who update 21% of the 2228 cases confirmed mers-cov cases were reported to have no or mild symptoms while 46% had severe disease or died [48] .imported mers-cov cases were treated in healthcare settings. more than 20 travel-related mers-cov had occurred as summarized previously [28] . however, there were no reported asymptomatic cases. travel related mers-cov occurred infrequently among pilgrims performing umrah [28, 49] .the role of asymptomatic individuals was evaluated in a family cluster [50] . the index case in that study was thought to have acquired mers infection from an unrecognized mild or asymptomatic case [50] . however, the link was not established in this case. one study suggested the possible transmission of mers from an asymptomatic individual. the index case of a family cluster acquired infection 14 days after hospitalization suggesting that the infection occurred from an asymptomatic person [50] . this is based on an incubation period of 7-10 days. in the south korea outbreak, 82 contacts of an asymptomatic or mild mers-cov infection were tested by rt-pcr and serology and all of them were negative [51] . in a study from abu dhabi, of 34 casepatients, 91% were asymptomatic with no evidence of transmission [52] . in another study, most of the cases were either asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic [53] . mers-cov was cultured from a patient with mild respiratory symptoms confirming the ability of such patients to transmit mers-cov [54] .the role of asymptomatic travelers in the potential transmission of the infection to household contacts is a concern. however, so far no such event had been reported. the risk of mers-cov infection seems to be low in travelers [49] , and there were multiple cases described in travelers [28] . the risk of mers-cov was evaluated in a mathematical study and the model included all middle east countries with reported locally acquired cases, and 41% of the travel-imported cases outside the middle east were in the top ten countries [55] . although, india was the most at-risk country, there had been no reported cases from this country.the initial 2012 hajj season started few weeks after the first case of mers-cov infection was reported [56] . however, there were no reported cases among pilgrims in 2012 [57] [58] [59] [60] . thus, the saudi ministry of health utilized the mers-cov case definition for monitoring any occurrence of the disease during hajj for early detection of cases among pilgrims [61] . an enhanced surveillance system was established for the detection of mers-cov cases. the disease remains limited to the middle table 1 a summary of studies addressing asymptomatic mers cases in humans. east with the exception of sporadic travel associated infections and the large outbreak in south korea [22, 28, 62, 63] . in one study conducted september 2012-october 2013, 77 travelers from the middle east met the possible case definition for mers and two of them tested positive for mers [28] . in a small study of 14 retuning pilgrims, all patients were hospitalized for respiratory symptoms and none of them tested positive for mers-cov in marseille france in october 2013 [64] . furthermore, nasopharyngeal swabs were collected from suspected cases and all samples tested negative for mers-cov [56] . another small study of 7 pilgrims in 2014 in austria, none had mers-cov [65] . mathematical models estimated the risk of mers-cov among pilgrims to be 1-7 cases per hajj, and 3-10 per umrah per year [66] . it was estimated that 6.2 pilgrims may develop mers-cov symptoms during the hajj, and 4 pilgrims may become infected and return home before symptoms development [67] . however, systematic screening of pilgrims for mers-cov showed no positive cases [59, 65, [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] [81] . systematic surveillance of returning pilgrims was done in several studies in egypt, iran, france, ghana, iran and saudi arabia [64, 68, 71, 72] . few studies examined mers-cov among symptomatic pilgrims and none was positive for mers-cov) [56, 59, 65, 81] . there had been an extensive surveillance of mers-cov among pilgrims and only 4 cases have been linked to umrah (mini-hajj) [82] [83] [84] [85] [86] .the occurrence of asymptomatic infection of mers and the possibility of transmission to other individuals is of particular importance for healthcare settings and for travelers. these rt-pcr positive persons with mild or no symptoms are usually identified when conducting laboratory screening tests as part of active case monitoring or contact investigations. asymptomatic health care workers may contribute to healthcare associated transmission and asymptomatic travelers may potentially transmit the infection to household contacts. the who recommends the isolation of asymptomatic pcr-positive individuals and daily follow up for the occurrence of symptoms. those individuals should be tested at least weekly and hcws should not return to work until two consecutive upper respiratory tract samples are rt-pcr negative [87] . in a study of severe cases and those with mild disease, the latter group cleared mers-cov at an earlier time than patients with severe disease whereby on day 12, 30% of mild cases and 76% of severe cases were positive for mers-cov by pcr [88] . another study reported prolonged nasal virus rna detection (more than 5 weeks) from one asymptomatic rt-pcr positive health-care worker [89] .in conclusion, the proportion of asymptomatic mers cases were detected with increasing frequency as the disease progressed overtime. those patients were less likely to have comorbid disease and may contribute to the transmission of the virus.the early pneumonia cases were identified in december 2019 with unclear origin. 1 the novel coronavirus has been named by the world health organization as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , which shares similarity to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. 2 especially, older people and individuals with coexisting diseases are particularly susceptible to covid-19 and are more commonly seen in patients with severe diseases. 1 now, the covid-19 has spread to many countries over the past 2 months and become a serious threat to public health worldwide.to impede the outbreak of covid-19, series of precautionary measures nationwide have been taken such as activation of emergency response system, quarantine, isolating suspicious cases, community surveillance, and epidemiological investigations. 3 as a result, the transmission of covid- 19 in china has been effectively blocked.however, the occurrence of asymptomatic patients (asp) has posed a novel challenge regarding the epidemic of covid-19. 1,4 asp are not quarantined but also have considerable infectivity. 5 the viral loads in asp were quantitatively similar to those identified in patients with symptoms. 5 meanwhile, the asp have not been diagnosed as the laboratory-confirmed cases. 6 therefore, imported cases and asp have become novel challenges in china.modeling-based work may provide critical insight into the impact of interventions and epidemic of covid-19. 7 recently, many models have been developed to estimation the epidemic trend and evaluate the effect of controlled interventions. [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] however, the epidemic data have been updated and the number of laboratory-confirmed cases fall to zero on march 20 at several provinces in china.therefore, novel data-driven model should be reconstructed to better characterize the epidemic features of covid-19.in current work, we developed a refined model with two novel features. we considered the effect of maximum capacity in healthcare facility on the recovery rate of infected cases. meanwhile, we also incorporated the asp into our model. owing to the epidemiological features of covid-19 and declaration of public health emergency in jiangsu and anhui provinces immediately following the closure of wuhan on 23 january 2020, interventions such as isolation, precaution, and quarantine have been implemented.therefore, the migration of population was cutdown and we did not consider wuhan returnees since 23 january as previously described. 17, 18 the effect of wuhan returnees after 23 january was discussed in supporting information discussion 1.1. to simplify model construction, we divided the total population in jiangsu and anhui provinces into five variables, termed as susceptible population with no resistance to disease (s), closely observed population (c, including the individuals under public health intervention or people with potentially close contacts), infected patients (i), recovered (r, cured/dead), and asp (a). the total infected population (i) was of interest for monitoring the epidemic of covid-19.the complete model was formulated as follows: respectively. ε is the assumed self-recovery rate for asp. 19-21 ν 1 and ν 2 denote the transition from close contacts to asymptomatic and infected/diagnosed patients, respectively. ν 3 is the transition rate from asp to diagnosed cases. [19] [20] [21] μ describes the average recovery rate for infected patients. since the health-care facility/workers in the hospital has maximum capacity, a reasonable assumption argues that higher number of inpatients or quarantined cases will lower the recovery rate. as the number of infected cases decreased, the clinical care and treatments may be improved. these concerns may lead to threshold behavior in recovery rate. we used a hill function to depict the dependence of μ on asymptomatic to diagnosed patients, in which k denotes the threshold and n is the cooperativity.the initial values of susceptible population "s" were set to be the total population in jiangsu and anhui provinces as described above.the initial value for "i" and "r" commission of health in jiangsu andanhui provinces (r = 0). 15, 16 the initial values of close contacts and asp were estimated.the simplified version of the model without the effect of asp and health-care capacity related recovery rate is described by followinga more complex "mutant" model without the effect of asp was described by following equations: the parameter estimation was performed using the potterswheel. 22 the trust region method was adopted. during simulation, initial values of s, i, and r were fixed. other parameters and initial conditions were allowed to vary with lognormal distributions. a fit sequence with at least 400 stochastic runs was implemented to exclude the potential local minima in parametric space. the basic χ 2 criteria was used for model identification (χ 2 /n < 1, where n denotes the number of data points). 22 local sensitivity analysis provides dynamic responses to an infinitesimal disturbance in kinetic parameters and initial conditions.a dynamic system can be defined by x'=f (x, θ), where x and θ donate state and parameter vector, respectively. relative sensitivity s is defined asnote that this sensitivity coefficient is only locally valid in parameter space.the ordinary differential equations were integrated using ode23s solver in matlab (r2018b).we first formulated a simplified model similar to the seir model 23 which captured the major interactions among susceptible population, close contacts, infected patients and recovered cases (model 2). with reasonable guess for parameter values, we performed model fitting to reported data from jiangsu province. 15 a total of 400 stochastic runs were performed. however, the best fit from 400 runs did not satisfy the basic criteria for a convincible model (χ 2 /n > 1 for both infected and recovered population, figure s1a ). a speculation argued that the actual recovery was slower than model predictions at early time points ( figure s1a, right) . notably, the temporal recovery exhibited a moderate cooperativity with a hill coefficient 4.857 (95% confidence interval: [4.7, 5 .014]) implying that the recovery rate μ might be dynamically adjusted. since the number of health-care facility/workers in hospital might affect the maximally admitted inpatients and medical treatment, we modified the recovery rate μ by multiplying a scaling factor (model 3). we assumed that higher infected/quarantined cases may lower the recovery rate. the cooperativity was also subject to model fitting. results suggested that the χ 2 penalty from model fitting was significantly decreased ( figure s1b) . however, the model could not faithfully match the infected numbers (χ 2 /n > 1; figure s1b , left). since the occurrence of asp had raised extensive concerns about a possible outbreak and community spread of covid-19, [19] [20] [21] we then incorporated the effect of asymptomatic cases (model 1, the complete model). we found the fitting was markedly improved and several fits to epidemic data from jiangsu province had even reached a χ 2 /n < 0.1 ( figure 1a ; parameters were shown in table s1 ). we further fit our model to data from anhui province (kinetic parameters, c and a were reestimated, table s1 ) and the results showed that the revised model formulation could also faithfully match the data ( figure 1b) .these results suggested that the effect of asp and threshold behaviors in health-care capacity contributed significantly to model fitting.we next performed local sensitivity analysis to identify critical parameters for covid-19 epidemic. we used maximal infected patients as the metric to evaluate the local sensitivity. we found that only a small fraction of parameters exhibited strong or moderate sensitivities. the sensitivity patterns were qualitatively similar between jiangsu and anhui model (figure 2a,b) . the discharge rate λ showed strong negative regulation for maximally infected patients in both models (figure 2a,b) . the transition from close contacts to asp (ν 1 ) and contacts between susceptible population and close contacts (β 1 ) profoundly increased the maximal infection. not surprisingly, the size of susceptible population ("s") and close contacts ("c") positively contributed to viral outbreak. these results characterized the locally sensitive parameters which potentially affected viral outbreaks.to avoid fitting bias toward local minimum in parametric space, we then performed model fitting from stochastic parameter sets. totally, 400 runs were performed and the top 50% (200 sets, with a maximal total χ 2 /n = 0.0904) were selected for analysis. we found that parameters related to asp were not significantly different between jiangsu and anhui provinces suggesting that asymptomatic cases had similar epidemic (ν 3 , ν 1 , ε, and β 2 , figure 3 ). the discharge rate λ in anhui province was faster ( figure 4) . meanwhile, patient recovery rate μ was also significantly larger than that in jiangsu province ( figure 3) , which is consistent with the epidemic data that all infected patients were cured before march 9 (upto 6 days ahead compared with jiangsu province). during stochastic fitting, we found that the initial number of asp approached zero (~0.0024 in jiangsu province and~0.1268 in anhui province). therefore, we set initial asp to zero. the parameter "n" in jiangsu and anhui model was only slightly larger than one implying minimal cooperativity. however, the f i g u r e 3 fit sequence analysis. all parameters and close contacts ("c") were subject to stochastic parameter fitting procedure. 400 stochastic runs were performed and the best 200 sets were selected for analysis. the distribution of each fitted parameters was shown. blue area: jiangsu province; orange area: anhui province. note that several parameters were shown in log 10 scale. the asterisks indicated that the estimated parameters in jiangsu and anhui province were not statistically different threshold level for health-care capacity (k) in jiangsu province was significantly larger than that in anhui province (p = 2.6982 × 10 −7 , increased and finally reached a high peak (at least two orders of magnitude larger than the initial patient numbers). an exemplified case was shown ( figure 4a ). when asp = 100 and controlled intervention was slightly reduced (ie, mutual contact was increased, f = 1.5), the infected cases were rapidly tolerated ( figure 4a, left) . however, if f was increased to 4, there would be an outbreak ( figure 4a, right) . extensive figure 4c ). these results suggested that strongly controlled intervention to reduce mutual contact is highly effective to block viral outbreak.there are more and more imported patients in china since the coronavirus outbreak surges worldwide. we then investigated the effect of imported cases to viral epidemic. we varied the initial population of imported patients and contact factor f to explore whether an outbreak would be initiated. we found that mutual contact (contact factor f) among different populations (susceptible, close contact, infected and asymptomatic) was also the major determinant for viral outbreak in both jiangsu and anhui models ( figure 5a,b) . the latent period and the outbreak size were both sensitive to changes in contact factor f in both jiangsu and anhui models ( figure 5a,b) . we further considered dynamic importation. a daily importation occurs with different numbers of imported patients. results suggested that the mutual contact markedly affected the outbreak size (see supporting information discussion 1.2). taken together, lowering mutual contact remains a sensitive strategy to impede coronavirus spreading.the latent periods and outbreak sizes were compared for identical contact factor f and initial imported/asymptomatic populations. results suggested that the latent period for imported cases was uniformly longer than that of asymptomatic cases ( figure 6a) . accordingly, the outbreak size for asymptomatic cases were larger than that of imported cases ( figure 6b) . collectively, the simulation suggested that asp can more rapidly trigger a coronavirus outbreak with larger outbreak sizes.in current work, we used modeling-based approaches to investigate the impact of asymptomatic and imported cases on the potentially new outbreaks. we developed a model with two novel features: which is consistent with a recent report. 19 from the sensitivity analysis, we found that regulating β 2 or β 3 alone plays neglectable role to block coronavirus outbreak. there is no feasible way to alter total population s and discharge rate λ either.the seemingly only way to impede viral transmission is simultaneously lowering mutual contacts (β i ). we found that the latent periods and outbreak sizes are remarkably sensitive to the contact factor f (note that the surface plot was removed if there was no predicted outbreak). under strong interventions (f approaches 1), our model predictions suggested that even a total of 500 imported or asp will not lead to coronavirus outbreak ( figures 5 and 6 tests should be used for individuals in dense populations (eg, students, teachers, or health-care workers). the extensive tests may help to identify the hidden asp to impede potential outbreaks. since april 1, china has begun to include detected asymptomatic cases in daily report. 24 therefore, strong interventions should be taken especially for asp owing to the unpredictable and covert features.liu et al 25 recently showed a model with "asymptomatic patients." however, the "asymptomatic patients" all become diagnosed ones with symptoms and are more likely to be "pre-symptomatic." 26 this is in contrast with the recent definition for asp. [19] [20] [21] our model also has limitations. we did not incorporate death into our model similar to some recent models. 8 despite the limitations above, the current study faithfully fits the epidemic data. our model has predicted that the asymptomatic cases are factors with higher risk compared with imported cases and emphasized the critical role of strict interventions. the demographic stochasticity is worthy of further investigations using stochastic models.acknowledgment this work is supported by national natural science foundation of china (31971185, 31970897).these differences between covid-19 and sars or mers require a change in epidemic response plan. only by fully researching the various characteristics and mechanisms of asymptomatic infections can we lay a theoretical foundation for deployment of the next steps in its control. with that purpose, this review summarizes the epidemic status, transmission characteristics and clinical features of asymptomatic patients with sars-cov-2 infection.confirmed asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infections continue to increase multiple studies indicate that asymptomatic infections make up a large percentage of confirmed covid-19 cases. a retrospective study in beijing collected data for 262 individuals with diagnosed covid-19 from 20 january to 10 february 2020, and 13 were asymptomatic (5.0%) [18] . in addition, 126 persons of german nationality were evacuated from hubei province to frankfurt, germany, on 1 february 2020. after strict screening and testing, two were confirmed to have sars-cov-2 infection, yet both patients were asymptomatic [19] . a further epidemiological investigation (28 january to 9 february 2020) was conducted in clinics and communities in nanjing, jiangsu province, china. the survey screened the close contacts of patients with confirmed or suspected infections. the results of nucleic acid screening identified 24 confirmed sars-cov-2 carriers without any obvious symptoms. of these, five patients developed typical symptoms during the subsequent hospitalization, while the other 19 patients remained asymptomatic [15] . furthermore, the ministry of health, labor and welfare of japan announced on 5 march 2020 that among 696 people on the 'diamond princess' cruise ship infected with sars-cov-2, 410 were asymptomatic [20] . all of the above indicates that in the community there may be a large number of unidentified asymptomatic people with contagious infections (figure 1 ).asymptomatic patients with sars-cov-2 infection may carry high viral loads sars-cov-2 has been detected in nasopharyngeal swabs and sputum samples from asymptomatic patients [11] . the viral load detected in asymptomatic individuals was similar to that of symptomatic patients suggesting that people without symptoms have a strong ability to transmit the virus to others [21] . in addition, sars-cov-2 has been detected in the blood and stool samples of seemingly well patients [22] [23] [24] , and compared with the virus in respiratory secretions, the virus in feces may take longer to clear [25] .in general, patients with symptoms of sars-cov-2 infection are admitted to hospital for detection and treatment under isolation. however, asymptomatic individuals may not be recognized by healthcare workers, and do not selfisolate or seek treatment. bai et al. [14] showed that the incubation period of an asymptomatic patient was 19 days. what is more, hu et al. [15] reported that the communicable period of asymptomatic covid-19 patient may be as high as 29 days.transmission of sars-cov-2 by asymptomatic persons is implicated in crowd & family-clustered outbreaks multiple studies have found that there are asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infections in the process of crowds and family-clustered outbreaks. among a family of six in shenzhen who traveled to wuhan from 29 december 2019 to 4 january 2020, five members were identified with covid-19, including an asymptomatic 10-year-old boy [11] . a family of three who traveled on 22 january 2020 from wuhan to guangzhou, china, through the high-speed rail tested positive for sars-cov-2, but only one developed clinical symptoms, and the other two members had no signs or clinical symptoms [26] . infants also are not spared from sars-cov-2 infection. the first pediatric case was confirmed asymptomatic in singapore. the infant was part of a family transmission cluster, in which its parents and their live-in helper were symptomatic [22] . furthermore, asymptomatic covid-19 patients can even become the source of infection in contagious outbreaks among families. sars-cov-2 transmission from an asymptomatic infected person returning home from wuhan on 10 january 2020 was suspected as the cause of a family cluster epidemic of five members in anyang, china [14] . in fact, any infected person, symptomatic or asymptomatic, may be the first to transmit sars-cov-2 to other members in a clustered and family-clustered outbreak. the source of infection and susceptible population exist in both the male and female of any age, and the disease performance is both symptomatic and asymptomatic. the sars-cov-2 is mainly transmitted through respiratory droplets and close contact; furthermore, there is a possibility of aerosol transmission when it is in a relatively closed environment and exposed to high concentrations of aerosol for a long time. the sars-cov-2 has an incubation period of 1-14 days, but mostly range 3-7 days. in addition, many studies have confirmed the existence of a large number of cluster outbreaks and family cluster outbreaks.at present, cases of covid-19 continue to occur around the world, so the rate of asymptomatic infections cannot be accurately determined. identification and isolation of asymptomatic patients is essential to control virus outbreaks.various studies have shown that asymptomatic persons with sars-cov-2 infection are generally not discovered until after their families, relatives, friends or close contacts have symptoms that are diagnosed [11, 14, 21, 22, [26] [27] [28] . therefore, in order to not miss any infected patients, it is best to perform screening for all close contacts of patients with confirmed or suspected infections [15, 19] . the main tests used to diagnosis covid-19 are the sars-cov-2 nucleic acid test (nat) of nasopharyngeal swab samples, the sars-cov-2 specific serological test and chest computed tomography (ct) scanning. nat by reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr) is well established as the gold standard for the diagnosis of covid-19 [29] , but still the test is associated with false negatives due to problems with sample collection and the operating procedures [30, 31] . therefore, for cases that are highly suspicious of covid-19 but test negatively by nat, diagnosis via screening with a sars-cov-2 specific serological test and chest ct scan may be of great value [28, 32, 33] . in one study of 285 covid-19 patients with acute antibody responses to sars-cov-2, in 19 days after the onset of symptoms, 100% of the patients were positive for antiviral igg. importantly, the seroconversion of igg and igm occurs simultaneously or sequentially, and the titers of igg and igm were found to be stable within 6 days after seroconversion [34] . however, if the nat result is negative and the sars-cov-2 specific serological test is positive, the diagnosis still cannot be directly confirmed. it is necessary to continue to observe and conduct multiple nat tests until either the nat result is positive or the sars-cov-2 specific serological test is determined to be a false positive. a study conducted in the usa used 1020serum specimens that were previously tested for hsv serology by western blotting in 2018 and 2019 (prior to sars-cov-2 circulation) and detected one false positive using the abbott sars-cov-2 igg test [35] . in addition, many studies on sars-cov-2 specific serological tests have shown that it is difficult to achieve 100% sensitivity and specificity [36, 37] . thus, for now, the diagnosis of covid-19 remains a challenge globally. no test method is completely mature and reliable, but the combination of multiple testing methods can improve the effectiveness of screening [38] and avoid missed diagnoses and misdiagnoses as much as possible [33] . it is important to note that some patients with covid-19 may experience only mild symptoms and signs. kam et al. [22] reported a 6-month-old infant who developed a temperature of 38.5 • c during hospitalization, although for only 1 h. hoehl et al. [19] reported a 48-year-old german woman who experienced a mild rash and minimal pharyngitis after admission. therefore, persons with covid-19 may appear essentially asymptomatic, but do experience very mild symptoms and can enter the recovery period without being detected. therefore, at the time of consultation healthcare workers should thoroughly interview the patient for any recollection of discomfort.variety of people with sars-cov-2 infection may be asymptomatic asymptomatic infection is not limited to young or middle-aged adults [21] , but also children [11] , infants [22] and even the elderly [27] . hu et al. [15] showed that asymptomatic patients were relatively young, with a median age of 14 years in seven cases. in addition, asymptomatic infections were found in both males [19] and females [14] .in general, asymptomatic infected people do not suffer seriously, but the virus they transmit can cause others to develop severe disease [15] . those with asymptomatic infections did not always show lung changes such as ground glass opacities after ct examination, and may appear normal [28] . yet, in other cases the typical changes in ct examination may be observed [27] . changes in laboratory test indicators typical of sars-cov-2 infection have been found in some asymptomatic patients [11, 22, 27] , but for others, indicators are normal (table 1) [14, 19, 26] .the number of people with covid-19 continues to increase. asymptomatic infections are hidden and easily overlooked. however, their potential to spread the virus cannot be underestimated, as the viral load they carried and their ability to infect close contacts may be similar to those of symptomatic individuals. in addition, asymptomatic infections can occur in any age range and either gender, and there may be no abnormalities in laboratory tests or ct examination. this, complete isolation of all sources of infection in the covid-19 outbreak is a major problem. for this reason, measures of home quarantine and centralized isolation for observation over time have been and will continue to be necessary; otherwise, the pandemic will continue to cause great harm to the public and disease control will become even more complicated. anyone who has had close contact with a confirmed or suspected case of covid-19 should be closely monitored and screened; and therefore, the centralized isolation for medical observation and related tests of covid-19 should be applied to the greatest extent possible, even if they have no symptoms. healthcare workers should give close attention to screening consultations and collect detailed information, including the presence of even very slight symptoms. overall, we have objectively summarized the current transmission and clinical characteristics of asymptomatic patients with covid-19, which are deserve for further study and exploration in the future.at present, the number of confirmed cases of covid-19 continues to increase, and various prevention and control measures continue to be needed. with more in-depth research on covid-19, systematic treatment plans and guidelines have been improved, so it is particularly important for patients to be diagnosed early and admitted to hospital for isolation treatment. unfortunately, asymptomatic patients with sars-cov-2 infection are a silent source of infection, who can unknowingly place others at risk for infection. therefore, as more research is conducted to understand the mechanisms of sars-cov-2 infection and to develop treatment methods, efforts to prevent the transmission of sars-cov-2 by asymptomatic individuals will be the key to reducing the spread of covid-19. while the epidemics of sars, mers and covid-19, were all caused by coronaviruses and shared other similarities, there are many differences among these diseases as well. the number of cases of covid-19 far exceeds the case numbers for the other epidemics, and of these three diseases, covid-19 is the only one to cause a global pandemic. notably, this, once insignificant and benign family of viruses, the coronavirus, has now generated three serious epidemics in the last two decades, indicating the importance of remaining alert to this class of emerging infectious diseases. this will be a long-term challenge, and we cannot yet predict when the next coronavirus outbreak will occur. what we can do is carry out more research and testing and develop better plans to handle such outbreaks in order to be better prepared when they emerge.• the covid-19 that originated in wuhan, china in december 2019, is caused by sars-cov-2 infection. covid-19 is now a global pandemic, and almost all countries in the world have recognized its seriousness and implemented various measures to curb its spread. • the numbers of confirmed asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infections continue to increase, indicating that a large number of unidentified asymptomatic individuals with contagious infections may remain undetected in communities. in general, these patients do not know to self-isolate or seek treatment, and thus, are unlikely to be detected by healthcare workers. however, their potential to spread the virus cannot be underestimated, and emerging evidence indicates that they are an important source of transmission. • sars-cov-2 has been detected in nasopharyngeal swabs, sputum samples, blood samples and stool samples from asymptomatic patients, and asymptomatic patients with sars-cov-2 infection can carry high viral loads. • the incubation period of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infections is complex and exists in the process of crowd and family-clustered outbreaks. in addition, asymptomatic patients are even the source of infection in contagious outbreaks among families. • asymptomatic infections can occur in patients of any age and either gender, and they may not exhibit any abnormalities on laboratory or computed tomography examinations. • the identification and isolation of asymptomatic patients are essential to controlling virus outbreaks. to avoid missing any infected patients, anyone who has had close contact with a confirmed or suspected case of infection should be closely monitored and screened. therefore, centralized isolation for medical observation and related tests for covid-19 need to be applied to the greatest extent possible, even among contacts who have no symptoms. healthcare workers should pay close attention to screening consultations and collect detailed information, including the presence of even very mild symptoms. • coronaviruses were once considered an insignificant, benign family of viral pathogens, but have now caused three major outbreaks of serious illness in the last two decades. thus, we must all stay alert to such emerging infectious viral diseases, and this will be a long-term challenge.study concept and design was performed by y xin. acquisition of the data was performed by j tan, s liu, l zhuang, l chen, m dong and j zhang. analysis and interpretation of the data was performed by j tan, s liu and l zhuang. drafting of the manuscript was performed by j tan and s liu. critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content was performed by y xin.supervision was performed by y xin. medjaden bioscience limited writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.coronavirus (cov) is a positive-sense single-stranded rna virus [1] . many kinds of mammals, such as hedgehog, pangolin, civet, and bat, can serve as storage hosts of coronavirus [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] . six covs have been identified to be pathogenic, including four endemic (hcov-oc43, −229e, −nl63, and -hku1) and two epidemic (sars-cov and mers-cov) viruses [7, 8] . a cluster of cases of pneumonia was reported in wuhan, hubei province, china, in december 2019. on 11 february 2020, the diseases named as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) by the world health organization (who), and coronavirus study group (csg) of the international committee proposed to name the new coronavirus as sars-cov-2. up to 2 march 2020, at least 80 151 cases were reported (http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2020-03/03/content_5486171.htm). most of the patients had a history of visiting hubei province or contacting people who had ever stayed in or passed by hubei province, or were exposed to symptoms [9] . some patients got infected through only asymptomatic contact. this study aimed to report the epidemic features and lab identification of a patient confirmed with covid-19 infection through only asymptomatic contact (fig. 1 ).a 44-year-old man, who lived in nanchang, jiangxi province, china, got a fever of 38.8°c on 27 january 2020. he wore a mask and drove himself to see a doctor in a local hospital in nanchang on 30 january 2020. he was immediately hospitalized in an isolation room. the pcr assay result was positive for the throat swab sample using a sars-cov-2 real-time rt-pcr kit (fig. 2) . the patient was an instructor in a university and visited the city of huangmei, hubei province. he stayed with his parents and his brother's family, but denied any exposure to a febrile patient or wild animals, or visits to wet markets, including the seafood market in wuhan.before the onset of symptoms, the patient, along with his wife and son, drove from nanchang to honghu city, hubei province, on 23 january 2020, where his parents and brother lived. they did not stop by any of the expressway service area. after arriving, they stayed at home and did not visit any public place in honghu city. in addition, his parents stayed at home for 20 days with his younger brother's family before they got back. his younger brother and one of his brother's children visited wuhan on 5 january and came home on 6 january 2020. after staying with his parents and brother's family for 3 days, the patient drove back to nanchang and arrived on 25 january. on the way back home, they stopped by tongshan service area, hubei province, without any close contact with other people. after arriving home in nanchang city, jiangxi province, none of them left their residence.the patient began to have a cough on 27 january 2020, and took cefalexin capsules by himself. fever symptoms appeared on 28 january, with a maximum temperature of 38.8°c, accompanied by cough, sore throat, headache, fatigue, muscle ache, joint ache, and other symptoms (fig. 3) . the symptoms continued until he went to the doctor. at the hospital's fever clinic, he underwent blood routine examination and lung computed tomography (ct) examination (fig. 4) .he was not obese and had no previous basic disease. on admission (30 january 2020), the physical examination fig. 1 the detailed onset timeline of the index patient revealed a body temperature of 38.8°c, a respiratory rate of 19-21 breaths per minute, a pulse of 62-88 per minute, and a blood pressure of 76/128 mmhg. the initial chest radiography showed a glass density shadow of both lungs ( fig. 4a-b) .on 31 january 2020, the blood routine examination revealed the following: white blood cell (wbc) count: 7.4 × 10 9 /l; lymphocyte (ly) count: 0.6 × 10 6 /l. another routine test on 31 january showed the wbc count of 4.4 × 10 9 /l and a decreased c-reactive protein level of 4.9 mg/l. the lung ct examination at 8:00 pm showed lung lesions significantly larger compared with those on the previous day.however, high-resolution computed tomography on 3 february 2020 (day 8 of illness), revealed multiple, ground-glass opacities located in both subpleural spaces ( fig. 4c-d) . the blood routine examination showed mild changes in neutrophil and lymphocyte counts. during admission, he developed nasal congestion, cough, and pleuritic chest discomfort.he received the following medicines treatment during hospitalization for 18 days. including: oral lopinavir/ritonavir (6.67/1.67 mg/kg/day [ before the patient's visit to honghu, his relatives, including his parents and brother's family, had no disease or infection through contact or clustering. after he was hospitalized, the results of the coronavirus conventional pcr assay of his wife, son, brother, and brother's wife performed once every other day were negative. no farmer's market was located near their residence. the patient did not go to any farmer's market. his wife and son, who were two close contacts with a final contact on 30 january 2020, had no symptoms or signs till 18 february 2020 (figs. 5 and 6 ).this patient was diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection. his pcr test was positive, but the test for seasonal influenza and adenovirus infection was negative, despite flulike symptoms and pneumonia during the first week of illness. in this case report, the covid-19 infection was diagnosed by a pcr test or based on clinical symptoms combined with a ct scan [10] . the duration from infection to the appearance of symptoms of sars-cov-2 was not exactly known [11] . generally, it was thought to be 14 days, but a research group at guangzhou reported the longest incubation period of 24 days [12] . in addition, asymptomatic transmission of sars-cov-2 is an important topic and asymptomatic infections of sars-cov-2 could complicate disease control [13] . the report of "diamond princess" showed that a large number of asymptomatic carriers might remain undiscovered in the community [14] . mao et al. reported that the asymptomatic ratio of covid-19 was 2.6% (2 out of 78 confirmed cases) [15] . nishiura et al. estimated 41.6% of cases among 565 japanese individuals evacuated from wuhan, china were asymptomatic case [16] . as of 4 april 2020, 150 asymptomatic case out of 915 confirmed cases were reported in hong kong, giving a ratio of 16.4% [17] . hu et al. provided evidence for transmission from an asymptomatic infector to close contacts that result in severe covid-19 pneumonia [18] . these findings suggest that asymptomatic carriers should be considered a source of covid-19 infection. in this study, the patient's wife, son, parents, and brother's family had no symptoms or signs between 5 january and 18 february 2020. after the patient was hospitalized, rt-pcr tests of his wife, son, brother, and brother's wife performed once every other day were negative. their pcr results were negative probably because the virus was eliminated due to the longtime interval or the viral load was too low to be detected, or the test results were false negative. moreover, the patient's parents and nephews a and b did not undergo the rt-pcr test for sars-cov-2 infection, and hence whether they were carriers was not confirmed. no suspected or confirmed cases were reported in nanchang within 14 days of the departure of the patient from the site on 23 january. therefore, it was difficult to predict who might have passed the virus to the patient; any of the relatives could have served as an intermediary of the virus except for his wife and son (fig. 7) .this case report highlighted the possibility of developing sars-cov-2 infection through an asymptomatic contact. it indicated the need for contact isolation, especially for those who returned from the epidemic area without any symptoms [19, 20] . in addition, this report suggested that, in the early phase of covid-19, routine screening could miss diagnosing patients who were virus carriers. the frequency of such transmissions of asymptomatic infection remains to be determined. the scale of transmission through an asymptomatic contact during the early phase of infection should be explored urgently.in conclusion, this report indicated that highlighting travel history is of paramount importance for the early detection and isolation of sars-cov-2 cases. the findings might be used as a reference for the prevention and control during this global outbreak of covid-19. in december 2019，a novel coronavirus, currently designated severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), formerly called 2019-ncov, was first identified in wuhan, china. sars-cov-2 caused a respiratory disease called coronavirus 2019 (covid-19) which was officially named by the world health organization (who) on february 11, 2020. covid-19 had caused severe illness and death in china and had spread to countries around the world [1] [2] [3] [4] . by march 30, 2020, a total of 82447 confirmed cases have been reported in china [5] . moreover, 552479 cases have been confirmed in other countries, mainly in america, italy and spain [5] . the main symptoms of covid-19 are fever, dry cough, fatigue, sputum production, shortness of breath, and sore throat [6] . asymptomatic infected individuals, called "asymptomatic carrier or transmitter", may also become the contagious source of sars-cov-2, and some of them progress rapidly, even resulting in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) with a high case-fatality rate [7] [8] [9] [10] . however, the positive rate of sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), which is the golden standard for the diagnosis of covid-19, is only about 30-50%. the high false-negative result rate of sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing inevitably increases the difficulty in managing the current 5 / 21 covid-19 outbreak as the misdiagnosed patients might miss the best timing for proper treatment and cause the spread of disease [11] . the chest computed tomography (ct), especially high-resolution ct (hrct) is also the main diagnostic method followed by "pneumonia diagnosis and treatment guideline for sars-cov-2 infection (trial version 5)" issued by national health commission of the people's republic of china ( http://www.nhc.gov.cn/). ct findings plays an important role in detecting lung abnormalities, facilitate the early identification of the diseases.we aimed to characterize the ct imaging features and clinical course of asymptomatic patients with covid-19 pneumonia admitted to our hospital, in order to have a more comprehensive understanding of asymptomatic patients with covid-19, facilitate detection and isolation of patients with covid-19 pneumonia, especially in the highly suspicious, asymptomatic cases with negative nucleic acid testing.the study was conducted in accordance with the principles of the declaration of helsinki. the study was a retrospective analysis and approved by the ethics committee of renmin hospital of wuhan university (approved number: wdry 2020-k009), which waived the requirement for patients' informed consent referring to the cioms guideline. asymptomatic patients with covid-19 pneumonia confirmed by fluorescence reverse-transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (frt-pcr) assay for sars-cov-2 in renmin hospital of wuhan university between january 1, 2020 and february 23, 2020 were enrolled. all patients rechecked every 3-7 days. the clinical data including gender, age, course, comorbidities, epidemiologic characteristics, laboratory results and ct findings were collected and analyzed retrospectively.all ct scans were obtained using one of the following scanners: optima ct680, revolution ct, bright speed (ge healthcare system, milwaukee, wi, usa & gehw healthcare system, beijing, china). scans were done from the level of the thoracic entrance to the inferior level of the costophrenic angle with patients in a supine, head-first position and breath-holding manner, and the following parameters were used: slice thickness 1.0~1.25 mm, tube voltage 120 kv. the tube current was regulated by an automatic exposure control system (asir, ge, healthcare). images were reconstructed with a slice thickness of 0.625mm and an interval of 0.625 mm, respectively, using ge aw workstation (aw 4.6 and aw4.7). the reconstructed ct images were transmitted to the workstation and picture archiving and communication systems (pacs) for multiplanar reconstruction post-processing.all ct images were independently reviewed by two experienced thoracic radiologists blinded to the clinical data. all discrepancies were resolved by consensus. the features of ct imaging were focused in the following aspects: figure 1 ). ggo was defined as hazy opacity that did not obscure underlying bronchial and vascular margins; consolidation was the opacity with obscuration of bronchial and vascular structures; reticulation is a collection of innumerable small linear opacities; halo sign is a ground-glass opacity surrounding a nodule or mass; interlobular septal thickening is thin linear opacities at right angles to and in contact with the lateral pleural surfaces near the lung bases; crazy-paving pattern was defined as thickened interlobular septa and intralobular lines superimposed on a background of ggo, resembling irregularly shaped paving stones [12] .the clinical characteristics and laboratory results of this cohort are presented in table1 another ct feature, consolidation was presented in 3 cases (5.2%). compared with the ct images at admission, there were evolution of ct manifestations in 10 patients at the first reexamination after admission. lesions were fused to form patchy, crazy-paving signs, or diffusion pattern, distributed in multiple lung lobes or bilateral, and a few patients showed consolidation in ct imaging. in these patients, there were significantly lower lymphocyte count(p=0.009), higher c-reactive protein (p=0.023) than that in other cases. the average days of hospitalization is 19.80±10.82 days, and the hospitalization of patients (28.60±7.55 day) in progression group was significantly longer than others(p=0.016).six previously known coronaviruses, including the sars coronavirus (sars cov), which first appeared in china in 2003, and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers cov), which first appeared in the middle east in september 2012, are zoonoses and highly pathogenic coronaviruses. the novel coronavirus sars-cov-2, as the 7th coronavirus discovered, has high contagion and pathogenicity.so far, more than 700,000 thousand cases with covid-19 have been confirmed in the world. with the global outbreak of sars-cov-2, more and more facts show that many patients with covid-19 pneumonia have no symptoms or only mild symptoms, but they can transmit sars-cov-2 to others [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] . the latest research showed that 30% -60% of patients with sars-cov-2 infected had no symptoms or mild symptoms, but their ability to spread the virus was not low, and these covert sars-cov-2 infections could be seeding new outbreaks [7] . it is essential to fully understand the asymptomatic or mild symptomatic cases (covert sars-cov-2 infections) to control the epidemic of sars-cov-2.the diagnosis of covid-19 is mainly based on the epidemiological history, symptoms, laboratory results, imaging findings and virus nucleic acid detection according to the chinese guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment plan of sars-cov-2 infection by the national health commission (trial version 5) [13] , although sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing is the golden standard for the diagnosis of covid-19, due to qualification of the specimen sampling from nasopharyngeal swab and the detection kit, the positive rate of sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing is just about 30-50% [11] . furthermore, the supply of the detection kit limits its widespread use in the outbreak of covid-19, especially in those areas with limited health care resources. chest ct scan is of great value in the diagnosis of covid-19 in the outbreak of covid-19.in this cohort, all 58 asymptomatic cases with covid-19 pneumonia confirmed by sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing and ct scan had history of exposure to sars-cov-2. at the time of admission, all patients had not any symptoms, but all had abnormal ct findings. ggo was the main ct manifestation in this cluster of patients (55, 94.8%), consolidation was present in other 3 patients (5.2%). the lesions of ct imaging in asymptomatic patients with covid-19 pneumonia were predominantly located in the peripheral and subpleural area of the lung (44, 75.9%), mostly involving one or two lung lobes (38, 65.5%).ggo lesions were inclined to distribute in the lower lobes (left 62.1% vs right 68.9%). in addition to pure ggo, it is often accompanied by other characteristic imaging, including fine reticuticulatio, subpleural curviliner line, halo sign, air bronchogram and vascular enlargement [14] [15] [16] [17] . the ct manifestations of covid-19 pneumonia had its pathophysiological basis [18] . since the diameter of sars-cov-2 is about 60-140nm, and the size of the alveolar pores is about 10-15μm, after inhaled through the respiratory tract, sars-cov-2 invades the bronchioles, mainly involving the interstitium around bronchioles at the end of lobular bronchioles, causing bronchiolitis and peribronchitis, and spreads to the distal end. therefore, the lesion originates from a round-like nodule in the core of the secondary lung lobule, which were usually shown as round ground-glass opacity at first, and then extends to the whole secondary pulmonary lobules, forming lobular patchy imaging. sars-cov-2 mainly invades the interlobular interstitium, resulting in the appearance of fine reticulation sign. halo sign is the image that the lesion infiltrates from central nodule of lobule core to surrounding interstitium and accumulation of inflammatory cells in interstitium. the virus spreads along both sides of reticular structure of the interlobular septa, leading to the sign that the long axis of the lesion is parallel to the pleura. inflammatory stimulation leads to thickening of blood vessels in the lesion, which results in a corresponding alteration on imaging.compared with the ct manifestation at admission, there were significant changes presented in ct findings after short-term treatment, including lesion absorption (22 cases, 37.9%), lesion improvement (23 cases, 39.7%), lesion no change (3 cases, 5.2%) and lesion progression (10 cases, 17.2%). after admission, 16 patients (27.6%) presented symptoms, predominantly including fever (8 cases, 50%), cough (9 cases, 56.3%), fatigue (8 cases, 50%). the average days before symptoms onset is 3.71±2.86 days, patients in lesion progression group have shorter days than other group (3.25±2.77 day). in these 16 patients, 10 patients (17.2%) were in lesion progression group. the results indicated in asymptomatic patients with covid-19 pneumonia, with the disease progress, about 25% cases present symptoms, and the evolution of ct findings were shown in 17% patients in the short-term follow-up. the average age of patients in lesion progression group was 57.40±22.54, much older than other patients (p=0.016). this may indicate that younger patients with pneumonia have strong immunity and recover quickly. with the progress of the inflammation, scatttered lesion gradually fused to form patchy, crazy-paving pattern, even diffusion appearance in ct manifestation. all the asymptomatic patients with covid-19 pneumonia discharged after treatment. the mean days of hospitalization was 19.80±10.82 days and the hospitalization of patients in progression group was 28.60±7.55 day, significantly longer than other cases (p=0.016).the cases recruited in this study were all asymptomatic patients with covid-19 pneumonia, which were confirmed by positive results of sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing and abnormal findings in ct imaging. the predominant feature of ct findings in asymptomatic patients with covid-19 pneumonia was ground glass opacity with peripheral distribution, unilateral location and, mostly involving one or two lobes, often combined with subpleural curviliner line, fine reticulation, air bronchogram, halo sign or vascular enlargement signs. after a short-term follow-up, a few asymptomatic patients presented clinical symptom, mainly fever, cough and fatigue. and the evolution of ct findings was shown in patients with the progression of disease.in summary, ct images of asymptomatic cases with covid-19 pneumonia have definite characteristics. since the asymptomatic patients with covid-19 is called "covert transmitter", covert sars-cov-2 infections could be seeding new outbreaks, and some patients can progress rapidly in the short term.therefore, it is essential to pay attention to the surveillance of asymptomatic patients with covid-19. ct examination plays a vital role in managing the current covid-19 outbreak, for early detection of covid-19 pneumonia, especially in the highly suspicious, asymptomatic cases with negative sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing. these four ct images mainly shows the absorption of the lesion during the course of the disease. a1 shows the lesions parallel to the pleura under the pleura of the patient's left lung. a2 shows an ill-defined, irregularly shaped lesion. after 5 days, we recheck chest ct and find out the lesion at the original location is reduced or even disappeared. the lung tissue in the original position is gradually restored and returns to normal.a1、a2：a covid-19 pneumonia patient, ct images on feb 13,2020b1、b2：a covid-19 pneumonia patient, ct images on feb 19,2020these four ct images mainly shows the improvement of the lesion during the course of the disease. a1 shows a large, fused lesion in the patient's right lung, and the lesions are extensive. a2 shows a small lesion under the pleura in right lung. after 6 days, we recheck chest ct and find out the lesion at the original location is reduced. the expansion of the lesion is contained. the scope of the lesion is gradually reduced. lung lesions are getting better after treatment.the ongoing global pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has spread to more than 215 countries and territories with 8385440 positive cases and 450686 fatalities as of june 19, 2020 [40] . unlike sars-cov that mainly infects the lower respiratory tract, sars-cov-2 is observed with a high level of shedding at the upper respiratory tract [41] . a wide variety of covid-19 symptoms have been reported, including fever or chills, body or muscle aches, headache, stuffy or congested nose, dry cough, fatigue, sore throat, and loss of taste or smell, 2-14 days after exposure to the virus [41] . severe symptoms like high fever, severe cough, and shortness of breath indicate the onset of pneumonia. less common gastrointestinal symptoms like diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting have been listed at the centers for disease control and prevention. currently, symptom-based testing, contact tracing, isolation, and quarantine are the main strategies for controlling and combating covid-19. however, viable viruses have also been isolated from asymptomatic cases [31] . asymptomatic and presymptomatic cases can play an important role in transmitting coronavirus [23] . elusive asymptomatic transmission is regarded as the achilles heel of current strategies to control covid-19 [24] . early studies with 235 cases of influenza virus infections indicate that the duration of influenza viral shedding was shorter and decayed faster and quantitative viral loads were lower in asymptomatic than in symptomatic cases. [27] the epidemiological and virological characteristics of covid-19 asymptomatic pathogenicity remains a mystery.sars-cov-2 is a non-segmented positive-sense rna virus that belongs to the β-coronavirus genus, coronaviridae family, and nidovirales order. many rna viruses, such as the flu virus, are prone to mutations due to the lack of proofreading in their genetic evolutions. viral mutations are driven by a variety of factors, including replication mechanism, polymerase fidelity, access to proofreading or post-replicative repair, sequence context, cellular environment, and host immune responses or gene editing [34] . benefit from an error-correction mechanism common to the nidovirales order, the replication of coronavirus is regulated by a bi-functional enzyme nonstructure protein 14 (nsp14) [19] . therefore, sars-cov-2 maintains relatively high accuracy in virus replication and transcription compared with the flu virus. nonetheless, sars-cov-2 has had 10620 single mutations for the genome collected on january 5, 2020 [38, 42] . although the impacts of mutations on sars-cov-2 transmission and pathogenicity [2, 20] and covid-19 diagnosis, vaccine, and medicine have been studied [38] , little is known about the connection between viral evolution and asymptomatic transmissions.this work reports the first association of a sars-cov-2 single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) variant and covid-19 asymptomatic cases based on the genotyping of 20656 sars-cov-2 genome isolates. we reveal a significant correlation between asymptomatic infections and sars-cov-2 single mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) on nsp6. nsp6 is a common protein of α and β-coronaviruses that locate at the endoplasmic reticulum (er) [9] . as a multiple-spanning transmembrane protein, coronavirus nsp6 participates in viral autophagic regulation. autophagy degrades alien components to provide an innate defense against viral infection and promote cell death and morbidity. [32] . in response to extreme cases of starvation, autophagy generates autophagosomes to transfer long-lived proteins, unnecessary or dysfunctional components to lysosomes for orderly degradation. studies show that nsp6 undermines the capability of autophagosomes to transport viral components to lysosomes for degradation by rendering smaller diameter autophagosomes in nutrient-rich media and thus enhancing viral replication [9] . additionally, nsp6 proteins induce a higher number of autophagosomes per cell compared with starvation to facilitate the assembly of replicase proteins [4, 9] . although further studies are required to understand the molecular mechanism of the nsp6 regulation of autophagy, it is clear that coronavirus nsp6 is extremely important to viral protein folding, viral assembly, and the replication cycle. it is of paramount importance to understand how nsp6 mutation l37f leads to covid-19 asymptomatic transmission and reduced virulence.we show that nsp6 is a relatively conservative protein and the region around residues is quite conservative over several sars-cov-2 related genomes to maintain the crucial regulative function of nsp6. using artificial intelligence (ai), topological data analysis (tda), and a variety of network models, we further demonstrate that mutation l37f disrupts the folding stability of nsp6. we uncover the correlation between nsp6 mutation l37f and weakened sars-cov-2 virulence. we also analyze the global transmission and find the decay tendency of nsp6 mutation l37f. we prove that the evolutionary dynamics of l37f is ageand gender-independent.we analyze 20656 sars-cov-2 complete genome sequences deposited in gisaid ( https://www.gisaid.o rg/) database up to june 19, 2020. among them, 7243 samples have patient status information recorded as asymptomatic, symptomatic, hospitalized, icu, deceased, and so on. in particular, 83 samples are labeled with asymptomatic (53) and symptomatic (30) cases. by genotyping 53 genome samples, we find that mutation 1083g>t is significantly relevant with asymptomatic infection with a p-value being much smaller than 0.05. mutation 11083g>t changes leucine (l) residue at position 37 of nsp6 to phenylalanine (f), denoted as l37f.in the following sections, we investigate the relationship between mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) and asymptomatic infections using both gene-specific analysis and protein-specific analysis. the global evolution and transmission pathway of the mutation is studied as well.our customized dataset generated from genotyping 20656 sars-cov-2 complete genome sequences downloaded from the gisaid database is summarized in table 1 . here, patient status referred to as incomplete records of asymptomatic, symptomatic, hospitalized, deceased, gender, etc. additionally, our dataset contains data collection dates and locations of genome isolates. the detailed information of our dataset is available in the supporting information. we first analyze 83 sequences that have either asymptomatic or symptomatic labels submitted from japan. the statistic analysis shows that the pearson correlation coefficient between asymptomatic records and 10083g>t is 0.606. moreover, the p-value is 1.29×10 −9 , which reveals the significant relevance between asymptomatic and single mutation 11083g>t-(l37f). next, we split our genotyping dataset of 20656 sequences into different countries and extract those records with the 11083g>t mutation. table 2 summarizes the total number of sequences related to 11083g>t-(l37f), denoted as n l37f , the total number of sequences n s , the 11083g>t-(l37f) ratio, the number of total cases, the number of total deaths, and the death ratio of 25 countries up to june 19, 2020, respectively. a complete table for all countries/regions can be found in the supporting information. table 2 suggests that the 11083g>t-(l37f) ratio correlates with the death ratio. for example, singapore has the highest 11083g>t-(l37f) mutation ratio as of 0.644. a piece of recent news reported that half of the covid-19 cases in singapore are symptomless [25] , which matches our finding that mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) is relevant to the asymptomatic infections. moreover, singapore has the second-lowest death ratio as listed in table 2 , suggesting that single mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) may have weakened sars-cov-2 virulence. a similar deduction can be obtained from the records of turkey, jordan, norway, australia, and south korea. the relatively high 11083g>t-(l37f) mutation ratio (greater than 0.200) with a correspondingly low death ratio (less than 3.00%) further validates that 11083g>t-(l37f) may be relevant to the asymptomatic-induced the hypotoxicity of sars-cov-2. moreover, 11 out of 17 countries whose mutation ratios are less than 0.200 have a death ratio greater than 4.5%. the death ratios of the united kingdom, belgium, france, and spain are even higher than 10%, which supports our assumption that mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) weakens sars-cov-2 virulence. figure 1 illustrates the number of complete sars-cov-2 sequences in our dataset with 11083g>t-(l37f) detected versus the number of complete sars-cov-2 sequences without 11083g>t-(l37f) detected every 10 days in singapore, japan, india, china, united kingdom, italy, united states, australia, and spain, as well as two states in the united states: new york and washington. the blue and red bar represents the 11083g>t-(l37f) counts and other mutation counts every ten-day period, respectively. similar bar plots for all countries/regions involving this specific mutation can be found in the supporting information. singapore's plot shows that 11083g>t was widely found after march 24, 2020, which is consistent with the report saying that at least half of singapore's newly discovered covid-19 cases show no symptoms [25] . almost all of the cases collected from february 12 to february 22 have 11083g>t mutation with asymptomatic infections recorded, which is the most robust evidence to associate the sars-cov-2 11083g>t or l37f mutation on nsp6 with the asymptomatic infections. india is one of the countries that also have a large number of 11083g>t mutation cases. recent news reported that 80 percent of all coronavirus patients in india were asymptomatic or showed mild symptoms [12] , which supports our deduction that 11083g>t correlates with the asymptomatic infection. moreover, one can see that mutation 11083g>t in china, the united kingdom, and australia is not as abundant as in singapore, japan, or india. furthermore, as discussed before, the asymptomatic infection may associate with the hypotoxicity of sars-cov-2 as well. note that from figure 1 , china, the united states, spain, and italy have a relatively lower occurrence of 11083g>t, which may contribute to the relatively high death ratio. however, this specific mutation is not the only factor in determining the death ratio. the number of total infected cases, diagnostic testing, medical and health conditions, age structure, nursing-home population, etc. are also critical factors. for example, japan has a second-highest ratio of 11083g>t-(l37f), while the death ratio is greater than 5 percent. similarly, the united kingdom has the third-highest death ratio, suggesting its ratio of mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) is not at the last echelon. one of the possible reasons is that the healthcare system was heavily broken by a sudden increase in infected cases. the lack of proper healthcare attention to a large number of mid/severe covid-19 cases resulted in a high mortality ratio. note that although russia has the lowest 11083g>t-(l37f) mutation ratio lists in table 2 , its 1.37% death ratio caused by covid-19 is also relatively low. one possible reason is russia's relatively low median age.in total, 53 genome samples were related to 11083g>t among 542 samples that were collected from may 14 to may 24 in new york. after that, fewer cases were collected in new york and the 11083g>t mutation ratio decreased. also, the state of washington had a small proportion of 11083g>t mutation before may 13, 2020. in the first week of june, 26 out of 27 genome sequences had mutation 11083g>t, which may indicate that the asymptomatic infection is becoming increasingly prevalent in washington.during the last few months, the proportion of the 11083g>t mutation in the united kingdom has gone down as shown in figure 1 . globally, the ratio of samples with the 11083g>t mutation over all samples, shown in the middle chart of the last row in figure 1 decays over time, suggesting the mutation is unfavorable to the viral transmission. two abnormal peaks appeared on february 22 and june 2 in the ratio were due to the l37f mutation counts from japan and washington, respectively. the relatively small numbers of total genome sequences at these dates induce the jumps. unfortunately, the number of genome sequences decays rapidly after april as shown in figure 1 , while globally, the number of sars-cov-2 infections increasing steadily according to the who's daily situation reports ( https://www.who.int/em ergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/situation-reports).in this section, we track the global transmission pathways of the single mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) to understand its spread dynamics. we found that the first genome containing single mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) was sequenced in chongqing, china, on january 18, 2020, which can be considered as the ancestor of 11083g>t in our dataset. however, the complete genome sequences released on the gisaid do not include all of the infected cases. mutation 11083g>t also detected in a co-mutation record [8782c>t, 11083g>t, 28144t>c] in yunnan, china one day earlier than chongqing's sequence, which indicates that the true ancestor of 11083g>t might have occurred early than january 18, 2020. note that the first sars-cov-2 sequence released in gisaid was collected in wuhan, china on december 24, 2019. china's covid19 epicenter, wuhan, implemented a lockdown on january 23, 2020, which explains why china has a relatively low ratio of 11083g>t-(l37f) mutation.the first confirmed case reported by the singapore government was on january 23, 2020. interestingly, the first genome sequence related to mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) was found in singapore on january 29,2020, only a few days after the first confirmed cases. therefore, the transmission of covid-19 in singapore at the initial stage contains a large proportion of the11083g>t-(l37f) mutation. the prevalence of the11083g>t-(l37f) mutation in singapore's sars-cov-2 infections explains its low death ratio.mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) first appeared in the united states on january 22, 2020, in arizona, a 26year-old male with co-mutations [8782c>t, 11083g>t, 28144t>c, 29095c>t], which is the descendant of [8782c>t, 11083g>t, 28144t>c] found in china. since then, more records related to 11083g>t have appeared in the united states. at this stage, 236 genome isolates from the united states in our dataset are relevant to 11083g>t. france and italy are the following countries that found the 11083g>t mutation at an early stage. both of them detected this mutation on jan 29, 2020. although 11083g>t mutation has arrived in the united states and the united kingdom at a very early stage, different subtypes of sars-cov-2 spread vastly due to their large population, which makes the 11083g>t mutation non-dominated.in jordan, the earliest sequence released on gisaid is on march 16, 2020, with 11083g>t mutation, which indicates the high 11083g>t ratio in jordan. note that multiple reasons may lead to a low death ratio of 0.90% in jordan. one may be due to the hypotoxicity of sars-cov-2 caused by mutation 11083g>t. the other is that the healthcare system is in good condition due to the small number of infected patients.the first confirmed covid-19 cases reported by the vietnamese government was on january 16, 2020. however, the first genome isolates related to mutation 11083g>t in our dataset was collected on march 17, 2020. the 11083g>t was found in vietnam two months after the first confirmed cases, which result in a low 11083g>t mutation ratio. surprisingly, none of the patients died in vietnam. as a low-middle income country with nearly 100 million population and a much less-advanced healthcare system than other countries such as italy, the united kingdom, and france, vietnam's success in tackling covid-19 attracts attention. they immediately took action to ban the foreign nationals' entries and implement strict social distancing rules, which is the essential factor in keeping the coronavirus death toll at zero. mutations. the color of the dominated type of mutation decides the base color of each state. one can see that oregon, alaska, texas, and ohio have a higher proportion of 11083g>t than the other states, while the death ratio in oregon, alaska, and texas is lower than the average death ratio (5.47%) in the united states as of june 19, 2020. note that although the ratio of mutation 11083g>t in nevada is 1, only one genome sequence was submitted from nevada; hence, it is insignificant in the statistics. 20656 complete genome sequences, 9923 cases have age labels and 9437 cases (male cases: 4993 and female cases: 4444) have gender labels, which are used for our age-related and gender-related analysis, respectively. overall, male cases have a slightly higher ratio of the 11083g>t-(l37f) mutation than female cases. in terms of age distribution, the ratio is significantly higher in the age group of 99-109 years. however, only 7 cases fall into this group and all data were collected from the united kingdom (2 cases) and singapore (5 cases). more data and further studies are required to draw any conclusion from this group. therefore, we conclude that mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) is quite evenly distributed over age and gender groups, implying that the mutation does not have a host-dependent behavior. figure 3 depicts the sequence and structural information of nsp6. figure 3 (a) is generated by an online server [30] , figure 3 (b) is plotted by pymol [11] , and figure 3 (c) is created by [1] . as shown in figure 3 (a), nsp6 is a multi-span membrane protein. in mutation 11083g>t-(l37f), both leucine and phenylalanine are α-amino acids and non-polar. however, phenylalanine has a benzyl ring on the side chain, making the secondary structure of nsp6 more compact. as shown in figures 3(a) and (c), from the nsp6 protein residue position 34 to 37, the residues are fffl. therefore, there will be four continuous phenylalanine amino acid ffff after the l37f mutation. as a result, mutation l37f can stiffen the nsp6 structure by the aromatic-aromatic, hydrophobic, or π-stacking interactions. such an additional interaction can significantly change nsp6 function [4] . figure 3 (c) presents the alignment of the sars-cov-2 nsp6 sequence with those of the other four coronaviruses, including that of sars-cov. the sequence identities between sars-cov-2 nsp6 and the nsp6s of sars-cov [28] , ratg13 [46] , zc45 [26] , bm48-31 [13] are 87.2%, 99.7%, 97.9%, and 83.8%, respectively. note that the overall sequence identity between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov is 83.8%. therefore, nsp6 is relatively conservative. additionally, nsp6 position 37 is in a relatively conservative environment among different species. position 37 for all other species is valine, which is also hydrophobic and extremely similar to leucine. two amino acids differ by one -ch 2 -unit. a large region from 25 to 45 has only three mutations among five species, indicating the region is potentially important for the protein function.there three-dimensional (3d) structure of nsp6 is displayed in figure 3 (b). to further understand the impact of mutation l37f on nsp6, we carry several theoretical analyses using ai [6] , tda [8] , flexibility and rigidity index (fri) [43] , and a large number of other network theory models [15] . our results are summarized in table 3 . the protein folding stability change following mutations is defined by ∆∆g = ∆g m − ∆g w , where ∆g w is the free energy change of the wild type and ∆g m is the free energy change of the mutant type [6] . the folding stability change ∆g measures the difference between folded and unfolded states. thus, a negative ∆∆g means the mutation causing destabilization and vice versa. we use a tda-based deep learning method [6] to compute ∆∆g in this work. as shown in table 3 , a negative folding stability change ∆∆g is found for the mutation, indicating a destabilizing mutation l37f for nsp6. physically, a large hydrophobic residue (f) at the lipid bilayer and solvent interface reduces nsp6 stability. considering the sequence alignment in figure 3 (c), we have also carried a similar calculation for the mutation of l37v and found its ∆∆g = −0.71 kcal/mol. therefore, leucine is favored at residue position 37 for sars-cov-2 nsp6.next, the fri rigidity index r η measures the geometric compactness and topological connectivity of the network consisting of c α at each residue and the heavy atoms involved in the mutation [43] . the scale parameter η determines the range of pairwise interactions. in this work, the parameter η is set to 8å. as shown in table 3 , the increase in the fri rigidity index r η is found, indicating the increase in the rigidity of the first alpha helix of nsp6. it is known that protein flexibility is required to allow it to function through molecular interactions within the cell, among cells and even between organisms [37] . the quadruplet phenylalanine resulting from mutation l37f can significantly reduce nsp6's interactions with er.moreover, seven network models [15] are utilized to analyze the l37f mutation in nsp6 as shown in table 3 . we consider the network of heavy atoms at residue 37 and c α atoms in nsp6. the connections are allowed between any pair of atoms within a cutoff distance of 8.0å. the mutation-induced decrease in the edge density d is due to the factor that the mutation increases the edge on the surface of the protein.the mutation induced the decrease in the average path length l is owing to the mutation increases the edge with shorter distances. the mutation induced the decrease in average betweenness centrality c b is due to the increase in the crowd of vertices by the mutation residue. the mutation induced the increase in average eigencentrality c e is because increase in the number of the connected components will enlarge the maximal eigenvalues. the mutation induced the increase in the average subgraph centrality c s is due to the decrease in the average participating rate of each edge. the mutation induced the decrease in average communicability m is due to the decrease in the neighbor edges participating rate of each edge. finally, the mutation induced the increase in average communicability angle θ is due to the increase in the alignments among different edges. together with the fri rigidity index and the protein folding stability table 3 : the folding stability change and graph network descriptor consisting of wild type and mutant type of nsp6 calculated by web server [6] . the folding stability change ∆∆g = ∆gm − ∆gw, where ∆gm is free energy change of wild type and ∆gw is free energy change of mutation type. r 8 : fri rigidity index with η of 8; d: edge density; l : average path length; c b : average betweenness centrality; ce : average eigencentrality; cs : average subgraph centrality; m : average communicability; θ : average communicability angle. while the asymptomatic infections of severe acute respiratory syndrome 2 (sars-cov-2) have been reported worldwide in the past few months, little is known about the formation mechanism and virological characteristics of asymptomatic infections. this work parses 20656 complete genome sequences of sars-cov-2, and for the first time, reveals the relationship between asymptomatic cases and a single nucleotide mutation 11083g>t-(l37f) on nsp6. after genotyping 83 sequences with asymptomatic and symptomatic records, we find 11083g>t is significantly relevant to the asymptomatic infection. by analyzing the distribution of 11083g>t in various countries, we unveil that the 11083g>t mutation correlates with the death ratio in singapore, the united states, the united kingdom, etc, inferring the correlation between the asymptomatic infection and the hypotoxicity of sars-cov-2. moreover, we track the dynamics of 11083g>t mutation ratio globally and discover its decaying tendency, indicating that 11083g>t mutation hinders sars-cov-2 transmission. furthermore, the analysis of the distribution of 11083g>t in different ages and genders unveils that 11083g>t-driven mutation does not have a host-dependent behavior. the protein-specific analysis is also taken into consideration. the 11083g>t mutation leads leucine (l) residue at position 37 of nsp6, changing to phenylalanine (f). by employing the graph network analysis and topology-based mutation predictor, we find that 11083g>t-(l37f) destabilizes the structure of nsp6 in protein-wise. as one of the most conservative proteins of sars-cov-2, nsp6 involves in the viral autophagic regulation. therefore, this destabilized mutation may result in the inefficiency of nsp6 to participate in the viral protein folding, viral assembly, and replication cycle, which underpins our deduction that 11083g>t-(l37f) may be relevant to the asymptomatic infections and weaken the sars-cov-2 virulence.bristol-myers squibb, and pfizer. the authors thank the ibm tj watson research center, the covid-19 high performance computing consortium, nvidia, and msu hpcc for computational assistance.visualization of four coronaviral nsp6s in membrane figure 4 is the visualization of four nsp6 proteoforms of sars-cov, bat-sl-ratg, bat-sl-covzc45, and bat-sl-bm48-31. these proteoforms are consistent with that of sars-cov-2 described in the main paper, indicating their similar function of regulating cell autophagy. (e) (f) figure 5 : network analysis of the sars-cov-2 nsp6 l37f mutation. the networks consist of heavy atoms of mutation site 37 and cα atoms of sars-cov-2 nsp6. the differences of descriptors between the network with wild type, leucine, and the network with mutant type, phenylalanie, are displayed. (a) fri rigidity index differences; (b) eigencentrality differences; (c) subgraph centrality differences; and (d) betweenness centrality differences. in (e) and (f), relative changes versus cutoff distances to the mutation site are studied. (e) relative changes of fri rigidity index, path length, edge density, betweenness centrality, and eigencentrality; and (f) relative changes of subgraph centrality, communicability, and communicability angle. figure 5 shows the network analysis of the sars-cov-2 l37f mutation. the networks are constructed by heavy atoms at the mutation site and at the c α atoms of sars-cov-2 nsp6. figures 5 (a), (b) , (c), and (d) present the mutation-induced differences of fri rigidity index differences, eigencentrality differences, subgraph centrality differences, and betweenness, respectively. although these descriptors do not change much globally, their local changes around the mutation site reveal the l37f mutation-induced stress around the mutation site.figures 5 (e) and (f) show the dependence of relative changes over cutoff distances. first of all, every descriptor converges as the cutoff distance increase. relative changes do not fluctuate for cutoff distance greater than 24å. the relative change of fri rigidity index monotonically decreases in absolute value as the cutoff increases. similarly, the edge density has a monotonically decreasing pattern. the two networks are close in the path length descriptor. interestingly, betweenness centrality descriptor has the largest difference at 10å cutoff distance, while the eigencentrality descriptor has the largest difference at 22å cutoff distance.for betweenness centrality, it shows that the mutation has the largest impact in the network of c α within 10å to any atoms of the target residue. in figure 5 (f), three descriptors show a similar pattern -they increase in absolute value first and then decrease eventually as the cutoff increases. overall, the relative change plots indicate that the mutation happening at l37 has the largest impact on the c α within 10å to any atoms of the target residue.on january 5, 2020, the complete genome sequence of sars-cov-2 was first released on genbank (access number: nc 045512.2) by zhang's group at fudan university [42] . since then, there has been a rapid accumulation of sars-cov-2 genome sequences. in this work, 20,656 complete genome sequences with high coverage of sars-cov-2 strains from the infected individuals in the world were downloaded from the gisaid database [35] ( https://www.gisaid.org/) as of june 19, 2020. all the records in gisaid without the exact submission date were not taken into considerations. to rearrange the 20,656 complete genome sequences according to the reference sars-cov-2 genome, multiple sequence alignment (msa) is carried out by using clustal omega [36] with default parameters.the amino acid sequence of nsp6 is downloaded from genbank [3] . the three-dimensional (3d) structure of nonstructure protein 6 (nsp6) in this work is generated by i-tasser model [44] . the 3d structure graph is created by using pymol [11] .single nucleotide polymorphism (snp) genotyping measures the genetic variations between different members of a species. establishing the snp genotyping method to the investigation of the genotype changes during the transmission and evolution of sars-cov-2 is of great importance [38, 45] . by analyzing the rearranged genome sequences, snp profiles, which record all of the snp positions in teams of the nucleotide changes and their corresponding positions, can be constructed. the snp profiles of a given sars-cov-2 genome isolated from a covid-19 patient capture all the differences from a complete reference genome sequence and can be considered as the genotype of the individual sars-cov-2.in this work, the prediction of nsp6 folding energy changes upon mutation is computed by using the topology based mutation predictor (tml-mp) ( https://weilab.math.msu.edu/tml/tml-mp/) which is briefly reviewed as following and its detail can be found in the literature [6] . tml-mp applies element specific persistent homology, which reveals essential biological information [8, 14] . the method employs the element-specific persistent homology [7] and other biological and chemical properties as machine learning features to train gradient boosted regression tree (gbrt) models. the dataset includes 2648 mutations instances in 131 proteins provided by dehouck et al [10] . the error analysis based on the dataset is given as pearson correlations coefficient (r p ) of 0.79 and root mean square error (rmse) of 0.91 kcal/mol from previous work [6] .as the persistent homology widely applied in a variety of practical feature generation problems, it is also successful in the implementation of predictions of protein folding energy changes upon mutation. the key idea in tml-mp is to use the element-specific persistent homology (esph) which distinguishes different element types of biomolecules when building persistent homology barcodes. for instance, commonly occurring protein element types include c, n, o, s, and h. however, hydrogen atoms are often absent from pdb data and sulfur atoms are too few in most proteins to be statistically important. thus, c, n, and o elements are considered on the esph in protein characterization. as for persistent homology, barcodes generated based on esph provide a topological representation of molecular interactions. features are extracted from the different dimensions of persistent homology barcodes by dividing barcodes into several equally spaced bins, which is called binned barcode representation. the auxiliary features such as geometry, electrostatics, amino acid types composition, and amino acid sequence are also included for machine learning training.the element specific persistent homology is built by adopting the distance function di(a i , a j ) describing the distance between two atoms a i and a j defined aswhere loc(·) denotes the location of an atom which is either in a mutant site or in the rest of the protein and de(·, ·) is the euclidean distance between the two atoms. then, the persistent homology uses simplicial complexes with a specific rule such as vietoris-rips complex, cech complex, or alpha complex. vietoris-rips complex (vc) is used for characterizing first-order interaction where alpha complex (ac) is used for characterizing higher-order patterns. using esph to characterize interactions of different kinds, we construct persistent homology barcodes on the atom sets by selecting one certain type of atoms in mutation site and one other certain type of atoms in the rest of the protein. the set of barcodes from one persistent homology computation as v p,d,b γ,α,β where • p ∈ {vc, ac} is the complex rule,• d ∈ {di, de} is the distance function,• γ ∈ {m, w} is the protein of mutant type or wild type,• α ∈ {c,n,o} is the element type selected in proteins except in the mutation site,• β ∈ {c,n,o} is the element type selected in the mutation residue.these barcodes are capable of reflecting the molecular mechanism of protein stability. features are extracted from the groups of persistent homology barcodes. for 18 groups of betti-0 esph barcode such that 9 groups are from the mutant type and 9 groups are from the wild type, one can specify a fixed length interval to divide the esph barcodes into a number of equally spaced bins. for example, a length set, {[0, 0.5], (0.5, 1], ..., (5.5, 6]å} would turn the 18 groups of betti-0 esph barcode into 18*12 features with dimension of the number of atoms. the death and birth of bars are counted in each bin resulting in features. therefore, this representation enables us to precisely characterize hydrogen bonds, van der waals, electrostatic, hydrophilic, and hydrophobic interactions. for the higher-order betti numbers, the emphasis is given on patterns of both short and long-distance scales. statistics feature are computed for each group of barcodes for betti-1 and betti-2, which are sum, max, and the average of bar length, and max and min of birth and death values. overall, 12*18 features are generated by betti-0 on vc, and 7*2*18 features are generated by betti-1 and betti-2 on ac.in tml-mp, gradient boosted regression trees (gbrts) [22] are employed to train the dataset according to the size of the training dataset, absence of model overfitting, non-normalization of features, and ability of nonlinear properties. the gbrt method produces a prediction model as an ensemble method which is a class of machine learning algorithms. it builds a popular module for regression and classification problems from weak learners. by the assumption that the individual learners are likely to make different mistakes, the method uses a summation of the weak learners to eliminate the overall error. furthermore, a decision tree is added to the ensemble depending on the current prediction error on the training dataset. therefore, this method is relatively robust against hyperparameter tuning and overfitting, especially for data with a moderate number of features. the gbrt is shown for its robustness against overfitting, good performance for moderately small data sizes, and model interpretability. the current work uses the package provided by scikit-learn (v 0.23.0) [33] .the graph network descriptors are briefly presented which are applied in this work. graph networks can mimic interactions between pairs of units in molecules. the quantify features of the networks can reveal the biological and chemical properties measured by comparing descriptors on different networks. to detect the single residue impact following mutation, the network consists of a set s(r) of c α atoms from every residue of protein structure except the target mutation residue where r is the cutoff distance such that a c α atom is included if it is within rå to any atom of the target mutation. the total atom set t (r) is defined as the atoms (c, n, and o) of the target residue and c α atoms of s(r). moreover, two vertices are connected in the network if their distance is less than 8å. thus the adjacency matrix a can be defined as well where a is a matrix containing 0 and 1 such that a(i, j) = 0 if i-th and j-th are disconnected and a(i, j) = 1 if i-th and j-th are connected.fri rigidity index was introduced to reflect the flexibility between atoms for molecular interaction prediction [29, 43] . the single residue molecular rigidity index measures its influence on the set s(r) which is given aswhere n s is the number of c α atoms of the set s(r) and n is the number of atoms in total atom set t (r).edge density is defined based on the adjacency matrix of the total atom set t (r) such aswhere i t is the index set of the mutation residue.average path length measures the separation between two vertices of the whole network, which can be used to study infectious diseases spreading in the networks [39] . the average path length for the single mutation system of biomolecular is defined aswhere d(i, j) is the shortest path length between vertices v i and v j .average betweenness centrality shows communications in a network [21] . the average betweenness centrality is given aswhere g k ij is defined as the number of the shortest path between vertices v i and v j that passes v k , and g ij is the number of shortest paths between v i and v j .average egeincentrality is the average of elements of the eigenvector v max , which is corresponding to the largest eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix [5] such asaverage subgraph centrality is built on the exponential of the adjacency matrix, e = e a . the subgraph centrality is the summation of weighted closed walks of all lengths starting and ending at the same node [15, 18] . thus the average subgraph centrality reveal the average of participating rate of each vertex in all subgraph, which is given asaverage communicability is defined in a similar way as the subgraph centrality on the exponential of the adjacency matrix [15] [16] [17] , which isaverage communicability angle is given by [17] where θ(i, j) = cos −1.in december, 2019, several health facilities in the chinese city of wuhan (hubei province) reported clusters of individuals with pneumonia 1 whose clinical presentations resembled the symptoms of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), which emerged in 2002 in the nearby guangdong province and led to outbreaks worldwide. 2 on jan 7, 2020, a novel strain of coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (sars-cov-2), was isolated, confirming the circulation of a new respiratory illness, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , with evidence suggesting that the huanan seafood wholesale market was the initial transmission site. 3 on jan 1, 2020, the market was closed for environmental sanitation and disinfection to prevent further transmission. 4 cases of covid-19 have since been reported in health-care workers 3 and family clusters in china, 5 with 67 794 cases and 3805 deaths confirmed in hubei province as of march 15, 2020. 6 older individuals (aged >60 years) and people with chronic underlying health conditions are particularly susceptible to severe disease. 5 rapid spread of the virus compelled the chinese government to restrict movement in affected cities, with the cessation of public transport 7 and cancellation of flights. 8 despite extensive efforts to prevent onward spread, 143 countries and territories outside of mainland china have now reported imported cases. 6 internationally, ongoing local transmission of sars-cov-2 has been confirmed in 81 countries and territories. 6 in singapore, 243 individuals have tested positive for sars-cov-2, 121 have been hospitalised and are stable, 13 are in a critical condition, and 109 have been discharged at the time of writing. 9 the first case in singapore was identified on jan 23, 2020, and was imported from china; 10 a further 68 cases were imported, with the remaining 175 cases most likely the result of transmission within singapore. 11 all imported cases were travellers who had returned from wuhan before feb 4, 2020, with transmission to close contacts recorded within families at a church and shop in three small transmission clusters. 11 as of march 16, 2020, inpatients with covid-19 in singapore are isolated at the hospital they present to or at the national centre for infectious diseases, a specialised facility designed to facilitate infectious disease outbreak response. 10 a government-wide taskforce has been established to increase surveillance at borders and prepare the public in terms of awareness and education. 10 the ministry of health singapore has implemented contact tracing efforts to identify potential cases among people travelling with, or in close proximity to, individuals with covid-19. 12 despite these efforts and nationwide precautionary measures, including the dispensing of masks to households and public hospital emergency departments being on high alert for an outbreak response, the number of suspected and imported cases in singapore is expected to increase due to the high volume of incoming travellers. 10 preliminary estimates indicate that the ascertainment rate in wuhan is 5•1% (95% ci 4•8-5•5); 13 however, high levels of under-reporting and misdiagnosis due to difficulties in identifying cases make it challenging for policy makers to prepare a large-scale response. consequently, following the recom mendations made by wu and colleagues, 14 modelling studies are needed to estimate the potential impact of interventionsevidence before this study at present, in wuhan, the capital of hubei province in china, an outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is ongoing, caused by the 2019 novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2; previously called 2019-ncov). evidence to date has suggested rapid spread of the virus: at the time of writing, imported cases have been reported in 143 countries and territories, including singapore. 243 confirmed cases have been reported in singapore; however, this number is expected to increase substantially in the following weeks. in 2003, sars-cov, which also originated from mainland china, established locally, causing 33 deaths after 238 cases were confirmed. therefore, there is considerable concern since 3204 deaths and 81 048 cases of covid-19 have already been confirmed in mainland china, which surpasses the numbers observed in the sars-cov outbreak. 2020 lunar new year celebrations have now ended, marking a period of extensive travel between china and singapore, and a corresponding high risk for case importation. despite heightened surveillance and isolation of individuals suspected to have covid-19 and confirmed cases, the risk is ongoing, with the number of cases continuing to increase in singapore. immediate deployment of interventions will be required to contain the outbreak in the event that significant secondary local transmission is observed within the community. we searched pubmed from database inception to feb 26, 2020, for articles using the search terms "wuhan coronavirus", "covid-19", "sars-cov-2", "2019-ncov", and "coronavirus interventions". our search yielded three relevant articles.two articles investigated the effects of travel restrictions in wuhan during the early stages of the outbreak; one of the articles additionally investigated the effects of quarantine in china, and the other article estimated the effectiveness of airport screening for the detection of infected travellers. we found no articles assessing the efficacy of immediate national control measures outside of china.this study is the first to investigate the use of isolation for individuals with covid-19 and quarantine of family members, school closures, and workplace distancing as interventions for the immediate control of covid-19 in the event of secondary local transmission using a simulation model. we found that a combined approach (incorporating quarantine, school closures, and workplace distancing) could prevent a national outbreak at low levels of infectivity and reduce the number of total infections considerably at higher levels of infectivity. such control measures should be deployed in countries outside of china with evidence of imported cases and evidence of local transmission.the results of this study provide policy makers in singapore and other countries with evidence to begin the implementation of relatively standard outbreak control measures that could mitigate or reduce local transmission rates if deployed effectively and in a timely manner.in the early phase of the outbreak when uncertainty is highest, which is crucial should local transmission begin to increase.in this study, we aimed to develop a national spatial model of covid-19 transmission in singapore to estimate the distribution of cases across time and space and to assess the potential impact of interventions on outbreak size should local containment efforts fail.we used flute, 15 an agent-based influenza epidemic simulation model, which accounts for demography, host movement, and social contact rates in workplaces, schools, and homes to estimate the likelihood of human-to-human transmission of sars-cov-2 should local containment fail. the flute simulation model requires a synthetic population to build the contact and transmission network. therefore, we used the geographical, demographic, and epidemiological model of singapore (hereafter referred to as geodemos-r, where r represents respiratory illness), 16 a modelling framework that aims to recreate a synthetic but realistic representation of the singaporean population at the household and individual level. we generated the synthetic population using national 2010 census data 17, 18 to fit multiple attributes of the population at the household and individual level. the generated households contained demographic characteristics, such as age, marital status, religion, and ethnicity, of household members. individuals were then allocated to workplaces or educational facilities on the basis of local transportation data and home addresses according to 2010 census data. 19 the contact behaviour of individuals in the area of their home (ie, between family members and their local community; defined as the home community), workplace, and school, where applicable, were recorded with potential transmission events as a function of infectivity. we ran the models for 80 days to investigate the early stages of an epidemic and seeded 100 local cases randomly among the resident population at 0 days, representing a few generations of local transmission at the time of scenario implementation (ie, when contact tracing has failed to identify cases within the community and unknown local transmission has started). a full description of the model is available in the appendix (pp 1-5).within the flute infection model, we assumed that no individual had existing immunity to sars-cov-2. since data (ie, infectiousness, the cumulative distribution function for the incubation period, and the duration of hospital stay) on sars-cov-2 were unavailable at the time of designing this study, we used sars-cov parameters to estimate the infectivity profile of sars-cov-2. these parameters included how infectious an individual is over time, 20 the proportion of the population assumed to be asymptomatic (7·5%), 21 the cumulative distribution function for the mean incubation period (with sars-cov and sars-cov-2 having the same mean incubation period of 5·3 days), 3, 22 and the duration of hospital stay after symptom onset (3·5 days). 20 asymptomatic individuals were able to infect at a 50% reduced rate compared with their symptomatic counterparts based on estimates from nishiura and colleagues. 23 we also investigated four alternate asymptomatic proportions: 22·7%, as reported by furuya-kanamori and colleagues 24 for influenza a h1n1 in a pooled prevalence study; and 30·0%, 40·0%, and 50·0%, as potential but theoretical proportions to investigate intervention efficacy with a high fraction of infections that are cryptic and undetectable.three values for the basic reproduction number (r 0 ) were chosen for the infectiousness factor (1•5, 2·0, and 2•5) on the basis of analyses of wuhan case data by wu and colleagues. 14for the baseline scenario (ie, no interventions), we ran 1000 epidemic simulations to account for the stochasticity in infection contact networks and to calculate cis across time. four intervention scenarios were proposed for implementation after failure of local containment, following policy options currently being assessed by the singaporean ministry of health, as standard interventions for respiratory virus control: isolation of infected individuals and quarantine of their family members (hereafter referred to as quarantine); quarantine plus immediate school closure for 2 weeks; quarantine plus immediate workplace distancing, in which 50% of the workforce is encouraged to work from home for 2 weeks; and a combination of quarantine, immediate school closure, and workplace distancing (hereafter referred to as the combined intervention). quarantine of infected individuals is expected to occur 1 day after symptom onset in a health-care facility that is assumed to have 3000 beds at maximum capacity (during the early stage of the outbreak) and is fully equipped to handle full quarantine measures (ie, negative pressure isolation rooms, full personal protective equipment use by staff) so that the individual is unable to transmit sars-cov-2 to other inpatients. at full capacity, the remaining individuals are isolated at home after receiving treatment. family members of infected individuals are quarantined at home for 14 days and thus are unable to attend work or school or infect the wider community at their residential address. however, transmission within families is possible as a result of the presence of an isolated and infected individual. each of these intervention scenarios had 1000 simulations in which we additionally recorded the location of infection as the home community, workplace, or school (appendix pp 3-4).each of the 1000 epidemic simulations had a set of parameters, and was run for baseline and the four see online for appendix control strategies. the median simulation was determined as the median cumulative number of cases at day 80. the same set of parameters was used for each 1000 set of simulations for each r 0 value. when analysing differences across infectivity scenarios, we compared the outputs of each simulation, which used the same parameters, not the medians of each grouping. we calculated iqrs as the 25th and 75th simulation in terms of cumulative case count at 80 days. we used r statistical software (version 3.6.3) to plot graphs and for all analyses. we chose to present intervention data for the scenario in which r 0 is 2·0, because this represents a moderate and likely outbreak for policy planners. the relatively mild (r 0 =1·5) and severe (r 0 =2.5) outbreak scenarios are presented in the appendix (pp 9-10).the funders had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. the corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.for the baseline scenario, when r 0 was 1·5, the median cumulative number of infections on day 80 was 279 000 (iqr 245 000-320 000; figure 1, table), which corresponds to 7•4% (iqr 6•5-8•5) of the population. for the quarantine intervention, the median cumulative number of infections at day 80 was reduced to 15 000 (800-30 000; table; appendix p 9), which is a 94•8% decrease (90·2-99·7) in the number of infected individuals compared with the baseline scenario. school closure and workplace distancing reduced the median cumulative number of infections on day 80 to 10 000 (200-28 000) and 4000 (200-23 000), respectively (table; appendix p 9). the combined inter vention decreased the median cumulative infection count on day 80 to 1800 (200-23 000; table; appendix p 9), representing a 99•3% (iqr 92·6-99·9) reduction from the baseline scenario. the corresponding maximum number of daily infections from day 0 to day 80 was 12 400 (iqr 11 700-12 900) for the baseline scenario, 600 (0-1400) for the quarantine scenario, 500 (0-1300) for the school-closure scenario, 300 (0-900) for the workplacedistancing scenario, and 120 (0-900) for the combined intervention (figure 1; appendix p 9).when r 0 was 2·0, the proportion of the singaporean population infected under the baseline scenario increa sed to 19•3% (iqr 17•8-20•6), with a median cumulative number of infections on day 80 of 727 000 (iqr 670 000-776 000; figure 1, table). on day 80, quarantine resulted in a cumulative median of 130 000 cases (38 000-244 000), school closure 97 000 cases (14 000-219 000), workplace distancing 67 000 cases (11 000-145 000), and the combined intervention 50 000 cases (2000-143 000; figure 2, table). the maximum number of daily infections was 27 800 (iqr 27 300-28 000) for the baseline scenario, 11 000 (4100-18 600) for the quarantine scenario, 8400 (1900-17 000) for the schoolclosure scenario, 6100 (1500-12 000) for the workplacedistancing scenario, and 4900 (100-11 700) for the combined intervention (figures 1, 2). the combined approach resulted in the largest reduction in cases from baseline (93·0% reduction [iqr 81·5-99·7]). for the baseline scenario, when r 0 was 2·5, 32% (iqr 30•9-33•1) of the singaporean population were infected, with a cumulative median of 1 207 000 cases (iqr 1 164 000-1 249 000) on day 80 ( figure 1, table) . at this level of trans mission, quarantine resulted in a median of 520 000 cases (268 000-754 000), school closure 466 000 cases (175 000-728 000), workplace distancing 320 000 cases (116 000-558 000), and the combined inter vention 258 000 cases (65 000-508 000; table; appendix p 10). the maximum number of daily infections was 42 800 (iqr 41 400-43 500) for the baseline scenario, 37 900 (25 900-41 800) for the quarantine scena rio, 36 400 (18 100-41 400) for the schoolclosure scenario, 29 800 (12 500-40 500) for the workplace-distancing scenario, and 25 200 (7700-39 200) for the combined intervention (figure 1; appendix p 10). com pared with baseline, the combined approach resulted in the greatest reduction in cases (78·2%for all simulations, the median age of infection was 37 years (iqr 26-49). the location of infection (school, workplace, or home community) was determined according to the site where individuals were exposed to the virus (table). owing to behaviours of school absenteeism and work-distancing presenteeism, the number of infections acquired at work consistently exceeded those at school, although students could be transmitting the virus within the home community (table). such patterns of transmission are particularly evident for the combined intervention at higher levels of infectivity (r 0 =2·5), with a median of 1300 infections acquired at school (iqr 300-2800), 124 000 at the workplace (31 000-241 000), and 132 000 (34 000-265 000) in the home community.the median number of daily infections across time showed that when r 0 was 1·5 or 2·0, the epidemic peak was unlikely to occur during the 80-day timeframe, whereas when r 0 was 2·5, a peak in cases was observed approximately 9 weeks after reaching 100 community infections (figure 1). when r 0 was 2·5, the interventions had a suppressive effect on the number of new cases each day, although the number of cases continued to increase at day 80, indicating a delayed intervention effect rather than a preventive effect as observed when r 0 was 1·5 (figure 2; appendix pp 9-10). geospatially, the number of cases across singapore at day 80 show a high number of home community infections in highly residential areas and considerable infection-source mixing (figure 3; appendix p 11). the combined intervention had the greatest effect on the number of infections, with a universal reduction across singapore when r 0 was 1·5 ( figure 3 ). the combined intervention had a smaller effect when r 0 was 2·0 or 2·5, with a relatively homogeneous distribution nationwide, although dense residential clusters in the north of singapore, in areas near the malaysia border, indicate strong comparative persistence of the virus despite the use of the combined approach (figure 3).our models assumed that 7·5% of cases were asymptomatic. considering a higher asymptomatic proportion of the total infected population of 22·7%, owing to isolation of fewer infected individuals and quarantine of fewer family members, for the quarantine scenario when r 0 was 1·5, an additional 100 000 cases (iqr 41 800-152 000) would be observed at 80 days (appendix p 7). similarly, a higher asymptomatic proportion resulted in a higher median cumulative number of cases for the schoolclosure, work-distancing, and combined intervention data are median (iqr). all numbers up to 10 000 have been rounded to the nearest hundred, and numbers higher than 10 000 have been rounded to the nearest thousand, therefore, some discrepancies will exist in the summations. due to the stochasticity within each simulation, numbers less than 20 indicate nearly complete suppression and should not be compared to assess effectiveness. sars-cov-2=severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. r 0 =basic reproduction number.scenarios: an additional 97 000 (iqr 31 200-151 000), 64 800 (10 500-110 000), and 51 000 cases (1500-107 000), respectively, when r 0 was 1·5 (appendix p 12). when r 0 was 2·0, assuming an asymptomatic proportion of 22·7%, an additional 381 000 cases (iqr 250 000-474 000) were observed for the quarantine scenario, 400 000 cases (275 000-509 000) for the school-closure scenario, 316 000 cases (175 000-433 000) for the workplacedistancing scenario, and 294 000 cases (162 000-430 000) for the combined interventions scenario (appendix p 13). when r 0 was 2·5, an additional 577 000 cases (iqr 382 000-777 000), 557 000 cases (372 000-785000), 567 000 cases (379 000-775 000), and 599 000 cases (394 000-804 000) were observed for the quarantine, school-closure, workplace-distancing, and combined intervention scenarios, respectively (appendix p 14). the medians of the number of infections and location of infection for the 22·7% asymptomatic fraction is presented in the appendix (p 7). the median number of infections and location of infection for the higher theoretical asymptomatic proportions are presented in the appendix (p 8). at higher asymptomatic proportions of 30·0%, 40·0%, and 50·0%, further increases were observed (appendix pp 8, [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . we only ran the analysis at higher asymptomatic rates at the lower level of infectivity (r 0 =1·5), because we observed substantial increases in the number of cases observed, reflecting poor case control that would otherwise be exacerbated and lead to containment failure at higher infectivity. when r 0 was 1·5, interventions caused substantial reductions in the number of infections at asymptomatic fractions of 7·5% and 22·7%. for quarantine, by comparison with the number of cases observed for the 7·5% asymptomatic proportion assumption when r 0 was 1·5, the median number of cases increased by 172 000 (iqr 113 000-221 000) for a 30·0% asymptomatic proportion. this number increased to 253 000 (209 000-294 000) for a 40·0% asymptomatic fraction, and to 314 000 (276 000-343 000) for a 50·0% asymptomatic fraction (appendix pp [15] [16] [17] . at an asymptomatic proportion of 30·0%, increases compared with a 7·5% asymptomatic proportion of 172 000 (iqr 104 000-221 000), 124 000 (53 100-170 000), and 114 000 cases (36 300-172 000) were observed for school closure, workplace distancing, and the combined interventions, respectively (appendix pp [15] [16] [17] . increases for school closure, workplace distancing, and combined inter ventions were 253 000 (iqr 206 000-287 000), 203 000 (153 000-251 000), and 196 000 cases (134 000-244 000), respectively, for an asymptomatic proportion of 40·0% and 312 000 (278 000-340 000), 269 000 (215 000-308 000), and 267 000 cases (216 000-307 000), respectively, for an asymptomatic proportion of 50·0% (appendix pp [16] [17] .concerns about covid-19 becoming a global epidemic are increasing on the basis of previous epidemics, such as sars-cov, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), and pandemic influenza. the introduction of cases into new countries, regions and cities is likely to continue in areas where local establishment could form, depending on the ongoing level of control measures. in the event that local containment is unsuccessful, our findings suggest that national outbreak control is feasible provided that r 0 is low (≤1•5), with a combination of the proposed inter vention measures (quarantine, school closure, and workplace distancing) being most effective. under this scenario (r 0 =1·5), workplace distancing reduced the median number of cases from 279 000 (iqr 245 000-320 000) to 4000 (200-23 000), as a result of the high employment rates (around 98%) among individuals of working age in singapore. 25 this observation is consistent with the conclusions of a review of 15 studies that found a median reduction of 23% (range 12-82) in the cumulative influenza a h1n1 attack rate with workplace distancing alone. 26 the implementation of such a control measure, however, is likely to have an acute societal economic effect on individuals who must work from home or take leave, especially if reimbursement is not possible. thus, decision making becomes a function of risk as to whether the imported cases have or will infect the local population and cause a local outbreak. an r 0 value of 1·5 is not consistent with the evidence from china, 14 and thus prevention of community transmission might not be possible using interventions that would be widely supported by the population. at the start of the outbreak, the risk of repeated importation of sars-cov-2 into singapore was deemed to be considerable given that around 3•4 million people travel from wuhan to singapore annually. 27 furthermore, the start of the epidemic coincided with the 2020 chinese lunar new year holiday, with the expectation that the number of individuals arriving from china would be similar to that for the 2018 celebrations (around 800 000 tourists from china). 27 the high influx of incoming travellers exacerbated the risk of local disease establishment, bringing at least 18 initial confirmed imported cases into singapore before feb 4, 2020, when the first four local transmission cases were confirmed. 11 these four cases had contact with at least two infected tourists at a shop, who were identified through intensive contact tracing efforts. although travel is now reduced, at least 175 subsequent locally-acquired infections have been reported at the time of writing across a diverse range of residential and commercial sites despite efforts by the singaporean government to quarantine and isolate infected individuals. on march 16, 2020, 11 of the 17 confirmed cases were imported with travel histories including the uk, indonesia, portugal, spain, the usa, france, germany, switzerland, and belgium. 11 on march 17, 2020, a further 17 of 23 cases were reported to be imported. 11 with the risk of disease establishment remaining high from the continued importation of cases, workplace distancing and school closure remain as critical interventions that can avert a significant number of cases.we found that these two interventions, when used in combination with quarantine, would be highly effective at low infection rates (ie, r 0 of 1·5), with median of 10 000 cases (iqr 200-28 000) observed for school closures and 4000 cases (200-23 000) for workplace distancing compared with 279 000 cases (245 000-320 000) at the baseline. at the highest level of infectivity (r 0 =2·5), substantial reductions were observed with a median of 466 000 cases (iqr 175 000-728 000) observed when school closure was used and 320 000 (116 000-558 000) for workplace distancing compared with 1 207 000 cases (1 164 000-1 249 000) at baseline. however, if the preventive effect of these interventions reduces considerably due to higher asymptomatic proportions, more pressure will be placed on the quarantining and treatment of infected individuals, which could become unfeasible when the number of infected individuals exceeds the capacity of health-care facilities.scale-up of ongoing surveillance programmes and rigorous contract tracing 12, 28 are thus required to assist in the maintenance of a low number of unidentified infections at this time, with school closure and workplace distancing being potentially effective strategies for deployment nationwide should local transmission, with multiple transmission events recorded between individuals in the resident population, begin. our simulation model, which examined hypothetical infection spread with 100 unidentified singaporean cases as a seed population, showed that for the baseline scenario (ie, no control interventions) by day 80, when r 0 was 1·5, around 279 000 individuals would be infected, when r 0 was 2·0, around 727 000 individuals would be infected, and when r 0 was 2·5, around 1 207 000 individuals would be infected. in the event that suppression of transmission through quarantine is unsuccessful and local transmission begins, which has currently been observed in other countries on a small scale, 29, 30 policy makers in singapore should deploy alternate measures, such as school closure and workplace distancing, in a timely manner. school closure has been used in the past in singapore to limit the spread of hand, foot, and mouth disease, and was associated with a decrease of up to 53% in secondary cases, 31 probably because children generally have high contact rates with their peers in the school environment. given this historical experience, a similar programme for covid-19 could be established reasonably quickly. however, at present, data on the susceptibility of children to sars-cov-2 infection, the number of infected children in singapore, and the probability of children becoming symptomatic are limited, making school closure less desirable than workplace distancing.the continually high percentage contribution of workrelated infections despite work distancing being effective suggests that the workplace is a key infection site in singapore, whereby reductions in workplace transmission averts cases at all other sites. the effects of school closure and quarantine were comparable, since the displacement of students to the home community will then rely on quarantine as a measure of preventing infection. however, asymptomatic cases, assumed to account for 7•5% of the infected population, would continue to contribute to transmission, and the identification of these individuals presents a challenge.increasing the asymptomatic proportion in our model from 7·5% to 22·7%, which is reflective of influenza a h1n1, 24 resulted in limited infection control with considerable stochasticity, whereby the failure of early quarantine led to outbreaks similar in size to those observed for the baseline scenario, even when r 0 was 1·5. under this assumption, the median number of cases averted compared with baseline ranged from 219 000 to 282 000 cases (64·4-82·9% reduction) depending on the intervention scenario. for the quarantine, school-closure, work-dis tancing, and combined intervention scenarios, assuming an asymptomatic proportion of 7·5% and an r 0 of 1·5, a median of 264 000-277 200 cases (94·6-99·4% reduction) would be averted compared with the baseline scenario. thus, considering the differences in number of cases averted by proportion of asymptomatic individuals in the population, additional interventions, such as vaccination (where research is rapidly ongoing) or the prescribing of existing antiviral drugs that are effective for the treatment of related viral infections, should be considered. contact inhibition remains important, but the high proportion of asymptomatic and undocumented infections and missed opportunities to quarantine will make control challenging. even at a low infectivity (r 0 ≤1·5), a high asymptomatic pro portion is problematic, with 58 000 infections (iqr 5400-123 000) occurring at an asymptomatic proportion of 22·7% compared with 1800 infections (200-23 000) at a 7·5% asymptomatic proportion with the combined intervention'. these effects were exacerbated further at higher asymptomatic proportions of 30·0-50·0%. with fewer cases averted and larger outbreak sizes from undocumented spread due to asymptomatic individuals, the dialogue partly shifts from containment to case management to reduce mortality from complications.regardless of the proportion of individuals in the population with asymptomatic infection, all the proposed interventions should be used in addition to other measures, such as rapid diagnosis and appropriate case management, if local containment fails. current government-led outbreak control measures will only be successful with public cooperation through exercising good hygiene, infection prevention in shared spaces, and adequate education to understand when symptoms might be indicative of a potential sars-cov-2 infection. public complicity is particularly crucial for older individuals (>60 years), individuals who are immunocompromised, and people with comorbidities who are at high risk of severe complications. 5 during the 2003 sars outbreak, 238 probable sars cases were reported and 33 individuals died in singapore, with the highest proportion of deaths (45%) reported among people aged 65 years and older. 32 the same observation is thus expected for covid-19 should local transmission occur since the median age of infection in our models was 37 years (iqr 26-49), with comparatively few children becoming infected because of school closure and awareness among parents to quarantine children with fever. singapore has one of the highest employment rates among older individuals (aged ≥65 years) of all countries within the organisation for economic co-operation and development (oecd) 33 and a culture of eating at socalled hawker centres (ie, food courts), with around 75% of people visiting a hawker centre at least once a week. 34 consequently, many older people are expected to be exposed to infection at work or within their home communities, which could be mitigated in part by implementation of workplace distancing and, if possible, incentivisation to remain at home and practise workplace distancing, specifically for older individuals.at present, the quarantining of family and close contacts of confirmed cases is crucial, as shown by the substantial increase in infection rates among individuals who shared living spaces and bathrooms during the 2009 h1n1 influenza pandemic in china, despite the regular disinfection of these areas. 35 the protocols in place at present, including the use of specialist ambulances, negative pressure isolation rooms, and ultraviolet disinfection, will assist in isolating the infection and preventing transmission events at health-care facilities, as was seen during the 2003 sars outbreak. 21 since at least 15 medical staff in wuhan have contracted the virus, 3 singapore has provided full personal protective equipment for health-care workers; however, the results of our study suggest that community transmission will substantially contribute to transmission should local containment fail despite these measures. the main control measures at this time are surveillance, standard testing procedures, 36 and quarantine of individuals who are confirmed positive for the virus. such measures have been used in the past for suspected cases of mers-cov, which has a 34•4% casefatality rate, 37 with no cases of mers-cov reported in singapore to date, and for zika virus, which established locally in 2016, with only ten cases reported in 2019. 38 such successes in preventing local outbreaks are attributed to robust disease surveillance in singapore. nevertheless, dengue outbreaks are ongoing in singapore, 39 which highlights the difficulties in disease control that are in part due to undocumented spread and individuals who are asymptomatic; these issues are likely to affect the control of the ongoing covid-19 epidemic since many imported cases worldwide have been asymptomatic on entry to countries. 9 the implementation of school closure and workplace distancing can therefore be considered as a potential secondary control response in the event of infection quarantine failure and the establishment of community transmission. increasingly important, with a need to develop vaccines and existing drug therapies.jrk, bld, and arc designed the experiments. jrk and bld created the models. jrk ran the simulations. bld interpreted the results and wrote the manuscript. mp, ys, hs, jtl, and ct collected data for the models.we declare no competing interests.our study has several limitations. first, since geodemos-r is validated against census data, errors exist in our estimations of population features that are based on data that have been sample enumerated. second, a large population of migrant workers who travel from malaysia to singapore each day, visiting tourists, and long-term visa owners were not accounted for in our infection dynamics. third, the epidemiological characteristics of covid-19 remain uncertain in terms of the transmission and infectivity profile of the virus; therefore, estimates of the time between symptom onset and admission to hospital, how infectious an individual is over time, and the asymptomatic rate were based on sars-cov. once this information becomes available for covid-19, a full sensitivity analysis should be done. fourth, the contact patterns between individuals are highly dynamic and heterogeneous across the population; therefore, our simulated work, school, and home popu lations serve as a general estimation of infection spread. fifth, effectiveness of the interventions might vary depending on the ongoing seeding of imported cases, which we did not account for, and will also rely on intervention compliance. sixth, multiple indirect effects from the interventions and modifications to human behaviour are likely, which are difficult to quantify and measure. the optimum times to implement each intervention and how long they should be run for to achieve long-term epidemic control should be explored. finally, there are multiple unforeseen factors that remain challenging to assess at this time, such as increased infection rates at mass gatherings, delays in quarantining as a result of individuals not seeking health care at symptom onset, alternate contact events in locations such as public transport, potential transmission events in the health-care setting, and the effects of community-wide behavioural shifts in response to knowledge of the outbreak.pandemic planning is crucial at the early stages to avert a nationwide outbreak. in this study, we investigated the use of interventions that aim to restrict contact between individuals at important mixing sites: schools, workplaces, and at home. we found that, especially for lower infection scenarios (r 0 of 1·5), a combined approach comprising quarantine (for infected individuals and their families), school closure, and workplace distancing is effective and could prevent 99·3% of infections (iqr 92•6-99•9) when compared with the baseline scenario. at higher infectivity scenarios, outbreak prevention becomes considerably more challenging because although effective, transmission events still occur: for the combined approach scenario, a median of 50 000 cases were estimated at r 0 of 2·0 and 258 000 cases at r 0 of 2·5. these combined interventions should therefore be implemented rapidly upon confirmation of second-generation local transmission occurring within the resident population to suppress increases in the national r 0 . at higher asymptomatic rates, public education and case management becomecarried out on co-ethnic couples before inter-ethnic couples due to the majority being the former. location 23 attributes were set for the couple at one spouse's location and the sa was carried out again to ensure the 24 synthetic couples resembled the census data on spousal characteristics such as education level, religion, 25 working status and income level.following partner formation, households were characterized. attributes including the features of the household 27 heads, household size, dwelling type, number of working people, monthly household income and predominant 28 language, were generated for each synthetic household. the sa was performed before the introduction of 29 further variables which were the number of family nuclei, number of generations and age of the youngest child 30 of the household head, before again implementing the sa. constraints were applied for this sa on the lower 31 bound of household size, number of generations and number of family nuclei for married household heads with 32 or without children, as represented in the census tables.once partners and households had been created for each geographical spatial unit, individuals and couples were 34 assigned to these synthetic households to form household heads or members. maternal status was randomly 35 attributed among ever-married females for each age group at each household in a spatial unit. for mother-child 36 relationships, the frequency distributions of age differences between mothers and children by the child's year of 37 birth and ethnic group were derived from the registry of births and deaths, 2010 2 . for widowed and divorced 38 men, ex-spouse ages were generated based on the distribution of the age difference between husbands and 39 wives, which was extracted from the statistics on marriages and divorces, 2011 3 , in order to assign each child a 40 widowed or divorced father. parents of household heads and their partners were assigned in the same manner.during child assignment between parents, household characteristics such as the household size, family nuclei 42 number, number of generations and number of working people were retained as thresholds to retain the 43 generated household configurations.the 1.14 million households consisting of single or multi-generational parents and children were assigned to 45 76,834 georeferenced residential buildings with postal codes as listed by the singapore land authority on their 46 portal onemap 4 whilst preserving the characteristics of the households listed for each spatial unit using the sa.each of the 3.77 million singaporean individuals were then allocated further attributes from the labour force report, 2010, to account for relationships among socio economic attributes. a final sa was employed for each 49 attribute to match the joint distributions within the census until a 99% match was determined between the actual 50 and synthetic census tables created from the sa.the time taken travelling from home to work or school for each individual was used to determine the 53 corresponding address. smart ez-link data, which records the public transport activities for all individuals in 54 one month (1 st to 31 st august, 2013), was used to determine the distance individuals are able to travel across 55 singapore. the boarding and terminating ridership data are recorded at the card user level at bus stop and train 56 station locations. a full list of both bus and train lines and nodes was obtained from the lta datamall 5 as a 57 reference dataset for travel times to be calculated across the public transport network in singapore.the ez-link dataset was processed to remove noise by eliminating trips with empty alighting stops and 59 infrequent card users with fewer than 30 journeys a month as we assumed individuals who are students or 60 working would utilise public transportation twice a day. for each remaining card id, we determined the stay 61 duration for each journey, the morning journey (after 12am and before 9am) and evening journey pathways 62 (after 5pm to 12am). potential home to work or school journeys were assigned to be where the stay duration was 63 greater than 6 hours based on singapore's household interview travel study 6 with the most frequent and first 64 morning journey departure point at the home location and most frequent morning alighting stop at work or 65 school. three ez-link card types exist within singapore; adult, child and senior. the adult and senior pass 66 data were used for work addresses, and child passes for school addresses.a 250m buffer was created around every bus stop and 500m for train stations, representing a 5 to 10-minute 68 walk for the former and 10 to 15-minute walk for the latter in the dense and vertical structure of singapore's 69 urban city. the high spatial density of the bus stop network also required the smaller buffer size. all home, 70 work and school addresses were allocated a corresponding bus and/or train station for access with an associated for each home location of the working population, potential journeys were created from the three highest 82 probable travel nodes to relevant workplaces, as allocated by the occupation type and travel times in the 83 synthetic population process, and highest probable work travel nodes simultaneously. the total probability of 84 the home-work pair was determined to be the product of equation 1 at the home and work site. a ten-minute 85 leeway was allowed however in travel time which allowed for at least 3 potential journeys for each working 86 individual. once all journeys were ranked from highest probability to lowest, one of the top three were selected 87 randomly to be representative. the same process was repeated for students except a maximum capacity was 88 allocated to each school as determined by school enrolment sizes 10 , therefore schools were iteratively filled as 89 random students were selected with no spatial bias. for each working individual and student, a travel trajectory 90 is thus provided which serves as a contact network for epidemiological modelling. overall, the probability of individual getting infected from location type on a day is therefore given as, variable input/categories 159 some discrepancies will therefore exist in the summations. 216 d), f) and h). the baseline no control strategy is presented as the iqr in light blue for clarity.of such patients in the future.keywords: sars-cov-2; covid-19; asymptomatic; characteristics 24 1. introduction 25 since an outbreak of covid-19 in wuhan and related regions in 26 hubei province [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] , an increasing number of exported cases have been in table 1 . symptoms were fever (28, 77.8%), followed by dry cough (17, 47.2%), 104 expectoration (4, 11.1%), fatigue (4, 11.1%), sore throat (4, 11.1%), 105 myalgia (4, 11.1%), headache (2, 5.6%), and coryza (1, 2.8%). the 106 detailed clinical characteristics were found in table 2 and 3. asymptomatic individuals with coronavirus disease (covid-19) have been identified via nucleic acid testing for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2);however, the epidemiologic characteristics and viral shedding pattern of asymptomatic patients remain largely unknown in this study, serological testing was applied when identifying nine asymptomatic cases of covid-19 who showed persistent negative rt-pcr test results for sars-cov-2 nucleic acid and no symptoms of covid-19 two asymptomatic cases were presumed to be index patients who had cleared the virus when their close contacts developed symptoms of covid-19 three of the asymptomatic cases were local individuals who spontaneously recovered before their presumed index patients developed symptoms of covid-19 this report presents the epidemiologic and clinical characteristics of asymptomatic individuals with sars-cov-2 infection that were undetected on rt-pcr tests in previous epidemiologic investigations probably due to the transient viral shedding durationidentification of rt-pcr-negative asymptomatic covid-19 patients via serological testingthe coronavirus disease (covid-19) has spread globally, mainly via person-to-person transmission, and poses a major public health concern (1). the epidemiologic and clinical characteristics of symptomatic covid-19 patients have been increasingly reported in recent research (2) , whereas the asymptomatic proportion of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2)-infected individuals remains largely uncharacterized.symptomatic patients are detected because they seek medical attention, but asymptomatic individuals with sars-cov-2 infection are identified via the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) test for sars-cov-2 (3). a previous study investigated a familial cluster of covid-19 cases that included an asymptomatic 10-year-old boy who had radiological ground-glass lung opacities and tested positive on the rt-pcr test for sars-cov-2 (1). a case report identified a 61-year-old asymptomatic patient with abnormal ct images and positive rt-pcr test results for sars-cov-2 that persisted for 23 days in the absence of obvious clinical symptoms (4) . while some asymptomatic infected individuals remain asymptomatic over a long period, a proportion of asymptomatic covid-19 patients were identified at the presymptomatic stage. through epidemiological investigation, a study identified 24 sars-cov-2 positive cases on rt-pcr comprising five cases that subsequently developed covid-19 symptoms and 19 that remained asymptomatic (5) . in addition, a study screened pregnant women who presented at hospitals and identified 43 covid-19 patients via nucleic acid tests, including four patients who remained afebrile and asymptomatic throughout their delivery hospitalization and postpartum course (6) . the abovementioned studies identified asymptomatic covid-19 patients via rt-pcr tests, but the viral shedding pattern and epidemiologic characteristics of covid-19 remain poorly understood.asymptomatic patients can easily be overlooked in epidemic prevention (7, 8) . based on data extracted from china's infectious disease information system, 889 asymptomatic cases were identified among the 72,314 patient records, which accounted for only 1.2% of the total patients (9) . recent rt-pcr tests in china that primarily provided for passengers arriving from abroad revealed that 78% of the cases of new infection were asymptomatic when the tests were conducted (10) . the proportion of asymptomatic covid-19 patients on the diamond princess cruise ship was estimated to be 50.5%, and the proportion among the evacuated japanese citizens was estimated to be 30.8% (3, 11) . in addition, a study suggested that at least 59% of the infected cases went undetected in wuhan, which potentially includes asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic cases (8, 12) . in this study, we enrolled 38 patients with close contact with covid-19 who exhibited persistently negative rt-pcr results for sars-cov-2 and aimed to evaluate their antibody for sars-cov-2 via serological tests. to the best of our knowledge, this report is among the first reports on tracing of the index patients via serology testing. among the 38 study participants enrolled in this study, the median age of the patients was 47.5 years (interquartile range 26.5-59.25), and 11 (28.9%) were female. of the 38 close contacts who were tested, nine cases were found positive for anti-sars-cov-2 antibody. the positive serologic test results were reported with consistent results from wondfo and bioscience biotechnology co. ltd., both of which have been approved by the chinese national drug administration. colloidal gold immunochromatography reagent from wondfo biotechnology co. ltd. and chemiluminescence reagent for immunoglobulin g from bioscience biotechnology co. ltd. were used to detect sars-cov-2 specific antibodies according to the manufacturer's instructions. of the nine asymptomatic cases, two cases were presumed to be index patients of local cases (figure 1) , three cases were local patients who spontaneously recovered before their presumed index patients were found positive on sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing (figure 2) , and four cases were close contacts of covid-19 patients and had undefined roles in disease transmission (figure 3) .case 1 was a 39-year-old woman who lived in wuhan and drove to loudi on january 22, 2020, to visit a relative, who developed fever and cough on february 9, 2020, and tested positive on rt-pcr for sars-cov-2 on february 12, 2020 (figure 1) . case 1 showed negative rt-pcr test results for sars-cov-2 on nasopharyngeal swab samples collected on february 12, 17, and 24 and exhibited no fever, cough, dyspnea, headache, fatigue, gastrointestinal, or other covid-19 symptoms, and she did not receive any therapeutic intervention over this period. a blood sample collected on february 28, 2020, showed that she tested positive on a serological test for sars-cov-2 (figure 1) . case 1 was presumed to have viral shedding during january 22 and january 25, 2020; she spontaneously recovered before february 12, 2020 and had no covid-19-related symptoms during the following 2 months.case 2, a 52-year-old man, lived in wuhan and took the train to loudi on january 15, 2020. four close contacts of case 2 were later diagnosed with covid-19 (figure 1) . specifically, one close contact had never been in contact with the other three close contacts. case 2 presented with occasional cough but denied any fever, dyspnea, headache, fatigue, or gastrointestinal symptoms over the period. as case 2 had an occasional cough and four of his close contacts were confirmed to have covid-19, case 2 underwent medical examination from february 3 to 5. chest computed tomography (ct) scanning images recorded on february 4 and 7 showed exudative lesions in both lungs. however, the rt-pcr tests for sars-cov-2 that were repeated four times with nasopharyngeal swab samples were all negative (figure 1) , whereas the anti-mycoplasma pneumoniae immunoglobulin m (igm) and igg antibody tests on february 7 were positive. during the 2-week home quarantine without specific therapeutic intervention, case 2 reported that his cough had resolved. no characteristic symptom of covid-19 was reported thereafter; however, a blood sample collected on february 28, 2020, tested positive for anti-sars-cov-2 antibody (figure 1 ), although case 2 had no covid-19-related symptoms or complications during the following 2 months.cases 3-5 were local residents without travel histories in the past 3 months and were infected by the presumed index patients from the previous epidemiologic investigation. these patients presumably recovered spontaneously before their index patients were confirmed positive for sars-cov-2 (figure 2) . cases 6-9 had been to wuhan or had traveled since the covid-19 outbreak, and they thus had an undefined role in disease transmission (figure 3) . cases 3-9 had persistently negative rt-pcr test results for sars-cov-2 without covid-19 symptoms but tested positive on serological tests for sars-cov-2. the cases denied previous exposure to sars-cov-2 and received no therapeutic intervention or complained of covid-19-related symptoms or complications during the following 2 months.nine additional asymptomatic patients of covid-19 were identified via serological tests in 38 close contacts of covid-19 patients who had persistently negative rt-pcr test results for sars-cov-2. local covid-19 cases are rare in loudi district, which has a total of 76 symptomatic patients and 26 asymptomatic patients who were identified via rt-pcr test for sars-cov-2.underestimation of asymptomatic infections of covid-19 has been suggested, as an increasing number of infected people have not traveled to epidemic hotspots or been linked to known covid-19 patients (8) . applying serological tests, singapore identified the source of a cluster of 23 covid-19 patients who tested negative on rt-pcr for sars-cov-2 (13) . in this study, we report nine asymptomatic patients identified via serological test in addition to 26 asymptomatic patients who were previously identified by the rt-pcr test. the nine asymptomatic patients had multiple negative rt-pcr test results, with the first rt-pcr test of these asymptomatic patients conducted almost immediately after their close contacts were identified as covid-19 patients. thus, a proportion of asymptomatic patients might have short viral shedding duration or may have viral nucleic acid loads that are undetectable on rt-pcr. according to a previous study, the interval from the first day of positive rt-pcr tests to the first day of continuous negative tests for the asymptomatic patient ranged from 1 to 21 days, with five asymptomatic patients having persistently negative rt-pcr test results 1 day after the date of diagnosis (5) . the results indicated the potential for the underestimation of the proportion of asymptomatic patients based on rt-pcr tests, which possibly identifies only those with longer viral shedding period. these results suggested that serological tests could serve as a more reliable method to estimate the asymptomatic proportion of covid-19 patients.studies have suggested that symptomatic patients of covid-19 have higher transmissibility within 5 days of symptom onset than later on, and infectivity might peak on or before symptom onset (14, 15) . however, the epidemiologic characteristics of asymptomatic patients remain unclear. a previous study has identified covid-19 transmission caused by an asymptomatic carrier who had normal chest ct findings (16) . in addition, the viral load detected in the asymptomatic patient was similar to that in the symptomatic patients, suggesting a similar transmission potential (17) . herein, we identified covid-19 transmission caused by two asymptomatic index patients who cleared the virus whereas their local relatives developed symptoms of covid-19.serological test results of the 9 asymptomatic patients who had repeated negative rt-pcr test results for sars-cov-2 suggest that a proportion of the individuals infected with sars-cov-2 can recover without treatment, indicating that some individuals may have highly efficient neutralizing antibodies. admittedly, this research was limited to a small cohort with nasopharyngeal swab samples of the asymptomatic cases collected after their close contacts were confirmed to be sars-cov-2 positive on rt-pcr. further studies with a large cohort are needed to elucidate the viral shedding pattern and transmission characteristics of asymptomatic cases with sars-cov-2 infection.this study was approved by the hunan normal university institutional review board. written informed consent was obtained from the participants for the publication of the case report.pw and jw conceived and designed the experiments. xl, jw, gq, md, qy, dz, and zp contributed to the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data. pw and nz drafted and revised the manuscript. all authors critically reviewed the manuscript.in december 2019 a novel coronavirus, which was later named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), caused a large outbreak of infectious disease, designated covid-19. it spread from wuhan, hubei province, to the whole of china and continues to pose a great threat to public health [1] . compared to sars-cov or mers-cov, it appears to be transmitted more easily [2] [3] [4] . sars-cov-2 can be transmitted through a variety of modes, including droplets, close contact, aerosol and potentially also fecal-oral transmission [5, 6] . people of all ages are generally susceptible to the virus.symptomatic covid-19 patients and asymptomatic cases are both a source of infection and patients in the incubation period can transmit sars-cov-2 to other persons [7] [8] [9] [10] .patients with symptoms are more likely to be detected. among patients with sars-cov-2, fever has been the most common symptom, followed by dry cough, dyspnoea, myalgia, headache and diarrhoea [11] [12] [13] . in severe covid-19 cases, symptoms can progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock and metabolic acidosis [14] . the clinical presentation of covid-19 therefore ranges from asymptomatic to severe respiratory illness [15] . the presentation of symptoms provides an opportunity for case detection and isolation, facilitating the interruption of transmission. because most sars-cov patients had severe symptoms, they were relatively simple to identify and isolate, thus interrupting the chain of transmission. unfortunately, covid-19 has an incubation period from infection to onset of symptoms that lasts an average of 10 days (with a reported range of 2-14 days)[11, 16, 17] . the virus is also able to spread from one person to another before any symptom onset [14] . it is reported that about 1.2% of the patients have no any actual clinical manifestations during the entire course of the disease [18] . asymptomatic cases, however, particularly those with no history of contact with a known sars-cov-2, are hard to identify. there are several case reports of sars-cov-2 transmission from asymptomatic individuals [8, 9, 13, 19] , a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t including a report of presumed transmission by asymptomatic carriers with normal chest computed tomography (ct) [20] . together, these traits make control of sars-cov-2 very difficult.however, the exact profile of these asymptomatic cases and their role within the wider epidemic are unclear. it is important to understand the proportion of asymptomatic or mildly ill cases and their role in driving the epidemic [21] . since many sars-cov-2 infections are asymptomatic, subclinical or very mild the hallmarks and course of asymptomatic infection warrants for further investigation [22] [23] [24] . our goal was to document the characteristics of asymptomatic infections and identify factors associated with asymptomatic infection, enabling the formulation of corresponding strategies and control measures.we conducted a retrospective study focusing on the characteristics and length of rt-pcr positivity and associated hospitalization of confirmed asymptomatic cases of sars-cov-2 in northeast region of chongqing almost in the chongqing three gorges center hospital and wanzhou district hospital since january 2020.active contact tracing in china includes nasopharyngeal swab diagnostic testing of all contacts regardless of symptoms. in accord with chinese guidelines for the investigation and management of close contacts of covid-19 cases, close contacts were defined as people who had not taken effective protection while in close contact with suspected or confirmed cases 2 days prior to symptom onset or, if the case was asymptomatic, 2 days before sampling [25] . we screened close contacts from january through march 2020 in northeast chongqing by real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) of nasopharyngeal swabs. only a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t patients with an rt-pcr-confirmed infection and without any apparent symptoms, including (but not limited to) cough, fever, short of breathless and muscle soreness were enrolled in this study.these individuals were identified through close symptomatic contacts in both the clinic and the community. in accord with china's prevention and control policy, all rt-pcr positive cases were hospitalized and treated whether they have symptoms or not. we monitored asymptomatic individuals daily during hospitalization to document the development of any signs and symptoms. we recategorized patients who were asymptomatic at baseline to symptomatic if they reported any symptoms. case definitions of confirmed human infection with sars-cov-2 are in accordance with the interim guidance from the world health organization.following a positive sars-cov-2 nucleic acid test, a chest ct scan was done [26] .individuals were then divided to two groups by chest ct scan: a group with changes visible on the radiographic imaging, called asymptomatic covid-19 patients, and a group without any detectable imaging changes, called asymptomatic with normal chest ct. during hospitalization, all participants, regardless of group, had follow-up chest ct scans every 4 to 5 days until discharge. individuals initially allocated to the asymptomatic with normal chest ct group were immediately reallocated to the asymptomatic covid-19 patient group if a new abnormal finding was detected on any chest ct during hospitalization.with the approval of the ethics committee, we collected both epidemiological data and medical reports for these two groups. epidemiological data collection was achieved by interviewing each patient and their family members, including the dates and times of close contact with (working together, living or gathering) or to exposure individuals from the affected area (not only wuhan) with confirmed or suspected sars-cov-2 infection. all the data were checked by two researchers. if there existed anything ambiguous, we consulted the attending physician as soon as possible.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p tdiagnosis was made by nasopharyngeal swab and rt-pcr to confirm sars-cov-2 infection. the virus detection protocol was repeated on subsequent days until a negative nucleic acid was obtained on two consecutive occasions. other laboratory tests were conducted at admission. table 1 ). all of these comorbidities were reported to be very mild by the patients' clinicians.regarding potential sources of infection, less than a third (n=17, 27%) of cases had made short trips to hubei province and none had been to huanan seafood market. a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p ton admission, only 4 of the 63 (6.3%) cases showed leucopenia (white blood cell count <4×10 9 /l) and 4 (6.3%) showed leukocytosis (white blood cell count >10×10 9 /l). all the cases had a neutrophil count within the normal range. eight (12.7%) cases had low level lymphocyte count (<1.0×10 9 /l), including six (20.7%) asymptomatic covid-19 patients and two (5.9%) asymptomatic with normal chest ct. thirty-five of the 63 cases were given procalcitonin tests, with a mean of 0.029 ng/ml (range from 0.02 to 0.039) indicating a level within the normal range.almost half of the 63 cases were tested for cytokines such as il-6, il-10 and il-17, liver and kidney function, with all showing normal results. in all of these laboratory tests, the two imaging groups showed no significant difference ( table   2) .fitness for discharge was based on two consecutive negative rt-pcr tests of oropharyngeal swabs and a normal chest ct scan. all patients were discharged, and no one died. the median time between the initial positive rt-pcr test and discharge was significantly longer in asymptomatic covid-19 patients than in asymptomatic patients with normal chest ct, 13.0 and 10.4 days, respectively (p<0.05; figure 2 ).the number of sars-cov-2 infections is still rising rapidly in many parts of the world, and asymptomatic infections likely play a large role in transmission [22] .to our surprise, 23% of those identified with sars-cov-2 infection, including those with abnormal chest ct scans on admission, were completely asymptomatic throughout their infections-a much higher proportion than previously reported [18] . the high proportion may be related to the extensive and strict close a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t contact screening policy adopted locally resulting in early detection and treatment of cases. this finding suggests that there are actually more asymptomatic covid-19 cases than previously thought, highlighting asymptomatic cases as a noteworthy source of infection. a recent study reported that the viral load in asymptomatic patients is similar to that in symptomatic patients, further underscoring the transmission potential of these asymptomatic patients [27] . together these results suggest that strict isolation and screening should be carried out in all asymptomatic close contacts. ct scans can assist in the detection of asymptomatic pneumonia, but cannot identify asymptomatic cases with normal chest ct. if nucleic acid testing were reserved only for suspected patients with obvious symptoms, many contacts with mild symptoms or asymptomatic would be missed-as would their contacts.since there are no obvious symptoms, asymptomatic cases typically remain undiagnosed for a relatively long time. in our study the mean latency between close contact and diagnosis was 16.0 days, with a maximum of 29 days. this suggests that rt-pcr screening should be undertaken even if an individual shows no symptoms more than 14 days after close contact with an infected person. in asymptomatic patients, patients whose ct scans show signs of pneumonia are typically diagnosed earlier than those without such signs.because the pathogenesis of covid-19 is not well understood, all nucleic acid positive cases received antiviral treatment to prevent progression of the disease.although the efficacy of antiviral therapy is still unknown, it is possible that treatment prevented the progression of disease in this cohort. asymptomatic covid-19 patients with abnormal chest cts showed improvement over time, suggesting that these patients may have benefitted from the antiviral therapy. even with antiviral therapy the average time for viral nucleic acid testing assays to return to negative in the asymptomatic covid-19 patients after treatment was 13 days, which is not shorter than time reported for mild symptomatic patients [12] .however, cases with abnormal chest ct took significantly longer to become rt-a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t pcr negative than those without chest ct abnormalities. these characteristics indicate that asymptomatic covid-19 cases are important recessive sources of infection. thus, diagnosing all sars-cov-2 infections cases including the very mild, subclinical or asymptomatic as soon as possible and immediately isolating them is likely to be critical to cutting off the source of infection. although they have no symptoms or even no abnormal chest image, they spread the virus, causing infection and morbidity [20] .we found that 18 of the 63 asymptomatic cases (28.6%) had infection associated with familial clustering, indicating that asymptomatic infections can be identified through screening family members of index case. the high proportion may be related to the extent and length of close contact, as well as the relative ease of tracking and screening family members [8, 9] ; however, it is sometimes difficult to tell who transmitted the virus, the asymptomatic case or the infected family member [8] . it also suggests that occult transmission of sars-cov-2 may exist.only 14% of the asymptomatic cohort infected others, occurring equally between those with and without chest ct abnormalities. but it is certain that there are still a few asymptomatic cases that can cause transmission [28] . serum antibody tests may provide a low cost and rapid method for screening and could come to play an important role in the auxiliary diagnosis of sars-cov-2 infection[29].as a group, the asymptomatic cases in our study were younger and had fewer comorbidities compared to severe cases [11, 12] . research shows that the adaptive immune response against the virus in people with asymptomatic infection is stronger than in those with symptomatic infection [30, 31] . asymptomatic individuals without imaging abnormalities are younger than those with pneumonia.from our results, it seems that young individuals with normal immune function and without comorbidities are more likely to become asymptomatically infected.all patients in the study, with and without abnormal chest cts, steadily improved and were discharged smoothly after testing negative by rt-pcr. however, we do not know whether these asymptomatic cases, particularly those who had developed this study has several limitations. first, only 63 asymptomatic cases were included; as such it may be that we found no other associated epidemiologic factors due to sample size. second, we used a qualitative rt pcr test and could not quantitate viral load; thus, asymptomatic cases with low viral load may have been missed. third, a precise incubation period and transmissibility are difficult to document due to the concealed nature of asymptomatic infection. finally, our study does not provide a mechanistic explanation for asymptomatic status; a study linking asymptomatic status with differences in individual immu1nity, virus serotypes, viral load or other factors would contribute useful insights.in conclusion, here we provide an initial assessment of epidemiologic characteristics of asymptomatic infections of sars-cov-2. early identification of sars-cov-2 cases with subsequent isolation and treatment may contribute to decreased transmission and mortality. the authors declare no conflict of interest. m a n u s c r i p t table 1 personal and clinical characteristics of 63 asymptomatic patients with sars-cov-2 a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t m a n u s c r i p t a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t since december 2019, the novel coronavirus (covid-19) has been an epidemic. it is highly infectious and spreads rapidly. according to covid-19 global cases by the center for systems science and engineering (csse) at johns hopkins university (jhu), more than 2 million cases have been diagnosed worldwide, and over 190 thousand patients have died. the world health organization (who) listed the outbreak caused by covid-19 as 'public health emergencies of international concern (pheic).' this virus belongs to the same coronavirus as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) coronavirus but has higher replication ability, stronger interpersonal transmission ability, and higher pathogenicity. the population is generally susceptible, and there are numerous severe patients. however, after large-scale interpersonal infection, it is surprising that 'asymptomatic persons' appeared with no clinical symptoms, but pathogen detection is positive.the emergence of asymptomatic persons poses challenges to the prevention and treatment of the epidemic. whether asymptomatic patients are contagious and whether they need treatment are controversial issues for clinical experts. on the one hand, in terms of the law of infectious diseases, asymptomatic persons are also capable of spreading the virus, but the viral load and transmission harm need to be investigated. on the other hand, the progress of asymptomatic patients and the effect of drug therapy are still unclear. not long ago, a german asymptomatic patient was reported. the patient had chills, fever, and cough but recovered the next day and infected two colleagues in close contact with him in the latent period [1] .here, we report two special asymptomatic patients, a couple, without definite contact history. moreover, the male patient is an intercity bus driver; however, within 14 days after contact with him, no case of covid-19 infection was confirmed in the 188 passengers he had carried. only one passenger developed cough 6 days after taking the bus, whose covid-19 nucleic acid tests have been negative for many times so far, and influenza b was once weakly positive, waiting to be excluded covid-19 infection. this paper discussed the clinical characteristics of these two asymptomatic patients and summarized the pharmacological effects, clinical studies, and other precautions of the antiviral therapy on them, so as to provide a reference for the identification, diagnosis, and medication of asymptomatic patients in the epidemic prevention and control.on 28 january 2020, the patient went to a hospital in songxi county, fujian province, china, with 'soreness of loins' as the main complaint. the patient was in good health without previous medical history, medication history, and smoking or drinking habits. the physical examination showed the body temperature of 38°c, blood pressure of 138/80 mmhg, pulse rate of 92 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 98% while the patient was breathing ambient air. lung auscultation did not reveal rough breathing sounds, rhonchi, or pleural friction rub. blood test results demonstrated his c-reactive protein (crp) of 22.44 mg/l, procalcitonin of 0.12 ng/ml, glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase of 65 u/l, glutamic-pyruvic transaminase of 107 u/l, and glutamyl transpeptidase of 58 u/l, and other indicators were normal. chest ct examination showed multiple ground-glass appearance ( figure 1 ). since the patient works as a bus driver, covid-19 pneumonia cannot be ruled out, although he claimed no known contact with anyone from hubei. the hospital notified the local center for disease control and prevention (cdc) immediately and designated him as a 'suspected person.' the patient was isolated in the hospital. his throat swab specimen was obtained for covid-19 nucleic acid detection. on the same day, the local cdc confirmed that the patient's covid-19 test was negative.on 29 january 2020, the patient did not have fever or any other discomforts, and the covid-19 nucleic acid throat swab test was still negative. on 30 january, the patient had no discomfort. in order to exclude covid-19 infection, double throat swab specimens of the patient were collected and sent to both local and provincial cdc for reexamination. on 31 january, the results showed positive.with the coordination of the local health commission, the patient was sent to the isolation ward of nanping first hospital for treatment on 31 january 2020. on the first day of admission, the patient was suffered from soreness of waist, without cough, fever, shortness of breath, vomiting, or other discomforts. his vital signs appeared normal. the physical examination showed rough breathing sounds, and other monitored parameters were generally normal.from 31 january 2020 to 10 february 2020, the patient was given quadruple therapy, including lopinavir/ritonavir tablets (400/100 mg every 12 h), arbidol tablets (0.2 g every 8 h), lianhuaqingwen granules (a chinese patent medicine, 6 g every 8 h) orally, and recombinant human interferon-α2b injection via aerosol (6.0 × 10 6 iu with 2 ml of sterilized water for injection every 12 h). the patient had stable vital signs and normal oxygen saturation, without any discomfort. his clinical laboratory indicators are shown in table 1 . the patient's white-cell count, absolute neutrophil count, absolute lymphocyte count, platelet count, and crp were all in normal quantity. fasting blood glucose and triglyceride continued going up to 15.45 and 6.69 mmol/l, respectively, significantly higher than normal values. cholesterol rose to 5.47 mmol/l eventually. alanine aminotransferase (54-76 iu/l) and glutamyl transpeptidase (46-50 iu/l) persisted a bit higher. total bilirubin, fibrinogen, lactate dehydrogenase, and blood urate normalized after slightly exceeding the normal. on 10 february, compared with the previous chest ct result, the scattered patchy fuzzy shadows of both lungs slightly decreased. the patient was taken covid-19 nucleic acid throat swab tests on 7 february 2020 and 10 february 2020, respectively, and the results were both negative. on 11 february 2020, the patient discharged without any discomfort and in good condition.the patient is a 55-year-old housewife and has close contact with her husband, the patient of case 1.• asymptomatic patients are controversial and concerning issues of covid-19. the infectivity of some asymptomatic patients does not appear to be strong. • quadruple therapy, which is lopinavir/ritonavir tablets, arbidol tablets, lianhuaqingwen granules, and recombinant human interferon-α2b (ifn-α2b) injection via aerosol, is a common regimen for patients with covid-19 in china. the lung imaging of asymptomatic patients improved obviously after quadruple therapy, but which drug takes effect needs further studies. • lopinavir/ritonavir tablets cause high risks of drug interactions, hyperlipidemia, and hyperglycemia. • inhalation of ifn-α can raise its lung concentration. ifn-α2b is the most active type of ifn-α. 3.0-18 × 10 6 iu/day is the appropriate inhalation dose. on 28 january 2020, the patient had no discomfort and accompanied her husband to a hospital in songxi county, fujian province, china. as her husband was suspected to be infected with covid-19, she was also hospitalized and isolated. the patient was in good health without previous medical history, medication history, and smoking or drinking habits. the physical examination showed her body temperature of 36.8°c, blood pressure of 118/72 mmhg, pulse rate of 78 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 98% while the patient was breathing ambient air. auscultation of both lungs was normal. her clinical laboratory results were within normal range, except crp of 22.44 mg/l ( table 2 ). on the same day, the local cdc confirmed that the patient's covid-19 nucleic acid throat swab test was negative. on 29 january 2020, the patient had no discomfort, but her covid-19 nucleic acid throat swab test was positive. on 30 january 2020, her throat swab was collected again and the result was also positive. chest ct showed that her two lungs had diffuse patchy shadows and ground-glass appearance ( figure 2 ). she and her husband were sent to the isolation ward of nanping first hospital for treatment on 31 january 2020. on the first day of admission, the patient had no discomfort, and the vital signs were normal. the physical examination revealed rough breathing sounds, and other monitored parameters were generally normal.from 31 january 2020 to 10 february 2020, the patient was treated with four drugs, which are oral administration of lopinavir/ritonavir tablets (400/100 mg every 12 h), arbidol tablets (0.2 g every 8 h), and lianhuaqingwen granules (a chinese patent medicine, 6 g every 8 h) and atomization inhalation of recombinant human interferon-α2b injection (6.0 × 10 6 iu with 2 ml of sterilized water for injection every 12 h). the patient's vital signs were stable, and oxygen saturation was normal. there were no discomfort and any abnormal quantity of white-cell count, absolute neutrophil count, or absolute lymphocyte count. fasting blood glucose (6.48--8.4 mmol/l) and triglyceride (2.42-5.2 mmol/l) remained relatively high. crp and fibrinogen dropped back to normal from 29.15 mg/l and 4.72 g/l, respectively. platelet count increased slightly to 313 × 10 9 /l finally. on 7 february, from chest ct, it can be seen that the ground-glass shadow in her lungs has narrowed. the patient's covid-19 nucleic acid throat swab tests became negative on 15 february 2020 and thus discharged from the hospital without any discomfort.covid-19 infection presents a cluster attack. most patients were male, with an average age of 55.5 years [2] . fifty-one percent of patients were suffered from chronic diseases, including cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, endocrine system diseases, digestive system diseases, respiratory system diseases, malignant tumors, and nervous system diseases. elderly men with complications are more likely to be infected and may lead to serious or even fatal respiratory diseases [2] . although the two patients in this paper were about 55 years old, they had good health and no basic medical history, which may be one reason why they had no obvious clinical symptoms of covid-19 pneumonia. however, whether there are other possibilities need to be discussed and confirmed. for example, the male patient of the first case, saying no contact with wuhan people, might be infected unconsciously by other people who got in touch with wuhan people. after repeated reproduction and transmission, the virus is getting weak. or, the viral load entering the body is relatively low; thus, under the condition of a good immune system, it will not emerge that large and rapid virus proliferation and migration in vivo lead to serious damage to lungs and even other organs. all these conjectures need further investigation. asymptomatic cases are easy to miss diagnosis or misdiagnose, due to the lack of specific covid-19 pneumonia manifestations and normal inflammatory indexes such as white blood cells, lymphocytes, and crp. at present, there have been some asymptomatic cases in china, which should be paid attention to. it is worth noting that the first male patient in this paper, complaining of soreness of loins, is similar to the atypical covid-19 pneumonia german patient with myalgias as a complaint [1] . the male patient of case 1 also showed transient elevation of serum lactate dehydrogenase. with respect to muscle pain, there are similarities between asymptomatic infection of covid-19 and influenza to some extent, and sometimes, the rise of serum creatine kinase, lactate dehydrogenase, and myoglobin can be seen. at present, the guidelines of covid-19 pneumonia in various countries do not list muscle pain as one of the clinical manifestations, which may lead to the omission of some patients, especially the mild patients.what should be taken seriously is not only that asymptomatic patients did not have typical covid-19 infection symptoms but also that the covid-19 nucleic acid throat swab tests showed false negative in these patients, delaying the diagnosis of covid-19 infection. this may be caused by two reasons, one is that asymptomatic patients may have a low viral load, and the other is that the detection rate of nucleic acid throat swab may be not high enough. for mild cases of covid-19 infection, the use of lung imaging as a supplement or even an alternative to throat swab detection may also be an effective means to reduce the omission diagnostic rate. under certain circumstances, lower respiratory tract specimens such as tracheal aspirates, bronchoalveolar lavage, and sputum, with higher viral load, can be tested to raise the detection rate. on the other hand, interpretation of positive results is equally important. at present, in china, two consecutive negative results of covid-19 nucleic acid throat swab test are the necessary standard for patients to leave the hospital. in this paper, the female patient has no symptoms all the time, but the duration of positive nucleic acid test results is longer than that of the male patient, so she cannot be discharged from the hospital for a longer time. that provokes questions that how long the course of antiviral treatment should be and whether the sign of stopping antiviral treatment should be the clinical manifestation or nucleic acid turning negative. what is worth thinking about is whether it is a better choice for asymptomatic patients to rest at home instead of medication at hospital in order to prevent adverse drug reactions, such as the increase of triglyceride in cases 1 and 2 as described below. in this paper, two patients were treated with quadruple therapy combining chinese and western medicines. covid-19, sars, and mers belong to the same coronavirus, and their protein structures have many similarities. the antivirus drugs used in this paper have been proved to have an inhibitory effect on sars/mers in vitro or in vivo, but their adverse reactions and efficacy/safety in special populations such as liver and renal insufficiency still need to be paid attention to by clinicians.lopinavir/ritonavir is recommended by the national health commission of china for the treatment of covid-19 at present [3] . lopinavir is used to prevent the hiv gag-pol polyprotein from splitting. the action site of ritonavir is aspartyl protease of the virus, blocking the precursor of hiv gag-pol polyprotein. the two components work together, resulting in immature virus particles without regeneration capability. moreover, ritonavir is also an enhancer of lopinavir, which can inhibit the cyp3a-mediated degradation of lopinavir in the liver [4] . two sars-based clinical studies [5, 6] and a mers-based clinical case report [7] suggested that lopinavir/ritonavir has an anticoronavirus effect. in addition, lopinavir/ritonavir was listed as a candidate therapeutic drug in an anti-mers guideline written by clinical experts in south korea [8] . these studies are of great significance for the treatment of covid-19 with lopinavir/ritonavir. however, the clinical studies on sars published by chan and chu both pointed out that lopinavir/ritonavir as the initial treatment can remarkably improve the total mortality rate, oxygen saturation reduction rate, intubation rate, or glucocorticoid usage. but for treating the terminal stages, there was no obvious curative effect [5, 6] . this may be because lopinavir/ritonavir mainly acts by inhibiting the formation of new virus and cannot prevent the virus from entering cells, but numerous viruses have entered cells in the endstage patients, causing organ damage and poor outcome.in terms of adverse reactions, lopinavir/ritonavir induces diarrhea, hyperglycemia, hyperlipidemia, arrhythmia, liver dysfunction, etc. its serious adverse reactions also include fatal diseases such as pancreatitis [4] . in this paper, the triglyceride and fasting blood glucose levels of the two patients exhibited a huge rise far above normal after treatment. according to naranjo's adverse drug reaction probability scale score, 5 points were obtained, indicating that lopinavir/ritonavir probably caused adverse reactions of hyperlipidemia and hyperglycemia in both the patients. the adverse drug reactions may be common in patients because these two patients, as good representatives, had normal basic monitoring indexes and good liver/kidney function and physical condition and took lopinavir/ritonavir in a short time, thus metabolized and excreted lopinavir/ritonavir efficiently. for severe patients with liver function injury, risk of the adverse drug reactions may become higher, possibly leading to serious consequences, including fat overload syndrome, pancreatitis, other pathogen infection, and even prolonged hospitalization or death for reasons other than covid-19 infection. besides, lopinavir and ritonavir, both inhibitors of cyp3a, may increase the plasma concentration of drugs metabolized mainly by cyp3a, such as amiodarone, fentanyl, and midazolam, commonly used in severe patients. the drug action time will prolong and the occurrence of adverse drug reactions may increase. lopinavir and ritonavir also have certain inhibition effects on atp-binding cassette subfamily b member 1 (abcb1), but the effects of abcb1 were only detectable in the presence of cyp3a, suggesting that the simultaneous use of abcb1 substrates should also be cautious [9] .the severe pneumonia incidence of covid-19 infection is relatively high, especially in the elderly. for severe patients with hepatic or renal insufficiency, it should be noted that blood drug concentration of lopinavir showed a rapid increase in the patients with liver dysfunction [10] , suggesting the necessity of therapeutic drug monitoring of lopinavir. therapeutic concentration of lopinavir was 3-8 mg/l, and toxic concentration was above 8 mg/l [11] . however, patients with renal insufficiency can continue to take lopinavir/ritonavir at the conventional dosage because the renal clearance rate of lopinavir and ritonavir is extremely low. moreover, both lopinavir and ritonavir have strong protein-binding capacity, so hemodialysis will not affect their clearance greatly [12] . but lopinavir/ritonavir was reported to be strongly related to kidney impairment, so its potential nephrotoxicity should be concerned [13, 14] . there are few reports of old people treated with lopinavir/ritonavir, yet the lopinavir plasma level in the elderly seems to be higher than the recommended value [15] .atomization inhalation of interferon-α (ifn-α) is also recommended by the national health commission of china as medication for covid-19. ifn-α is bound to receptors on the cell surface to induce the production of various antiviral proteins, thereby inhibiting the replication of viruses in cells. ifn-α has a broad antivirus spectrum. in addition, it can enhance the specific cytotoxic effect of macrophages and lymphocytes by regulating immune function and thereby stop the invasion and infection of the virus effectively. at present, there are three types of ifn-α subtypes approved for clinical use, namely ifn-α2b, ifn-α2a, and ifn-α1b . it is found that ifn-α2b used in this paper tends to have a relatively higher activity [16] . ifn-α is mainly administered subcutaneously and intramuscularly, which is easy to cause influenza-like symptoms, myelosuppression, mental abnormalities, and other adverse reactions. inhalation will not inactivate ifn-α and can raise the lung concentration [17] . 3.0 × 10 6 iu/day is the minimum inhalation dose of ifn-α that can induce biological effects without side effects [18] . below the dose of 18 × 10 6 iu/day, ifn-α hardly enters the systemic circulation through inhalation [19] .as for the treatment of ifn-α on coronavirus, early therapy of ifn-α inhalation combined with antiviral drugs has been shown to be associated with better outcomes [20, 21] . while the clinical research of omrani et al. demonstrated that the combination therapy of ribavirin and ifn-α2a inhalation can improve the early and intermediate survival rate of severe mers patients significantly, it was useless for the late survival rate [22] . however, the sample sizes of the above investigations were small, and the effectiveness of ifn-α inhalation on coronavirus still lacks sufficient evidence-based medical evidence.inhalation of ifn-α may induce bronchospasm reaction and decrease the peak expiratory flow rate [19, 23] but few systemic adverse reactions such as influenza-like symptoms [19] .there are no data about the application of ifn-α inhalation on the elderly and patients with liver or renal insufficiency. however, the usage of ifn-α injection for inhalation is offlabel, so the patient-informed consents are required. besides, attention should be paid to the possibility of allergy caused by ifn-α and auxiliary materials.the two patients in this paper also used hemagglutinin inhibitor, arbidol, which is not recommended by the national health commission of china for covid-19. arbidol can specifically inhibit the contact, adhesion, and fusion of virus lipid membrane and host cell membrane and block virus gene from penetrating into nucleus, by activating 2,5-oligoadenylate synthetase (antiviral protein) [24, 25] . at present, there is no clinical report of arbidol on coronavirus pneumonia, but it has a good inhibition effect on sars, even ebola virus (ebov) and lassa virus (lasv) in vitro [26] [27] [28] . an arbidol concentration of 20 μg/ml was required to achieve a 50% reduction in virus proliferation and hemagglutinin levels [29] . according to china news, cell experiments in vitro showed that arbidol can effectively inhibit covid-19 up to 60 times at the concentration of 10-30 μm and significantly suppress the pathological effect of the virus on cells [30] . however, the concentration of 10-30 μm is equivalent to 5.3-16.0 µg/ml of arbidol, which is far above the peak concentration (0.41 μg/ml) that can be achieved in vivo by oral administration of single-and multipledose arbidol [31, 32] . therefore, whether to apply a higher dose of arbidol for covid-19 pneumonia needs to be concerned and studied.liver and intestine are the main metabolic organs of arbidol in the human body, and cyp3a4 is the major isoform enyzme, indicating possible drug interactions between arbidol and cyp3a4 substrates [33] . additionally, the adverse event rate of arbidol is approximately 6.2%, mainly manifested as nausea, diarrhea, dizziness, and increased serum transaminase [34] , which is similar to the adverse reactions of the digestive system in covid-19-infected patients, probably increasing difficulties in differential diagnosis. in the bioequivalence experiment of arbidol preparation conducted in china, 3 h after taking the medicine, some healthy subjects had bradycardia (heart rate less than 60 beats/min and reduced 2-24 beats per minute). but the subjects had no adverse symptoms and the correlation with arbidol was unclear.arbidol can be used for the elderly patients and improve their cellular immunity [35] . for patients with hepatic or renal insufficiency, the safety of arbidol is not clear. in view of the fact that arbidol is mainly removed by feces, accounting for 32.4% of the dose, and its glucuronide and sulfuric acid metabolites are excreted in urine, accounting for 6.3% of the dose, therefore, patients with severe liver dysfunction need to use arbidol with caution or reduction, while patients with renal insufficiency may consider the original dose [33] .in the guideline for covid-19 pneumonia of china, traditional chinese medicine has equal status with western medicine. lianhuaqingwen preparation has broad antiviral spectrum, antipyretic effect, and anti-inflammatory effect and is even superior to oseltamivir in improving the symptoms of influenza infection [36, 37] . lianhuaqingwen preparation has been recommended by the national health commission of china repeatedly in a series of infectious public health events such as sars, mers, h1n1, avian influenza, and hand-footmouth disease, for more than 10 years, and plays an important role in prevention and treatment. lianhuaqingwen preparation can obviously inhibit the replication of sars virus with ic50 of 0.11 mg/ml and therapeutic index of 40.3 [38] . lianhuaqingwen preparation has 61 compounds or more, in which 12 high-content compounds are salidroside, chlorogenic acid, forsythoside e, cryptochlorogenic acid, amygdalin, sweroside, hyperin, rutin, forsythoside a, phillyrin, rhein, and glycyrrhizic acid [39] . the common adverse reactions of lianhuaqingwen preparation were mostly related to digestive system, mainly manifested as nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. skin allergy reaction and clinical laboratory results are rare and can be relieved after drug withdrawal. the treatment of lianhuaqingwen preparation on covid-19 pneumonia has yet to be proved by clinical trials.the best medication for covid-19 infection has not yet been confirmed. in this paper, two patients were treated with quadruple therapy combined with chinese and western medicines. the symptoms and chest x-rays of both patients have been greatly improved. it can be said that quadruple therapy has a certain curative effect, but the possibility of spontaneous improvement cannot be ruled out, and it is impossible to tell whether one or more drugs work. the reason why the two patients were selected is that they were the only asymptomatic patients in northern fujian province of china, and their medication was analyzed by the authors, who often discuss difficult cases in the form of multidisciplinary team. the treatment of two patients met the guideline for covid-19 pneumonia of china and got the ethical approval of relevant hospitals. this paper has limitations. it is a report of individual cases, and we have not quantified the viral load, leaving the virus dynamics unclear. more clinical data are needed for asymptomatic patients as well as this combination medication.asymptomatic patients have no fever or respiratory tract symptoms, but pneumonia can still be seen on imaging. for asymptomatic patients, pharmaceutical care should be strengthened while virus detection and antiviral treatment are carried out, including the discovery, solution, and prevention of potential or actual drug problems, so as to ameliorate the safety, effectiveness, and economy of medication and achieve the ideal goal of improving the quality of life for patients with covid-19.the lack of effective drugs directly targeting covid-19 is the major challenge to doctors and the treatment of patients. whether the western medicine lopinavir/ritonavir, remdesivir, arbidol, and chloroquine or traditional chinese medicine with antiviral activity has caused the public to expect the control of covid-19 but lacks 'effectiveness' and 'safety' from multicenter, randomized, double-blind, controlled studies. in fact, it takes quite a long way from in vitro experiments to actual clinical use. in the design of clinical trials for covid-19, the trial efficiency is of great importance; thus, phase i trials with extended cohorts, trials based on pattern recognition, machine learning, and other technologies should be utilized.further study of covid-19 is not limited to antiviral drugs. anti-inflammatory (anti-il-6, anti-tnf-α, etc.) treatment should be actively carried out to quickly neutralize the cytokine storm in vivo and reduce the mortality of critical patients. adoptive reinfusion of cured patients' serum and the immune regulation of mesenchymal stem cells may also show a certain effect. with the help of multidisciplinary cross-analysis, to control symptoms quickly and reduce mortality effectively is the main task at present.a reasonable analysis of existing clinical data to make treatment decisions is the only choice in the absence of effective covid-19 antiviral drugs. the efficient utilization of clinical data needs the establishment of big data and the promotion of scientific, networked, and shared data collection and management modes. specifically, many complicated clinical data are cleaned and integrated, and the terminology is unified. the outliers or small-sample data are eliminated. repeated researches are conducted in clinical manifestations, laboratory test results, lung imaging, combined basic diseases, drug therapy and clinical outcomes, etc., via statistical analysis to find out characteristic data, helping physicians to realize accurate differential diagnosis and treatment of covid-19.in the future, the following aspects should be emphasized for the control of covid-19: (1) strengthen epidemiological research, especially the prevention and control of asymptomatic and mild cases as infection sources; (2) carry out indepth research on structures and functions of various virus proteins and then conduct drug prediction and highthroughput screening; and (3) enhance international cooperation. for example, traditional chinese medicine has played a positive role in preventing and treating covid-19, but further discussion is needed on how to standardize the use, how to reasonably evaluate the curative effect, and how to integrate with western medicine.this paper was not funded.in december 2019, the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) occurred in wuhan (hubei province) and then unfolded in china and all over the world [1] . the novel coronavirus has been a serious threat to public health [2] . china has taken strict measures such as quarantine, social-distancing, suspicious isolation, community surveillance, to restrain covid-19 outbreak by late february. however, heilongjiang has now become the province with most diagnosed patients in china (i.e. even worse than hubei province). massive imported cases emerge and continue to increase.specifically, a recent 'super spreader' or 'imported escaper' in heilongjiang province has led to tens of diagnosed or asymptomatic cases [3] . therefore, evaluating the epidemic of covid-19 in heilongjiang province may help provide effective strategies to restrict covid-19 transmission.recently, many mathematical models have been constructed to investigate the epidemic of covid-19. some models have made modifications based on the conventional 'seir' model [4] and concluded that strictly controlled interventions are critically important to impede covid-19 outbreak [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] . several other model instead established a stochastic transition model to evaluate the transmission of covid-19 and also emphasized the necessity of interventions such as social-distancing, isolation and quarantine [12, 13] . meanwhile, asymptomatic patients are covert cases which represent a serious threat to public health [14] . a few models have been developed to evaluate the role of coronavirus transmission based on asymptomatic cases [11, 15, 16] .however, all these models have ignored the covid-19 transmission from bats and unknown hosts. a recently proposed novel model has characterized these interactions among bats, unknown hosts and people in details [17] . they estimated the basic reproduction number (r0) to be ~2.4829 and indicated that model is locally asymptotically stable if r0 < 1 [17] . these important models have greatly improved our understanding about the epidemic of covid-19.in current work, we developed a mathematical model to characterize imported escaper and asymptomatic patients. we trained our model based on covid-19 epidemic in heilongjiang province from january 23 to march 25, by which the last confirmed patient was cured in heilongjiang province. using this model, we performed stochastic simulations and found that partial relief in strictly controlled interventions may contribute to the occurrence of diagnosed patients recently (from april 9 to april 19) provided that there is only one imported patient without surveillance [3] .meanwhile, we predicted that there is still an unidentified pool of asymptomatic patients. we suggested that strict or mild interventions should still be implemented to restrain a potential covid-19 outbreak.the number of experimentally confirmed patients and cured/recovered cases (january 23 to april 19) was obtained from health commission of heilongjiang province (http://wsjkw.hlj.gov.cn/, table s1 ). note that only domestic cases epidemiologically associated with the 'super spreader' between april 9 and april 19were recorded and simulated. the total susceptible population was set to be the total λ describes the discharge rate from quarantine. βi (i=1, 2, 3) describes the averaged contact rate between s and c, a or i, respectively. specifically, β1 is the average contact rate between susceptible population and close contacts. β2 describes the average contact rate between susceptible population and asymptomatic patients. β3 denotes the averaged contact between susceptible population and infected patients. ε denotes self-recovery rate for asymptomatic cases since specific asymptotic patients can recover without treatments [18] [19] [20] . ν1 and ν2 represent the transition rate from close contacts to asymptomatic and diagnosed ones, respectively. ν3 is the transition from asymptomatic to diagnosed cases [18] [19] [20] . μ is the (maximum) average recovery rate. since the healthcare capacity in different provinces differ significantly owing to economic development, we further incorporated a threshold behavior for the recovery. we assumed that higher numbers of inpatients and quarantined cases will lower the average recovery rate. the health-care capacity will be improved if there are fewer diagnosed/quarantined patients.a hill function was used to characterize the threshold behavior. the threshold was represented as a parameter k and the cooperativity effect was described by the parameter n (see model 1). initial values for i and r were obtained from the official site (http://wsjkw.hlj.gov.cn/). the total susceptible population was set to be the total population in heilongjiang province as described above. other parameters and initial conditions (c and a) were estimated based on epidemic data from heilongjiang province. for parameter estimation, 400 stochastic runs using potterswheel toolbox [21] were implemented and the best fit parameter set was shown in table 1 . since the best fit for initial asymptotic population is <<1 (0.042736), we set initial value for a to be 0 since a should be an integer. we note that the parameter n in the best fit set was ~1.02545 suggesting that the threshold behavior in recovery rate has relatively low cooperativity.parameters were estimated by potterswheel using a trust-region method [21] . a χ 2 criteria was used for model identification (χ 2 /n<1, n is the number of data points) [21] .we did not incorporate death similar to recent assumptions [13, 22] .the τ-leap method was used for stochastic simulation [23] . ordinary differential equations (odes) were numerically solved using ode23s in matlab (r2018b). the 'ksdensity' function in matlab was used for kernel estimation.the model was first trained with epidemic data from heilongjiang province. using a reasonable initial guess, we performed unbiased parameter fitting by sampling parameters in logarithmic scale (totally, 400 sets). the top 200 fits were harvested. we noted that fitted initial values from 200 top fits for asymptomatic patient number 'a' approximated zero with mean value <0.1 and therefore the initial value 'a' for is set to be 0. the best fit was shown for infected and recovered patients by march 25 ( figure   1a ). notably, the fitted βi (i=1, 2, 3) values were to the order of 10 -10 to 10 -9 suggesting that strong interventions were implemented to restrain mutual contacts (table 1) .meanwhile, n is around 1 (1.02545) suggesting that the cooperativity was neglectable.the best fit parameter set was shown in table 1 . we further estimated a dynamic reproduction number based on ordinary differential equations [24] . the results showed that the reproduction number initially reached 5.0692 and then quickly dropped below 1 by feb 14 and finally reached ~0.8702 ( figure s1 ). therefore, our model could faithfully match the epidemic data in heilongjiang province and found that continuously strict measures indeed impeded the covid-19 transmission.we then performed stochastic simulations using τ-leap method [23] [3] . therefore, the number of infected patients was increased by 1 at march 19 in the stochastic model. however, the 'home quarantine' was failed as reported possibly owing to accidental egress by escalator or stairs [3] . we modeled this by increasing f (from 3 to 8) and then performed stochastic simulations.results suggested that even a moderate relief would not lead to the reported local outbreak (f=3,4 and 5, figure 2a ). increasing f to 6-8, however, will result in possible matches between stochastic simulations and reported epidemic data (black dots, epidemic data; colored curves: stochastic simulations, figure 2a ). the median values from 500 stochastic runs were shown for increasing f values (blue curves, figure 2b , the shaded areas denote 25% and 75% quartiles). therefore, we predicted that the mutual contacts for the 'super spreader' was significantly elevated to around 7.we further matched our simulations to the reported asymptomatic patients. setting f=7, stochastic simulation could match the epidemic data ( figure 2 ). however, we noted a large gap between the simulated number of asymptomatic patients to the reported cases (f=7, figure 3a ). since asymptomatic patients usually do not seek medical tests owing to lack of symptoms, the reported number of asymptomatic cases may be lower than the actual number ( figure 3a ) [18] [19] [20] . the underestimation was significant for f=6 or f=7 on april 19 (dashed line: the mean value, figure 3b ). the discrepancy seemed to grow if intervention strength was not altered ( figure 3b ). these simulations implied that the unidentified asymptomatic patients might be another serious concern since the asymptomatic cases can also be contagious [18] [19] [20] .since the confirmed patients have undergone an ongoing increase, we then evaluated the effect of establishment of strict interventions since april 20 (black dot, figure 4a ). strict interventions were implemented (f=1 or 2) since april 20. we measured the time to peak and the recovery time since april 9, at which the first reported domestic patient occurs in heilongjiang province [26] . we found that roughly ~33 days were used to reach the peak for f=1 whereas for f=2, the duration was increased to ~53 days ( figure 4b and 4c, left) . ~80 days were required for total recovery if f=1 whereas about 139 days were needed for f=2 ( figure 4b and 4c, right) .therefore, these simulations suggested implementation of strict interventions is strongly required to impede a potential outbreak.in this study, we constructed a modified model which incorporated threshold behavior in recovery rate and asymptomatic patients with significant difference to 'seir' model [4] . however, ongoing importation into china especially in heilongjiang province has been a serious threat recently. furthermore, the asymptomatic patients are not easily identified owing to lack of obvious symptoms [20] . we estimated the influence of asymptomatic patients based on a data-driven model from heilongjiang province. we anticipated that an area-or province-specific model may help unravel the underlying features of covid-19 epidemic.from simulation, we found that even one 'imported patient' or 'super spreader'reported recently can lead to up to ~ 40 infected patients and unpredictable pool of asymptomatic patients till april 19 [3] . we anticipated that the relaxed 'home quarantine' for this 'imported patient' [3] is unsuccessful and has initiated a local outbreak potentially. simulation suggested that the mutual contacts from the relaxed 'home quarantine' might possibly increase to f=7 compared with f=1 for strictly controlled interventions. the occurrence of the 'imported escaper' might be ascribed to the significantly longer latent period [2] , the weakened surveillance for covid-19inpatient transfer in specific hospitals and the murky mismanagement for covid-19tests [3] . all these deficiencies may possibly lead to a secondary blockage of some hospitals and communities for haerbin city in heilongjiang province. more seriously, the associated pool of asymptomatic patients was underestimated from official report.since asymptomatic patients are also contagious, the potential impact of these covert cases should attract extensive attention. as least about one month is still required if strict measures are immediately implemented. therefore, the 'imported escaper' argues for further epidemiological investigations as well as strongly controlled interventions.as more data are available, our model could be used for analyzing these novel epidemic data.liu et al. recently constructed a model with 'asymptomatic patients' [11] . however, asymptomatic populations in their model will eventually become diagnosed/confirmed patients with clear symptoms and are more likely to be 'pre-symptomatic' [14] , which is in stark contrast to recent definition (i.e. asymptomatic patients were those who never develop symptoms) [18] [19] [20] .we modeled the covid-19 epidemic induced by one imported patient without strict 'quarantine'. lessons from the emerging diagnosed patients recently inheilongjiang province since april 9 should catch attention as they are epidemiologically associated with this 'imported escaper'. furthermore, we recommended that the strict measures such as isolation, home or centralized quarantine should be re-established especially in haerbin city of heilongjiang province to lower the risk of a potentially secondary outbreak. finally, our model could also be applied elsewhere with adjusted parameters to monitor covid-19 epidemic.the authors declare no competing interests.this work is supported by national natural science foundation of china (31971185) and quality engineering project of anhui college education (2018jyssf086). ☐the authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: covid-19 is a serious illness that currently has no known treatment or vaccine and is spreading in an immune naive population. deaths are rising steeply, and health systems are under strain. 1 since the first reported case of covid-19 in wuhan, china, at the end of 2019, covid-19 has rapidly spread throughout china and has also involved many other countries despite global effort s to prevent its spread. 2 on march 2, 2020, the first case of covid-19 was diagnosed in jordan to a patient who came from italy. total number of cases reached 448 by may 1, 2020. 113 of them were admitted to king abdullah university hospital (kauh) which is the only hospital that deals with covid-19 patients in the north of jordan.health care workers are essential workers defined as paid and unpaid persons serving in health care settings who have the potential for direct or indirect exposure to patients or infectious materials. 3 it is critical to ensure the health and safety of hcws, both at work and in the community. 3 they are at increased risk of contracting communicable diseases, including dropletspread respiratory viruses, because of their high level of exposure at work. 4 the idea of implementing a screening regimen to determine the prevalence of covid-19 among our hcws using real-time reverse--transcriptase rt-pcr on nasopharyngeal samples was to assess the subclinical transmission of the disease among hcws, evaluate our protective measures and to help in making decisions regarding staffing and protection of hcws in the hospital during the covid-19 pandemic. to the best of our knowledge, very few studies have been conducted about the prevalence of covid-19 among asymptomatic hcws during coronavirus pandemic.this study was approved by irb of jordan university of science and technology. it was a retrospective single center study. inclusion criterion were all asymptomatic hcws including physicians, nurses and other personnel (housekeepers, porters and administrative staff) who were assigned to deal with covid-19 patients at kauh between march 18, 2020 to april 29, 2020.the doctor/patient ratio was 1/20 while nurse/patient ratio was 1/5-10. a total number of 370hcws were voluntarily screened for covid-19 by nasopharyngeal swabs between 22 to 29 april 2020. sample collection was taken by our trained team and the swabs were tested for covid-19 rna using real-time reverse--transcriptase rrt-pcr. data on age, sex and occupational categories were also analyzed.hcws who had any symptoms suggestive of covid-19 have been excluded from this study.hcw with comorbidities (diabetes, hypertension, respiratory diseases and other chronic medial illness) and pregnant ladies were not included because they were already excluded from work during this period. this study was conducted according to strocss 2019 guideline. 5total numbers of hcws were 3000 which were reduced to about 50% (1500) during this pandemic. a total number of 385 hcws were involved in direct contact with covid-patients.only of 370 hcws were screened while 15 were unable to do the test. the asymptomatic hcws screened for covid-19 include the following occupational categories: 61.62% nurses (228 of 370), 31.35% physicians (116 of 370) and 7.02% other personnel including; housekeepers, porters and administrative staff (26 of 370). the average age was 32.02 years with the majority of hcws was males 67% (248 of 370). this study showed that all asymptomatic hcws were tested negative (table 1) . therefore, unexpectedly, the prevalence of positive-covid-19 among asymptomatic hcws who take care of patients infected with the novel coronavirus was 0%.since december 2019, the world has been in the grip of the severe acute respiratory syndromecoronavirus 2 and the disease it causes, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). 6 since then, the spread of covid-19 has increased exponentially, with the world health organization (who) declaring a pandemic on 11 march. 7 they are at high risk of morbidity and mortality due to health care-associated infections. 8 it has been estimated that 10% or more of all those infected with covid-19 in some european countries are hcws. 4 in italy, hcws experienced high rates of infection and death. 9 little is known about the effectiveness of personal protective equipment (ppe) for hcws who take care of patients infected with covid-19. 10 on the other hand, other studies showed that the prevalence of covid-19 amongst hcws will depend upon a range of factors, including the availability of ppe, the healthcare setting and access to testing.how well the country handles the covid-19 crisis depends largely on how effectively health workforce is used. 11 but, it is also necessary to protect the health and safety of this essential national workforce. 4 therefore, our local infection control committee started before the beginning of this pandemic in jordan to educate hcws about caring for covid-19 patients regarding hand hygiene, donning and doffing ppe. types of ppe used in kauh were: gloves, n95 masks with tight seal around mouth and nose, face and eye protection including face shields and goggles, clothing which includes gowns, aprons, head covering, and shoe covers. moreover, we started to establish policies and modify regulations to protect hcws during these challenging times. as a result, our hospital started to operate at less than half capacity in order to decrease workload and to prioritize resources. in order to minimize the risk to the hcws, only necessary procedures were allowed. aerosol generation procedures were limited to negative pressure rooms, they were undertaken by most expert doctors or nurses available and only necessary hcws were present in the room. hcws with comorbidities (dm, htn, respiratory diseases and other chronic medial illness) and pregnant ladies were exempted from work during this period.we also adopted a policy which allows every hcw to take two weeks of home self-isolation after finishing working shift (we divided the 385 hcws into 14 groups each group contains about 27 personnel who work 24 hours. this would provide about 2 weeks of home isolation for each hcw). moreover, we separated wards that could be contaminated with the virus from other low risk facilities and we minimized the time of contact between hcws and infected patients by limiting unnecessary procedures, decreasing the communication times between infected patients and hcws provided that the patient care is not affected and by trying as much as possible to do many tasks in the same round as taking vital signs, giving medications, distributing meals and doing beddings.early in the pandemic crisis in jordan (first 5 weeks) there were shortage of pcr-kit due to supply chain problems, the priority was to test only suspected patients and symptomatic hcws.taking into account that not all cases are symptomatic and some people may be infectious before they develop symptoms, many hcws were worried about their risk of exposing family members to the virus. 4 as a result, there was a need for hcws screening protocol that provides data base about the prevalence of covid-19 infection among our staff. therefore, a screening regimen has been proposed for all hcws who work in direct contact with covid-19 patients including physicians, nurses and other personnel.given the high prevalence of mild clinical presentations that may go undetected 5 and after the availability of pcr-kit, we decided to changed our strategy to be sure that our hcws are free of infection by both the pcr test and home-isolation period. so, we started to screen all asymptomatic hcws with any history of contact with covid-19 patients.we think that the advantage of having an objective regimen by lab test will help in decreasing the stress and worries of the hcws about their risk of having the virus 4 , to reduce the risk of transmitting covid-19 from hcws to their colleagues or to other non-covid-19 patients and to be able to formulate policies regarding workflow, especially in the absence of standard best practices. moreover, this may help health care providers in other institutions to develop policies regarding hcws during similar pandemics.as mentioned above, some studies showed that about 10% of all those infected with covid-19 in some european countries are hcws. 4 however, in this study, we found that the prevalence of positive-covid-19 among asymptomatic hcws who take care of patients infected with the novel coronavirus was 0%. although this result could be in part due to our policies and protective measures, it was unexpected and against our assumption as hcws are high risk group.potential explanations for this difference in the result are; firstly, the majority of admitted patients to our hospital were asymptomatic 88% and detected by epidemiological investigation teams as patients are most infectious when they are symptomatic. secondly, rrt-pcr test has risk of eliciting false-negative results especially in asymptomatic cases due torelatively lowviral loads. additionally, we used nasopharyngeal swab sampling. however, the optimum sample types during infections caused by covid-19 remain to be fully determined and require expertise. 12 the findings of this study have to be seen in light of some limitations. the first is the limited number of covid-19 patients admitted to our hospital. the second limitation concerns the timing of screening which was 4 weeks after the admission of the first covid-19 patient, during this period, hcws may have been infected with the virus at some point and recovered by the time of screening. additionally, this is an empiric way of screening due to lack of previous research studies that address this subject.it is worth mentioning that among the 385 hcws assigned to deal with covid-19 patients only two nurses were infected. first case was male aged 27 years who was diagnosed after he developed symptoms at the beginning of his fist shift, most probably that he had infected outside the hospital. he was excluded from the study because he was symptomatic and the inclusion criterion was only asymptomatic hcws. the second case was 28-year-old asymptomatic female, she diagnosed by rrt-pcr due to history of contact with her infected colleague and she was excluded from the study as the source of infection was outside the hospital. this represents only 0.5 % of total hcws. importantly, this is a rapidly moving topic of research. therefore, our result must be cautiously interpreted and should not give us a false sense of security regarding the prevalence of positive covid-19 among hcws. our perspective is to improve surveillance of hcws and to identify the best approach to protect hcws in order to assure source control to insure a safe working environment.unexpectedly, the prevalence of positive covid-19 among asymptomatic hcws who take care of patients infected with the novel coronavirus was 0%. this result must be cautiously interpreted. further studies are needed in order to find effective strategy of screening hcws to insure a safe working environment.provenance and peer review not commissioned, externally peer reviewed. • the prevalence of positive covid-19 among asymptomatic hcws was 0%.• the result should not give us a false sense of security• improvement of surveillance and protection of hcws is importantcovid-19 is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). the first case was reported in wuhan, china, in december, 2019, 1 and the ongoing outbreak has been characterised as a pandemic by who. because no definitive treatment for covid- 19 is available yet, identification of patients at high risk for severe illness is crucial to prepare and provide sufficient supportive therapy. additionally, a massive increase in case numbers has led to the collapse of health-care systems in several countries. therefore, triage of patients and their transportation to medical facilities with dedicated intensivecare capabilities are necessary. the clinical characteristics of covid-19 and the pathogenicity of sars-cov-2 are still being investigated; most studies published at the beginning of the outbreak focused on patients with severe disease, 2-5 although more recent studies have considered patients with mild or moderate covid-19. 6, 7 in japan, many infections occurred among the passengers and crew members on board the diamond princess cruise ship in february, 2020. by march 1, 2020, there were approximately 700 individuals with laboratory-detected sars-cov-2 infection. 8, 9 the 3711 passengers and crew members on the cruise ship were tested for sars-cov-2 by rt-pcr, and all symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals were referred to medical institutions desig nated for infectious diseases in accordance with the infectious diseases control law of japan. 8, 9 approximately 15% of all patients with laboratory-detected infection from the diamond princess were admitted to the self-defense forces central hospital in tokyo, japan.in clinical settings, identifying people who are at risk of symptom onset and clinical deterioration is essential. therefore, understanding the clinical characteristics of patients with covid-19 of different severity is necessary. to that end, we retrospectively analysed the detailed clinical characteristics of hospitalised people with sars-cov-2 infection as a result of the diamond princess outbreak, including those with asymptomatic infection and mild or severe covid-19, who were treated in the self-defense forces central hospital.we did a retrospective review of the medical records of passengers and crew members with laboratory-detected sars-cov-2 infection who were aboard the diamond princess and were admitted to the self-defense forces central hospital in tokyo, japan, between feb 11 and feb 25, 2020. the 3711 passengers and crew members on the diamond princess were examined by quantitative rt-pcr or nested rt-pcr for sars-cov-2 at the national institute of infectious diseases and regional institutes of public health using pharyngeal swabs or sputum specimens according to the recommended protocol by the japanese national institute of infectious disease. [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] this study was reviewed and approved by the japan self-defense forces central hospital (approval number 01-011). informed consent, both written and oral, was obtained from all enrolled participants.participant information was retrospectively obtained from the hospital medical records and included nationality, clinical records, laboratory findings, and chest ct images. participants' clinical history, physical examination, and chest ct scans were done on the day of admission, and any blood tests were completed within the first 2 days following admission. geographical regions for nationalities were classified according to the standard country or area codes for statistical use by the un statistics division. all data were obtained and reviewed by two study investigators (st and ki). the observation period was defined as the time interval between the date of admission and the date of discharge or feb 26, 2020, whichever was earliest.asymptomatic cases were defined as people with sars-cov-2 infection presenting with no clinical signs and symptoms from medical interviews and physical examinations from the start of quarantine (feb 3) to end of hospitalisation. severe symptomatic cases were defined as participants showing clinical symptoms of pneumonia (dyspnoea, tachypnoea, peripheral capillary oxygen saturation <93%, and need for oxygen therapy). 9 participants with other symptoms were classified as mild cases. radiographical findings were not used to classify cases, meaning asymptomatic cases could still present with radiographical abnormalities.continuous variables with a normal distribution were expressed as mean (sd) and with a non-normal distribution for the un statistics division country and area codes see https://unstats.un.org/unsd/ methodology/m49evidence before this study we searched pubmed from its inception until march 1, 2020, for articles published in english using the keywords "novel coronavirus", "2019 novel coronavirus", "2019-ncov", "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2", "sars-cov-2", "covid-19", "mass infection", "herd infection", "cruise ship", "diamond princess", "asymptomatic", and "subclinical". there were no published clinical studies featuring covid-19 as a result of mass infection on board a cruise ship. we found two articles that compared people with asymptomatic infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) or mild or severe covid-19. however, neither described potential predictors of symptomatic illness among people infected with sars-cov-2 and markers for disease progression in patients with covid-19.to our knowledge, this is the first study showing the predictors of symptomatic illness in people infected with sars-cov-2.we present a summary of the clinical characteristics of 104 participants with laboratory-detected sars-cov-2infection as a result of mass infection on the diamond princess cruise ship who were treated at self-defense forces central hospital, japan, from feb 11 to feb 25, 2020. serum lactate dehydrogenase concentrations were significantly higher in patients who were initially asymptomatic on admission to the hospital and developed symptomatic covid-19 during the observation period than in those who remained asymptomatic throughout. older age, consolidation on chest ct images, and lymphopenia on admission were more frequent in patients with severe covid-19 than those with mild covid-19 at the end of observation, and thus could be potential risk factors for disease progression.more than 70% of our patients with sars-cov-2 infection had asymptomatic or mild disease. however, massive increase in case numbers has led to the collapse of health-care systems.combining clinical and laboratory findings with chest ct imaging could help to identify people who are at risk of symptom onset and clinical deterioration.as median (iqr) and compared using student's t test for parametric data and wilcoxon rank-sum test for nonparametric data. odds ratios (ors) and a two-sided 95% cis for ors were calculated. categorical variables were compared using the χ² test or, if the cells had expected frequencies of less than ten, using fisher's exact test. a two-sided p value of less than 0·05 was considered significant. all statistical analyses were done using stata 13.there was no funding source for this study. the corresponding author had full access to all study-related data and had final responsibility for the decision to submit the study for publication.between feb 11 and feb 25, 2020, 107 people with laboratory-detected sars-cov-2 infection on board the diamond princess were hospitalised at the self-defense forces central hospital in japan. three people were excluded from the study because they withdrew consent and 104 participants were included in the final analysis. participants were aged 25-93 years, with a median age of 68 years (iqr 47-75), and 54 (52%) were male ( signs and symptoms (table 3) . fever and cough were the most common clinical signs and symptoms on admission among the 71 patients who were symptomatic at the end of the observation period (table 3) , and these remained the most common at the end of observation (appendix p 1). of the 43 participants who were asymptomatic on admission, ten (23%) developed symptomatic covid-19 during the obser vation period, including three (7%) participants who developed severe covid-19 and required supplemental oxygen therapy (table 2) . of the 41 participants with mild disease on admission, five (12%) developed severe covid-19 and required supplemental oxygen therapy, leading to a total of eight (10%) of 84 participants with asymptomatic or mild presentation on admission developing severe covid-19. additionally, of the 71 parti cipants who were symptomatic at the end of the observation period, 14 (20%) required oxygen therapy and one (1%) required mechanical ventilation, while ten (14%) were treated with antibiotics and five (7%) with lopinavir-ritonavir (appendix p 1). there were no reports of complications or death during the observation period. 30 (29%) patients had been discharged by feb 26.among the ten participants who were asymptomatic on admission and developed symptomatic covid-19 during observation, the most frequent symptom was cough (table 2) . conversely, 17 (52%) of the 33 participants who did not develop symptoms during the observation period had abnormal lung findings with various patterns on ct images (table 2; figure 1 ). univariable analysis showed no significant differences in the distribution of age, sex, and comorbidities or the prevalence of abnormal lung findings and ct patterns between symptomatic and asymptomatic participants. the prevalence of increased lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) concentrations was significantly higher in participants who were initially asymptomatic but developed symptomatic covid-19 during the observation period (or 7·25, 95% ci 1·43-36·70; p=0·020; appendix p 4).the eight participants who developed severe covid-19 during the observation period were aged 42-87 years (median 75 years, iqr 72-77) and five (63%) were male (appendix pp 2-3). the period from symptom onset to the reclassification of disease presentation as severe covid-19 ranged from 1 to 5 days (median 4 days, . additionally, all eight participants developed radio graphical abnormalities on ct before the emergence of symptoms of typical pneumonia such as tachypnoea, dyspnoea, and hypoxaemia (median 4 days [iqr 2-5] before symptoms; range 1-8 days; figure 2 ). four (50%) of these participants had no symptoms of cough and three (38%) had no symptoms of fever at study end. when comparing these eight participants who developed severe covid-19 with the 76 participants who remained asymptomatic or had finally, when comparing clinical characteristics between participants with mild and severe covid-19 at the end of the observation period, we found that patients in the severe covid-19 group were significantly older than those in the mild covid-19 group (table 3) . there were no significant differences in the distribution of sex, comorbidities, clinical signs, and symptoms between the two groups. however, there was a greater prevalence of consolidation as a ct pattern in participants with severe disease than in those with mild disease (or 3·27, 95% ci 1·15-9·30; table 3). additionally, the prevalence of lymphopenia was higher in participants who had severe covid-19 at the end of the observation period than in those with mild covid-19 (4·40, 1·57-12·32;  table 3 ).this retrospective, single-centre study provides a summary of the clinical features of people with sars-cov-2 infection and covid-19 of varying severity as a result of mass infection on board a cruise ship. ldh concentrations were significantly higher in the ten participants who were initially asymptomatic on admission to the hospital and developed symptomatic covid-19 during the observation period than in the 33 participants who remained asymptomatic throughout. older age, consolidation on chest ct images, and lymphopenia on admission were significantly more frequent among the 28 participants with severe covid-19 at the end of the observation period than among the 43 participants with mild covid-19. older age, consolidation, and lymphopenia on admission were also more frequent among the eight patients who developed severe covid-19 during observation compared with those who were asymptomatic or had mild covid-19 at the end of the observation period. overall, these findings suggest that serum ldh concentration might be a pre dictor of symptomatic illness among people infected with sars-cov-2 and that older age, consolidation on chest ct images, and . image (e) shows ground-glass opacities with interlobular septal thickening (crazy-paving appearance) adjacent to the parietal pleura in the right lower lobe of a 70-year-old woman. image (f) shows ground-glass opacities with consolidation, bronchial wall thickening, and bronchiectasis in left lower lobe of a 76-year-old man. sars-cov-2=severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. the predictors of symptomatic illness among people infected with sars-cov-2 and risk factors for disease progression in covid-19 are still partially unclear because people who are asymptomatic or with mild symptoms do not necessarily visit a hospital, and in many instances are even actively discouraged from doing this. during the covid-19 outbreak on the diamond princess, 3711 individuals on board were tested for sars-cov-2 by rt-pcr, and all individuals found positive for sars-cov-2 infection were referred to hospital. this unique situation allowed us to retrospectively observe the clinical course of asymptomatic people with sars-cov-2 infection, as well as those with mild and severe covid-19 symptoms.previously published findings of covid-19 in china suggest that old age, male sex, and presence of comorbidities are potential risk factors for disease progression and poor prognosis. 1,12 zhou and colleagues 13 indicated that older age, high sequential organ failure assessment score, and increased d-dimer concentrations were potential risk factors for death in patients with covid-19, whereas qin and colleagues 14 reported that lymphopenia and an increased neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio were frequently observed in patients with severe covid-19 compared with those with mild disease. our findings support those of previous reports suggesting older age and lymphopenia as potential risk factors for severe covid-19. lymphopenia, which is a common feature of symptomatic covid-19, 15,16 could be a direct consequence of sars-cov-2 or might be mediated by inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. qin and colleagues 14 also suggested that sars-cov-2 infection might affect t lymphocytes and dysregulate the immune system, consequently leading to secondary bacterial infections. they also suggested that in severe cases, lymphopenia could be induced by inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, including tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin (il)-2 receptor, il-6, il-8, and il-10, and could lead to lymphocyte deficiency and migration. 14 however, in the present study, we observed lymphopenia in 27% of participants who were asymp tomatic at the end of the observation period. further studies are warranted to determine the mechanism of lymphopenia for the prevention of covid-19 exacerbation. comparing the concentrations of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines between patients with symptomatic and asymptomatic covid-19 might help to understand the mechanism of lymphopenia.in this study, the prevalence of consolidation detected by chest ct was significantly higher in severe cases than in mild cases in patients who were symptomatic at the end of observation. consolidation was also frequently detected in participants who developed severe covid-19 during the observation period. pan and colleagues 17 and shi and colleagues 18 reported that abnormal lung findings varied from ground-glass opacities to consolidation during the course of covid-19 and that the appearance of consolidation was more frequent within 1-3 weeks after symptom onset. previous studies have found that 55% of patients with covid-19 developed dyspnoea in a median of 8 days (iqr 5-13) after symptom onset; 1 thus, the development of consolidation on ct is associated with disease deterioration. generally, consolidation is easily detectable by chest x-ray, which therefore might be useful for the evaluation of risk for disease progression in patients with covid-19 in settings with few resources.additionally, ct imaging showed a high prevalence of lung abnormalities in patients with covid-19. the various patterns of abnormal lung findings were observed in asymptomatic (52%) as well as in symptomatic (73%) participants at the end of the observation period. previous reports focusing on ct imaging findings of covid-19 also noted the presence of abnormal lung findings in asymptomatic individuals. 18, 19 bai and colleagues 20 inves tigated the common radiological characteristics of covid-19 pneumonia and reported that chest ct had a diagnostic sensitivity of 73-93% and a specificity of 93-100% in distinguishing covid-19 from viral pneu monia. therefore, chest ct might also be a useful diagnostic tool for asymptomatic and symptomatic people with sars-cov-2 infection. in the present study, all eight patients who developed severe covid-19 during the observation period presented with ct abnormalities before the appearance of typical pneumonia symptoms such as dyspnoea, tachypnoea, and hypoxaemia. of these eight patients, four had no cough and three had no fever at the end of observation. these findings highlight that covid-19 pneumonia can develop without any notable symptoms. conversely, most asymptomatic participants with radio logical ab normalities on ct imaging did not develop severe pneumonia. the differences observed in clinical outcomes might be associated with patient background characteristics as well as the genetic and pathogenic diversity of sars-cov-2. understanding the relevance of ct abnormalities to the duration of virus shedding and the incidence of secondary bacterial pneumonia is important to improve the clinical management of covid-19. further investigation is needed to clarify the clinical impact of ct findings in people with asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection or mild covid-19.notably, we found a significant difference in the prevalence of increased ldh concentrations between patients who developed symptomatic covid-19 during the observation period and those who remained asymptomatic throughout, although there was no significant difference in the prevalence of lymphopenia between the two groups. increased serum ldh concentrations are associated with lung tissue damage, 21 and serum ldh is considered a marker for disease activity and progression in pneumonia from various causes. 22, 23 given that abnormal lung findings are frequently observed in people with asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection, our results indicate that increased ldh concentrations might also reflect lung tissue damage by covid-19 and might be considered a predictor of symptomatic illness among people infected with sars-cov-2. patient assessment with determination of serum ldh and chest ct imaging might facilitate the successful dedication of medical resources to patients who are at increased risk for disease progression in the setting of mass infections, as well as in normal clinical settings.the major limitations of this study were selection bias and the small population size. we enrolled a homogeneous cluster of relatively healthy individuals who remained on board a cruise ship for an extended period of time. therefore, the patient population was not an exact representation of normal clinical settings. triage on the diamond princess before emergency transportation also introduced a sampling bias with an atypically large number of participants. the self-defense forces central hospital in tokyo where symptomatic individuals were referred to is close to the yokohama port where the cruise ship was docked. however, critical cases were preferentially referred to neighbouring designated hospitals in yokohama that were equipped to handle infectious diseases. likewise, some clinical signs and symptoms could have occurred and resolved before people were referred to our hospital, and thus might have been missed by our study. additionally, laboratory tests and ct images were obtained only once for most patients, and thus we were unable to determine changes in lymphocyte count and radiological findings over the course of observation.in conclusion, our study highlights clinical features of people infected with sars-cov-2 with various degrees of severity and shows that serum ldh, age, consolidation on ct scan, and lymphopenia might be predictors of disease severity. multicentre, multinational cohort studies with large population sizes that use multivariable analysis should be done to more accurately determine predictive markers for symptomatic illness among people infected with sars-cov-2 and risk factors for disease progression.ti and kt contributed to study conception and design. st and ki contributed to data collection and analysis. st, ki, mi, and km contributed to drafting and editing the manuscript. tkoda, ho, sk, tkode, mk, and sm revised the manuscript. ms, ss, and yu provided study supervision. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.we declare no competing interests.the raw data used in this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.since december 2019, a type of novel coronavirus which was designated novel coronavirus 2019 (2019-ncov) by world health organization (who) occurred in wuhan, hubei, china, 1 and then it spread to the whole country and even the whole world 2,3 . on february 11, 2020, the who announced a new name for the epidemic disease caused by 2019-ncov: 2019coronavirus disease (covid-19). as for the virus itself, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) has renamed the previously provisionally named 2019-ncov as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronaviruse-2, sars-cov-2. 4 the origin of sars-cov-2has not yet been explored, and early studies have found that wild animals such as pangolin were potential intermediate hosts of virus 5, 6 , which means that the virus was carried by wild animals at the beginning, and now it was the first time to invade human beings. meanwhile, it also means that human's cognition of covid-19 was not complete, and it was still in the process of exploration. china was the first country to experience covid-19, and most of the early reported cases indicated middle-aged and elderly people or who existed diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular diseases were common, children were few [7] [8] [9] [10] . however, because of the immature immune system of children and with the spread of the epidemic and the number of children cases increases gradually, which should be paid more attention to children's group. [11] [12] [13] we aim to compare and analyze the epidemiological characteristics and physiological test data of asymptomatic patients and symptomatic group, explored whether there were significant differences between the two groups, so as to provide a theoretical basis for later clinical diagnosis and related studies.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. setting a tertial hospital of covid-19 medical center in guizhou province.inclusion criteria all asymptomatic and confirmed patients under 18 years old with covid-19. all data were obtained from the records of a hospital information system (his) in guizhou provincial staff hospital.exclusion criteria all asymptomatic and confirmed patients of age ≥ 18 years old.main outcomes and measures epidemiological, demographic, clinical, laboratory, radiological, and treatment data were collected and analyzed. epidemiological and clinical characteristics of confirmed covid-19 infections and asymptomatic infections were compared.classification the standard for case classification in this study was based on covid-19 diagnosis and treatment scheme, 1st to 7th edition. according to the national standards, mild and moderate patients were included in the symptomatic group in this study, while asymptomatic patients were included in the control group.epidemic focus since 2019-ncov first appeared in wuhan, hubei province, and then spread . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. to the whole country and even the whole world, most of the existing studies regard wuhan or other areas of hubei province as the epidemic focus area.possible exposure time that is the maximum probability to infection with covid-19.incubation period theoretically, the incubation period is between onset infection and onset symptom. however, because the specific time of morbidity is affected by a variety of factors and cannot be accurately measured, we think the potential exposure time to the time that be allowed to get into hospital as the incubation period.the number of days of treatment cycle were actually counted in this study, which refers to the time from the first diagnosis to the definite detection show the patient was cured, excluding the observation time transferred to the centralized isolation hospital.excel software was used to arrange information, then choose suitable data imported into spss 26.0 for analysis. first of all, the method of mean sequence was used to process the missing values of the data. considering the sample size was less than 40, fisher's exact method was used to analyze the difference of class variable between the two groups.independent sample t test was used for quantitative variables which conform to normal distribution among two groups. and non-parametric test of independent samples was used for variable data that not conform to normal distribution. all practices serve one purpose that is to compare the differences in epidemiological characteristics and physiological detection data between the two groups.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. in this research, the whole cohort encompassed 137 cases with covid-19 infections including adults and children, as well as asymptomatic and confirmed covid-19 infections.twenty-five cases of age under 18 years old were divided into asymptomatic covid-19infections cohort and confirmed covid-19 infection cohort, we respectively compared the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of the two groups.studies have shown that from the current cases who were sent to hospital to receive treatment.covid-19 was less severe in patients under 18 years old, and most of were mild or moderate. 14 however, there have been reports of critical illness in children at present 15 .among the 25 cases in this study, 16 (64%, 16/25) had appeared infection symptoms, and 9 (36%, 9/25) had no symptoms. it should be pointed out that asymptomatic patients had no clinical performance, but it does not mean that they belong to patients with a mild degree of infection. the severity of infection should be determined according to the duration of virus activity in the body 16 . moreover, asymptomatic patients are infectious and can still cause a certain range of transmission. 17among asymptomatic patients in the study, 5 (55.6%) cases of the patients were male. in terms of age, the youngest patient was only more than 5 months old, the oldest patient was 16 years old, the average age was 8.27 years old and the median age was 7 years old (inter-quartile range, 6 to 10). while 16 symptomatic patients made up of 10 (62.5%) male.from age structure to see, the youngest patient was an infant who only more than 2 months . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. old, and the oldest patient was 17 years old, the average age was 9.6 years old, and the median age was 11 years ((inter-quartile range, 3.75 to 14.25). there was no significant difference in gender and age between the two groups (p=0.53 and p=0.34, respectively).in pneumonia cases infected by sars-cov-2 in patients under 18 years old, the incubation is as short as one day and as long as 14 days. in this study, the mean sequence method was used to process the data about 8 patients' incubation absence. the median incubation period for symptomatic patients was 10 days (inter-quartile range, 7 to 10) , and 15 patients (93.75%, 15/16) had an incubation period of less than two weeks.previous studies have shown that the average treatment period of light and normal types was not more than two weeks. collectible statistics show that the shortest period of asymptomatic patients was 6 days, the longest treatment period was 26 days, and the average treatment period was 14 days. for people who have symptoms the shortest treatment cycle was 4 days, the longest treatment cycle was 20 days, and the average treatment cycle was 12 days. the data showed that the average treatment circle of 9 asymptomatic patients was longer than two weeks and which was longer than symptomatic patients. however, there was no significant difference between the two groups in the treatment cycle.according to the existing epidemiological data, people who had visited wuhan or had a living story in the city or other areas of hubei province were those with high incidence of covid-19, and close family contact was the key cause cluster outbreak in children. among . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. the asymptomatic patients, 4 (44.4%) had visited wuhan or had a living story in the city or other areas of hubei province. all the patients had familial cluster outbreak, and the average familial infection number was 6. as to symptomatic patients, 9 (56.3%) had visited wuhan or had a living story in the city or other areas of hubei province. fourteen patients (87.5%) had familial clustering, and the familial average infection number was 5. by and large, there was no significant difference between the two groups in the three characteristics.among the asymptomatic patients in the recovery stage, 5 patients had decreased white blood cell count, 2 patients (22.2%) had increased lymphocyte absolute value, 3 patients had increased platelet count, and 4 patients had decreased neutrophils. blood sedimentation was normal in all patients. only 1 case (6.2%) of confirmed patients had decreased white blood cell count and 2 cases (12.5%) had increased in white blood cell count. the absolute value of lymphocytes was increased in 3 (18.75%) cases. 6 (37.5%) patients' platelet count had risen.neutrophils were decreased in 3 cases (18.75%). there were significant differences in leukopenia between the two groups (p=0.04), but no significant differences in other laboratory test items.all the 25 patients underwent chest ct scan after getting into the hospital. only 1 (11.11%) case of the asymptomatic patients had the characteristics of pulmonary infection (figure 2 the occurrence of the 2019-ncov in hubei province aroused the attention of the provincial committee and government in guizhou province, and then leading organization quickly formulates appropriate prevention and control measures. guizhou province had the least covid-19 patients in southwest china except tibet autonomous region through joint effort.since the first confirmed case of covid-19 appeared in guizhou province on january 13, 2020, the public health department actively executes joint prevention and control work, and launched the first-level response to public health emergencies on january 24, 2020. until april 1, 2020, a total of 147 covid-19 patients were confirmed, including 1 case imported from abroad, and 26 cases were children, accounting for 17.81% (26/146). in this study, there were 25 cases of children, have a proportion as high as 96.15% (25/26) of the cases in . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. the reason that patients' incubation period exist missing data is that 12 (48%, 12/25) children's age at 10 years old or younger, due to the young did not have the ability to accurately describe onset time of their symptoms or even no memory about onset symptom.another reasonable explanation is that asymptomatic patients have no obvious symptoms in the early stage of infection, so they are not aware of the fact of infection. in addition, the average treatment period among 9 asymptomatic patients was more than two weeks and longer than 2 days for symptomatic patients, and 3 (33.33%) patients' treatment period was more than 3 weeks. the reason is that the long incubation period of asymptomatic patients made the virus survive in the body for a long time, and the degree of virus invasion was severe, so it needs to undergo a longer treatment cycle.the literature has proved that in the routine blood test of covid-19 patients, the occurrence of white blood cells or lymphocyte count decreased were common phenomenon 9, 18 , and the number of white blood cells in both mild and moderate types is mostly decreased. in this study, 5 asymptomatic patients' white blood cells had decreased, while only 1 symptomatic patient's (6.2%) white blood cells had decreased and 2 (12.5%) cases had increased. there was a significant difference in white blood cells between the two groups (p=0.04). the reasonable explanation was that although the 5 asymptomatic patients had no clinical performance, they were infected with sars-cov-2 was a pre-exist fact. the erosion of the virus caused excessive destruction of white blood cells, so the number of white blood cells in peripheral blood had decreased. however, the presence of white blood cell count increased in patients with symptomatic was indicative that the aggravation of the patient's condition. as . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20074682 doi: medrxiv preprint for the significant difference in the white blood cell count between the two groups, it was considered that the difference in the immune system and the ability to resist the virus in the two groups.there are several advantages in our study. firstly, this is the first study to use clinical inspection results and epidemiological survey data about covid-19 in patients under 18 years old during the recovery stage. secondly, the nature of our study was a retrospectively analysis that compared symptomatic with asymptomatic patients to draw conclusions. thirdly, it is the first time that leukopenia is found mostly in asymptomatic patients under 18 years old with covid-19.certainly, there are some disadvantages and shortages in the research. for example, the sample size of this study was a total of 25 patients, which was small and lacked credibility.additionally, in view of the small number of covid-19 patients in guizhou province, the sample size of patients under 18 years old with covid-19 in this study was small, so our conclusion will be verified by more studies in the future.in this study, most of patients under 18 years old infected by sars-cov-2 were mild or moderate type. leukopenia mostly occurred in asymptomatic patients under 18 years old with covid-19 than in those with confirmed infections.all authors declared that there are no conflicts interests involved in the article.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20074682 doi: medrxiv preprintkeywords asymptomatic infection, population health, respiratory viruses r espiratory virus infections are among the most common diseases in humans and cause significant morbidity and mortality across seasons and populations (1) . while respiratory virus infections can often be mild, these infections are typically undocumented, as individuals may not seek medical care because either the infection is asymptomatic or it elicits symptoms not severe enough to warrant seeking care. as a consequence, standard medical surveillance provides an incomplete picture of the epidemiology of respiratory infections. in this study, which was an extension of a previously published study focusing on infection in this population during only the summer months (2), we focused on ascertaining the rates of asymptomatic infection for the following suite of respiratory viruses: adenovirus, coronavirus (cov), human metapneumovirus (hmpv), human rhinovirus (hrv), influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), and parainfluenza virus (piv). the population in this study was not only largely asymptomatic but also specifically ambulatory; we recruited participants from among visitors to a new york city tourist attraction. we therefore might have missed sampling severely symptomatic patients who were not well enough to visit the attraction, but we nonetheless can estimate the levels of prevalence in a setting where transmission is likely.some previous studies have measured or inferred asymptomatic respiratory virus shedding prevalence levels; however, such estimates range widely across demographics, pathogens, and sampling approaches. a study carried out in nashville, tn, and salt lake city, ut, recruited 238 completely asymptomatic adults (no symptoms within 14 days of recruitment), who were controls for patients with pneumonia, from among visitors to outpatient primary care clinics for routine health checks. of these individuals, only 5 (2%) tested positive for human rhinovirus (hrv), coronavirus (cov), or human metapneumovirus (hmpv) (3) . a different study, also based in salt lake city, ut, which prospectively recorded infection and symptoms over time within families recruited from the university of utah campus community, found that 47% of respiratory infections among adults were asymptomatic. influenza a virus, hmpv, cov hku1, and cov oc43 were more frequently associated with symptoms (4). among elderly adults enrolled in prospective surveillance in rochester, ny, two studies have shown that very high proportions (80% to 90%) were symptomatic when infected with respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza virus, and hmpv (5, 6) .asymptomatic infection rates may vary as a function of host age and virus. in one study, 52% of asymptomatic children recruited from an alaskan community tested positive for shedding respiratory virus in a one-time sampling scheme, with the majority having hrv and adenovirus (7) . in another prospective surveillance investigation comparing positivity levels of symptomatic and asymptomatic infants in perth, australia, respiratory viruses were detected in 70% of samples from symptomatic infants and in 24.6% of samples from asymptomatic infants (8) . in general, among children, studies have found that 24.6% to 64% of human rhinovirus (hrv) infections are asymptomatic (7) (8) (9) (10) . a number of studies have also documented the fraction of asymptomatic children who are shedding virus rather than the fraction of infected children who are asymptomatic. calvo et al. documented an hrv shedding rate of 12.3% among healthy children (9) . van benten et al. found that 20% of asymptomatic infants յ2 years old tested positive for hrv (11) . similarly, nokso-koivisto et al. found that 20% of children without any past or recent respiratory infection symptoms tested positive for hrv or coronavirus (cov) (12) . other studies examining multiple respiratory agents documented respiratory virus infection in 40% and 42% of children without symptoms (13, 14) . the definition of symptomatic infection is not standardized, but most of these studies defined asymptomatic patients as those free from symptoms at the time of study participation or within a window around the time of enrollment. this wide variation in symptomatic versus asymptomatic presentations underscores the need for further studies to understand the distribution of symptoms across infec-tion statuses. here, we document the shedding prevalence of a number of common respiratory viruses in an ambulatory adult population, as well as the distributions of symptomatology and symptom severity. sampling was conducted in two seasonal arms: one carried out in the late spring/early summer (summer arm), which has been previously reported (2) , and one carried out in the late winter/early spring (winter arm). in the summer arm, we found that over 5% of individuals tested positive for respiratory virus, with the majority testing positive for hrv, but with over half also reporting being asymptomatic. we hypothesized that these numbers might vary by season, as many respiratory infections, as well as ambulatory population contact dynamics, display seasonal patterns. (since we published our previous study, genmark diagnostics, the manufacturer of the respiratory viral panel [rvp] assay used to analyze these samples, determined that a higher cutoff value for positivity was warranted for some of the assayed viruses. this paper thus rereports the summer study with a cutoff value of 25 na/mm 2 rather than 3 na/mm 2 , so the numbers differ from those reported in shaman et al. [2] .)demographics. we received consent from, surveyed, and swabbed a total of 2,685 individuals 18 years of age or older from among visitors passing through a room in the tourist attraction. some directly approached the study recruiters, while others were present while a recruiter was explaining the study and elected to join afterward. a total of 1,477 participants were enrolled between 29 april and 31 july 2016 (summer) and a total of 1,208 between 28 january and 30 april 2017 (winter) ( table 1) . among all participants, 57.7% were reported as female, 41.7% as male, and 0.6% as transgender, gender nonconforming, or gender not known. among the participants, 69.5% identified as white, 3.5% as black/african american, 13.2% as asian, 1.5% as american indian/ alaskan native, 0.6% as native hawaiian/pacific islander, 6.8% as other or of two or more races, and 4.9% gave no response. 21.7% identified as hispanic, while 77.8% did not. a total of 39.8% of participants were in the 18-to-29-year-old age range, 20.9% were 30 to 39 years of age, 22.0% were 40 to 49 years of age, 12% were 50 to 64 years of age, and 4.2% were 65 or older. a total of 42.6% reported having had a flu shot, while 52.0% had not had one and 5.4% did not know whether they had had one. in response to the statement "i get sick more easily or more often than most people i know," 3.4% reported that they strongly agreed, 11.3% somewhat agreed, 13.5% neither agreed nor disagreed, 23.0% somewhat disagreed, and 48.8% strongly disagreed. the breakdowns across all of the categorical variables described above were similar between the summer and winter arms of the study (see table 1 ). viral positivity results. among all 2,685 participants across both seasons, there were a total of 168 (6.2%) individuals who tested positive for respiratory virus. of these, 85 (50.6%) were positive for hrv, 65 (38.7%) for cov, and 18 (10.2%) for adenovirus, hmpv, rsv, influenza virus, or piv. there were no coinfections. in the summer arm, only 5.6% of participants tested positive (2) , whereas in the winter arm, 7.0% did. these positivity results did show differences across seasons in terms of virus distribution (fisher's exact test p ϭ ͻ0.001) though not in terms of overall positivity prevalence (p ϭ 0.13). the majority of infections in the summer arm were hrv infections (71.0%), with 19.3% testing positive for cov and the other 9.7% testing positive for influenza virus, hmpv, rsv, or piv; however, the majority of infections in the winter arm were cov infections (57.6%), with 30.6% testing positive for hrv and the remaining 11.8% testing positive for adenovirus, hmpv, influenza virus, or piv (fig. 1a) . there was evidence of differing viral positivity rates across the months, with the highest proportion of positive tests (11.1%) occurring in february (p ͻ 0.001). figure 1b shows the percentage of positive tests per month broken down by virus.analysis of positivity. testing positive for respiratory virus was positively associated with consumption of cold and flu medicine among all participants, and this association was consistent across the seasonal arms (fisher's exact test p ϭ ͻ0.001). the proportion of participants testing positive who were symptomatic ranged from 3.6% to 39.4% overall, depending on symptomatic definition. there were slight differences between the seasonal arms, with 2.5% to 48.1% of positives being symptomatic during the summer arm and 4.8% to 30.1% being symptomatic for the winter arm, again depending on definition. there was some evidence of differences in the proportions of infections that were symptomatic between seasons by symptomatic definitions 1 and 2 (chi-square p ϭ 0.05 and 0.03, respectively) (see materials and methods for an explanation of the scoring method used for quantification of symptomatic definitions), but there was no evidence of differences for any other definition. rates of being symptomatic differed significantly among virus-positive and virus-negative participants, with positive-testing participants more likely to meet symptomatic criteria, though there were up to 17.6% of individuals who tested negative who were nonetheless symptomatic (depending on definition) ( table 2 ). this association was consistent across the seasonal arms. no other univariate associations between testing positive for respiratory virus and other collected characteristics (e.g., race, gender, age, etc.) were found.the best-fit logistic regression models according to minimum akaike information criterion (aic) values are shown in table 3 . for all participants combined across seasons, the best-fit model supported an association of an increased likelihood of testing positive for respiratory virus infection (all viruses) with a higher total symptom score but with no other variables. there was some difference between the arms, with the association for the summer arm holding for the symptom score and being hispanic and that for the winter arm holding only for the symptom score. performing the analysis on all participants (both arms) for hrv positivity, the best-fit model showed an association of positivity with symptom score, being hispanic, and age category. for the summer arm and winter arm considered individually, the association held only for symptom score and being hispanic. for cov positivity, the best-fit model indicated an association between positivity and symptom score for both seasonal arms. analysis of quantitated signal intensity score. among the positive-testing participants, signal intensity (measured continuously in nanoamps per square millimeter) was positively associated with reporting allergies (p ͻ 0.05). there were differences between the seasonal arms for this finding, however. for the winter arm, allergies were similarly associated with quantitated score of signal intensity for all positives, whereas there was an association of signal intensity with age but not with allergies for the summer arm (there was a negative association between signal intensity and the 40-to-49-year-old and 50-to-64-year-old age categories compared to the 18-to-29-yearold age category). among hrv positive-testing participants (both arms combined), there was strong evidence of a negative association between signal intensity and the 50-to-64-year-old age category compared to the 18-to-29-year-old age category, weak evidence of a positive association between signal intensity and having allergies, and weak evidence of a positive association between signal intensity and being hispanic. again, there were seasonal differences, with the symptom score being negatively associated with signal intensity in the winter arm and with being hispanic being positively associated in the summer arm. for those positive for cov, signal intensity was weakly positively associated with having allergies (p ͻ 0.1). this association held across seasons, with stronger association in the winter arm (p ϭ 0.02). in the summer arm there were also associations with symptom score, race, and gender, with signal intensity being positively associated with symptom score, a negative association between signal intensity and all other races compared to whites, and a negative association with women compared to men. symptom results. among all participants, there was strong evidence of a higher reported total symptom score among women than men (analysis of variance [anova] p ͻ 0.001); participants aged 30 to 39 years, 40 to 49 years, and 50 to 64 years had lower total reported symptom scores than participants aged 18 to 29 years (anova p ͻ 0.001). these results were consistent and significant across the seasonal arms. reporting consumption of cold and flu medicines was positively associated with higher total symptom scores across all participants and also only among positives (anova p ͻ 0.0001). this finding was also consistent across seasons. there was evidence of differences in symptom scores by month across all participants (anova p ͻ 0.001), but there were no differences seen in assessing only the participants testing positive (aov, p ϭ 0.725) (fig. 2 ). there were, however, differences in mean individual symptom scores by virus as shown in table 4 . there was a positive association between reporting a greater tendency to get sick and total self-reported symptom scores among all participants (aov, p ͻ 0.0001); however, there was no significant association between viral positivity and reporting a greater tendency to get sick. these results were consistent across the seasonal arms.interestingly, the proportions of symptomatic individuals (by the various definitions) who tested negative were quite high (66.7% to 86.9%), and this finding held across the seasonal arms. examining this result further, we found that for symptom definitions 1 and 2 (the definitions that encompassed all symptoms), there was a strong association among the participants who tested negative between being symptomatic and having allergies (p ͻ 0.001). the association between having allergies and being symptomatic among participants who tested negative was less strong for definition 2 (p ͻ 0.05) and nonexistent for definitions 3 to 7.in this two-part study, we found that 6.2% of adult visitors to a new york city tourist destination tested positive for the shedding of respiratory virus, with 5.6% testing positive in the late spring and summer months and 7.0% testing positive during the winter and early spring months. regardless of symptom definition, over half of the participants who tested positive could be categorized asymptomatic, across seasons, whereas 81.9% to 99.6% of participants who tested negative were categorized asymptomatic. prior estimates of symptomatic rates for persons positive for respiratory virus ranged from~9% to 80% (9, 10, 15, 16) . the results from this study determined on the basis of less-strict definitions 1 and 2 were consistent with those estimates. however, the results based on symptom definitions 3 to 7, which incorporated stricter definitions, indicated a lower percentage of symptomatic individuals than had been seen in some previous studies.the winter results presented in this paper largely confirm the findings reported in the previously published summer study, with some slight differences in seasonal prevalence and breakdown of infection composition. for the summer arm, the winter arm, and the entire study, respectively, 25.9%, 32.8%, and 29.6% of individuals testing positive reported no symptoms at all (symptom score of zero). these numbers indicate that though there may be a spectrum of symptom severity, a substantial number of infected individuals are completely asymptomatic. regardless, the participants in this study, even if symptomatic by the definitions used (see materials and methods), felt well enough to visit a tourist attraction. there were few individuals who reported severe symptom scores or fever, indicating that those with severe symptomatology might have stayed home and thus were not captured in this study.conversely, a substantial percentage of individuals who were symptomatic across the definitions did not test positive. only some of the variation appears to have been due to allergies and only for symptom definitions 1 and 2. this result may indicate that symptoms persist after an infection has cleared, that symptoms may appear before an infection is detectable, or that symptoms may be due to infections not tested for in this study.in multivariate analysis of viral positivity, we found an expected association between having worse symptoms and testing positive for respiratory virus. we also found some evidence of an association of hispanic ethnicity with being positive, in particular, for hrv. this association has been found previously in other studies of respiratory virus (17, 18) , especially in children. some of the best-fit models also included the age category, although the only statistically significant result was that individuals aged 30 to 39 years were more likely to be positive than individuals aged 18 to 29 years. this association might be due to the fact that 30-to-39-year-old adults may be more likely to have or to be in contact with young children, who classically have a high prevalence of respiratory manufacturer specifications, as well as data from previous studies, indicate that there is no association between esensor signal intensity and the amount of virus present in a sample. however, in this study, we found evidence of an association between signal intensity and having allergies among all positives combined from both study arms and also among those in the winter arm alone (although not among those in the summer arm alone). there was, however, some association between signal intensity and age in the summer arm.these findings build on our previously reported summer arm study and provide an estimate of baseline prevalence of respiratory virus shedding in an ambulatory population across seasons. the results indicate that nearly 1 in 17 adults is shedding respiratory virus across seasons and that nearly 1 in 14 do so during the peak winter month. there is evidence of a difference in virus species prevalence among seasons, with hrv being the most prevalent virus species during the summer arm (more than half of all reported summer infections were hrv infections) and coronavirus being dominant during the winter arm (more than half of all winter infections reported were coronavirus infections). the impact of shedding prevalence on contagiousness or transmission is not yet well defined, however.there are several limitations to this study. while the sampling scheme was designed to capture individuals from a population different from those represented in studies of persons seeking medical attention, it would not capture individuals who stay home with severe symptoms. however, given that the site used in the study is frequented by tourists, who usually only have a limited amount of time in new york city, we hypothesize that many people might still visit the site despite having symptoms that would otherwise keep them home. consequently, our sample may be less skewed in symptom distribution than a random sample from the street. conversely, among tourist attraction visitors, those with symptoms might have been more inclined to participate in this study. symptoms were self-reported, which can introduce error, and were reported only for the previous 48 h. for some viruses, rna can be detected for several weeks following infection, so some seemingly asymptomatic individuals who tested positive may have been previously infected and symptomatic. further, shedding prior to symptom development also occurs (19) . these dynamics preclude calculation of the proportion of infections that are asymptomatic, but not estimation of asymptomatic prevalence in the ambulatory population, as the participants were asymptomatic at the time and were still shedding. also, the study was run over two seasons, but there were no samples taken during the late summer or fall or early winter season, when prevalence levels may be different. for the diagnostic analysis, we performed a molecular test but did not try to isolate viruses or determine titers and therefore cannot confirm whether the virus collected in samples was viable. lastly, this study excluded children, who have a high burden of respiratory virus infection.the findings presented here indicate a significant level of respiratory virus shedding in an ambulatory adult population across seasons, as well as a substantial proportion of infections that are asymptomatic. these results could help improve estimates of virus incidence and inform disease transmission modeling and forecasting, which could then be used to support control efforts. indeed, determination of respiratory virus prevalence in nonclinical settings can help with the design of control measures in the real-world settings where most transmission occurs. future potential work in this area could include replicating this study in other highly frequented areas in the city (e.g., subway stations and parks) and enrolling children in order to obtain estimates across a broader age range.as described in a report of a previous study (2) for which this study served as an extension, participants were recruited from a new york city tourist site frequented by both new york residents and tourists, thus providing a representative sample of visiting and local populations. two rounds of participant recruitment were undertaken: the first from 29 april to 31 july 2016 (summer) (2) and the second from 28 january to 30 april 2017 (winter). all parts of the recruitment process (i.e., participant solicitation, consenting, surveying, and sampling) were performed during weekend days. participants had to be over 18 to enroll and had to provide informed consent after reading a detailed description of the study (cumc irb aaaq4358; amnh irb fwa00006768). consented individuals were given a baseline survey, and one nasopharyngeal swab sample was collected from each nostril.survey. participants were surveyed with respect to demographic attributes, including age, gender, and race, as well for as other information, including reports of recent travel, preexisting medical conditions, allergies, self-reported propensity to get sick, and flu shot status. data were also collected, per the common cold questionnaire (20) , on whether participants were experiencing symptoms (over the previous 48-h period) commonly related to respiratory infection: fever, chills, muscle pain, watery eye, runny nose, sneezing, sore throat, cough, and chest pain. the severity level for each symptom was recorded on a likert scale (none, mild, moderate, and severe; scored at 0, 1, 2, and 3, respectively), and a total symptom score was calculated by adding together the values for all 9 symptoms.specimen collection and analysis. nasopharyngeal swabs from both the left and right nasal cavities were collected from each participant using a minitip flocked swab (copan diagnostics, murrieta, ca). the samples were jointly stored in 2 ml dna/rna shield (zymo research, irvine, ca) for up to 30 days at 4 to 25°c and were subsequently divided into 2 aliquots and stored at ϫ80°c until assay. nucleic acids were extracted from 200-l samples, with the addition of 10 l of ms2 bacteriophage as an internal control, using an easymag nuclisens system (biomérieux, durham, nc). samples were tested for infection using a multiplex pcr assay known as an esensor xt-8 respiratory viral panel (rvp; genmark diagnostics, carlsbad, ca) according to the manufacturer's instructions.positive samples were identified using a threshold of 25 na/mm 2 . the viruses detected by the xt-8 rvp include influenza a (any subtype), a/h1n1, a/h3n2, and ah1n1pdm2009 virus and influenza b virus; rsv a and b; piv 1, 2, 3, and 4; hmpv; hrv; adenovirus b/e and c; and cov 229e, nl63, oc43, and hku1.definitions of asymptomatic infections. there is no standard definition of symptomatic infection, so several definitions were used so that the sensitivity of our findings could be tested. all definitions were based on self-reporting of symptom type and severity. definition 1 consisted of reporting at least two symptoms, with at least one being moderate or severe (21) . definition 2 required only one moderate to severe symptom. definitions 3 to 7 were based only on fever, cough, and sore throat symptom reporting, as used to define influenza-like illnesses (22) . definition 3 required at least one of those three symptoms to be moderate to severe. definition 4 required moderate to severe fever and moderate to severe cough or sore throat. definition 5 required mild to severe fever and mild to severe cough or sore throat. definition 6 required moderate to severe fever and mild to severe cough or sore throat. lastly, definition 7 required mild to severe fever and moderate to severe cough or sore throat.statistical analysis. we conducted a range of statistical tests to identify associations between various demographic factors and both symptom scores and viral positivity. for categorical variables, such as gender and age group, we used anova and tukey tests to determine whether there were statistical differences in the average symptom scores between categories of the variable. we used chi-square and fisher's exact tests to compare differences across each categorical variable with respect to positivity. we performed univariate and multivariate regression to test associations between each set of variables (race, gender, age group, allergies, travel, residence, and hispanic self-identification) and quantitated positivity scores (measured in nanoangstroms per square millimeter) for all viruses and for hrv and cov separately. logistic regression was used to conduct a similar analysis on associations between the demographic variables and positivity as a binary variable (positive versus negative) for all viruses and for hrv and cov separately. the akaike information criterion was used to identify the best-fitting models.2 abstract.introduction: the novel coronavirus disease , caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus -2 (sars-cov-2), in africa is characterised by a more substantial proportion of asymptomatic (or mildly symptomatic) individuals thought to be playing a role in the spread of the infection. the exact proportion and degree of infectiousness of asymptomatic individuals remains unclear. studies however indicate that their management is crucial for control of sars-cov-2 transmission.we developed a simplified deterministic susceptible-exposed-infectious-removed (seir) mathematical model to assess the effect of active isolation of sars-cov-2 infected but asymptomatic individuals through blanket testing for control of the outbreak in lusaka province of zambia. here we modelled two scenarios; (1) assuming asymptomatic individuals comprised 70% of all covid-19 cases and (2) asymptomatic individuals comprised only 50% of the cases.for contrast, the model was assessed first under the assumption that asymptomatic individuals are equally as infectious as symptomatic individuals and then secondly, and more likely, assuming asymptomatic individuals are only half as infectious as symptomatic individuals.results: for the model assuming 70% asymptomatic cases, a minimum sustained blanket testing rate of ≥ 7911 tests/100000 population was sufficient to control the outbreak if asymptomatic individuals are only half as infectious while if equal infectiousness was assumed then a testing rate of ≥ 10028 tests/ 100000 population would be required. for 50% asymptomatic, minimum blanket testing rates of ≥ 4540 tests/ 100000 population was sufficient to control the outbreak at both assumed levels of infectiousness for asymptomatic individuals relative to symptomatic individuals.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint (sars-cov-2), has killed over 327,700 and infected over 4.9 million people globally by 21 st cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint 4 applied a simple mathematical modelling approach to explore the effect of increased blanket testing rates as a possible measure to capture and isolate asymptomatic individuals and control the covid-19 outbreak in lusaka province of zambia which is the epicenter of the outbreak in zambia since the first recorded case in the country on 18 th march 2020. [44] . recent studies have modelled the spread and expected burden of the covid-19 outbreak in africa and zambia and explored the effects of various control measures such as applying different levels of physical distancing and shielding in the population [42, 43, 51, 72] . although this provides vital information to guide policy for zambia, some interventions may not be easy to monitor in practice.additionally, while such interventions have already been instituted, cases continue to rise in zambia and other african countries [20, 43, 44, 50] . assessment of more covid-19 control options through mathematical modelling based on the known epidemiology of the disease would therefore serve to supplement current information on the possible management of the outbreak in zambia. lusaka is a busy corporate and commercial hub of zambia and an outlet to the rest of the world with the busy kenneth kaunda international airport. it is therefore no surprise that the first . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. the spread of sars-cov-2 in lusaka province was modelled through a simplified deterministic susceptible-exposed-infectious-removed (seir) compartmental mathematical model as shown in cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint 6 relationship to a compartment. infectious individuals are split into symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals.the model both directly and indirectly incorporated the current mitigation measures in place to attempt to predict the trajectory of the outbreak in lusaka accurately. we started by denoting the infection states as total number of susceptible s(t), exposed e(t), infectious i(t), removed r(t) and dead persons d(t) at any given time (t) in the population of size n. for our analysis, the total population size was assumed to be constant and demographics of natural birth and deaths rates were considered negligible [17, 70] . table 1 once they have become infectious, they may belong to either one of two classes of infectious individuals; symptomatic infectious ( ), or asymptomatic infectious ( ) determined by the fraction for symptomatic persons ɛ. based on current interventions in lusaka, the symptomatic . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. are taken to be generally unnoticed in the community but also recover at a rate in which time they can infect susceptible individuals before they become removed as ( ) and no longer infectious. note that some asymptomatic individuals develop symptoms much later in their infection but this does not substantially affect our model because at that time they would still be removed ( ) if they become diagnosed and quarantined through targeted testing. in this study,we assumed that the current mostly targeted testing for covid-19 in lusaka province is restrictive and probably missing some asymptomatic individuals [53] . therefore, a parameter ( ) was introduced in the model which describes blanket testing applied as tests per 100000 populations used to identify and isolate all infectious individuals in the community (symptomatic and asymptomatic) through sustained random mass testing. the total removed individuals for the model ( ) are given as ( ) + ( ) while the total confirmed cases are given asof which a fraction (case fatality rate -cfr) are recorded dead ( ).. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprintmodel optimisation and simulation was done using vensim ple systems dynamics modelling software for windows (version-7) [48] . this was done for two scenarios of 70% and a modest 50% assumed proportion of asymptomatic infectious individuals in the population. data from the first three months of the outbreak in lusaka as given in the zambia covid-19 situation reportsno. 1-64 [44] was used to configure the model and optimise parameters. however, due to presence of imported cases in the early days and the considerable variations in recorded cases between some days (probably influenced by variations in availability of testing kits), only data from 10 th april 2020 to 16 th may 2020 was used. this is because this period had more consistent data and by then is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint (as a key indicator of control of the outbreak), several iterations of this simulation were then performed using increasingly higher values for .no ethical issues were encountered as no human or animal subjects were used in this study and cases were anonymous.the model had significant fit to outbreak data under all the assessed conditions and therefore could be used for the general purpose of analysing the outbreak under all these general scenarios. figure   2 shows results of model optimisation and fit to outbreak data for both the 70% and 50% asymptomatic scenarios assuming equal infectiousness for asymptomatic and symptomatic individuals (denoted as a1 and a2). . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint detected. however, this more substantial proportion of asymptomatic individuals (70%) is 8 associated with higher expected peak values of both total active infectious individuals and total 9 quarantined individuals. it is also observed that the outbreak is expected to peak much earlier for 10 all variables in table 2 for the 70% asymptomatic individual's scenario compared to only 50% 11 asymptomatic. note that the model predictions for the lusaka covid-19 outbreak given in table   12 2 are however subject to the effectiveness of the containment policies in lusaka province over 13 time. figures 4 -7 and table 3 give the results of the effect of increasing blanket testing rates (θ) (table 3) . however, 29 if the asymptomatic individuals only make up 50% of all cases and are only half as infectious 30 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint discussion. 57 in this study, we developed a simple deterministic model to forecast the spread of infection and 58 assess required blanket testing rates for the control of the novel sars-cov-2 outbreak in lusaka 59 province, zambia, with specific consideration for asymptomatic infectious individuals. in the early cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint 16 2021 (table 2) . this lower projection is plausible given that it is an estimate for lusaka province cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.12.20152124 doi: medrxiv preprint asymptomatic infections may be even more pertinent than other regions of the world. this is 126 because africa has been found to have a younger population and with lower personal . further modelling studies using more refined models and more 146 outbreak data should, therefore, be conducted to study the covid-19 outbreak in lusaka.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. seir: susceptible-exposed-infectious-removed compartmental mathematical model. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. available from: https://www.citypopulation.de/php/zambia-admin.php?adm1id=05.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted july 14, 2020. first identified in hubei province, china, capital wuhan, there has been since december 2019 an ongoing epidemic of atypical pneumonia caused by the zoonotic novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) (li, q et al. 2020) . as of 8th april 2020 there have been over 1.4 million clinically and/or laboratory confirmed cases of covid-19 with over 70,000 deaths worldwide. this is the first coronavirus pandemic.a number of sub-saharan african countries, including kenya, were at moderate to high risk of novel coronavirus importation, measured by volume of air travel arriving from infected chinese provinces (gilbert et al. 2020) . as of 9th march8th april 2020, no east african country has had more than 200 confirmed cases of covid-19, and there are few confirmed instances of local transmission in the region (world health organization 2020). however, the likelihood of a significant outbreak remains high, with potentially severe consequences for fragile regional health systems (makoni 2020) . the potentially high negative impact of a novel coronavirus outbreak in kenya provides a strong motivation for forecasting studies of covid-19 epidemic magnitude ahead of a serious outbreak under a number of plausible scenarios. this modeling study provides a baseline for continuous updating as improved data become available, e.g. time course of covid-19 cases, updated mobility estimates, and the proportion and infectivity of asymptomatic infections, and new intervention strategies are proposed or implemented. it also provides the basis for studies of health service capacity; see accompanying article (barasa et al, 2020) . sars-cov-2 is the third novel betacoronavirus to pose a global health threat since 2002, the other two being: (i) severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov; in 2002) , and (ii) middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov; in 2012) . both previous novel coronaviruses (ncovs) were zoonotic, and clinically similar in their disease presentation, however they differed in their subclinical manifestation. there was virtually no evidence of asymptomatic infections of sars-cov, or of "hidden" person-to-person transmission caused by asymptomatic/subclinical or preclinical cases (anderson et al. 2004) . in contrast, mers-cov behaved more like other commonly circulating human covs, with a substantial proportion of asymptomatic or preclinical infections (cauchemez et al. 2013 ).the role of asymptomatic infected individuals (in this study we abbreviate to "asymptomatics") in the transmission of sars-cov-2 remains unclear. a significant majority of detections of sars-cov-2 infection have occurred after infected individuals have presented clinically with covid-19. clinical cases of covid-19 have presented mostly among older age groups (cpere 2020) . this could be due to a stronger resistance among younger age groups to contracting sars-cov-2 (zhang et al. 2020; hilton & keeling 2020) , or due to younger people developing covid-19 symptoms at a lower rate after contracting sars-cov-2, leading to under-ascertainment amongst those age groups. one epidemiological study of 391 confirmed cases and their 1,286 close contacts in shenzen found that children were as likely to be infected as adults (bi et al. 2020) , despite presenting with symptoms less frequently. another modelling study emphasizes the role of undetected subclinical transmission in explaining the observed epidemic dynamics in china (li, r. et al. 2020) . these findings informed a central assumption of our modelling: that all age-groups are equally susceptible to sars-cov-2 infection but that the symptomatic rate is different across age groups.in a recent novel coronavirus transmission modelling study by wu et al (wu et al. 2020 ) a clinical sars-cov-2 case was defined essentially tautologically: a clinical case is one that has sufficiently severe symptoms that the individual is detected by the health authorities. however, this presents a difficulty in translating symptomatic rates derived from chinese confirmed covid-19 clinical case data into a prediction of incidence in the kenyan setting. mildly symptomatic cases, defined as non-pneumonia and mild pneumonia cases by china cdc (cpere, 2020) , that presented to the health system in china might not present to the health system in kenya. in this study, we provide forecasts of the possible epidemic course of covid-19 infections, focussing on symptomatic infection, following initial invasion of sars-cov-2 into kenya. we recognize the limitations of using clinically detected cases from another setting (china) to infer a symptomatic rate in this setting (kenya). this reflects the difficulty in ascertaining covid-19 disease with an unclear available testing capacity and coverage. this limitation highlights the importance of the sensitivity analysis in this modelling study. we treated all sub-clinical undetected infected individuals in china as asymptomatic. however, the threshold for being a sub-clinical infected individual will be different in kenya and might miss significantly infectious, or even diseased, individuals. this observation led us to consider a range of infectiousness scenarios for asymptomatic cases, each scenario being capable of explaining the agedistribution of cases observed in china. characteristics as china, the reproductive number for kenya will not be the same as that estimated for the early stages of the pandemic in china for two main reasons:1. the age-profile of the kenyan population is significantly different to that of china;kenya having a far younger populace. therefore, the symptomatic rate of a "typical" infected individual will be different in kenya compared to china. 2. the typical mixing patterns between different age groups differ between the two countries. therefore, the transmission rate will differ even if the per-contact transmission probability is the same.our central assumption is that all age groups are equally susceptible to sars-cov-2 infection and that differing rates of becoming symptomatic are responsible for the age distribution of confirmed covid-19 cases. the age-dependent symptomatic rate could not be identified independently from an assumption about the infectiousness of undetected asymptomatics relative to detected symptomatic cases. therefore, we inferred agedependent symptomatic rates, using the age distribution of confirmed covid-19 symptomatic cases in china, for a range of values of the relative infectiousness of asymptomatics to symptomatic infected individuals. the range of relative infectiousness scenarios considered in this study was 0%, 10%, 25%, 50%, and 100%. each of these scenarios is capable of explaining the age-distribution of cases observed in china, but with a different set of fitted symptomatic rates in each scenario ( figure 1 ).it is also possible to explain the age distribution of cases observed in china by assuming a biological mechanism exists which reduces the susceptibility of contracting sars-cov-2 for some age groups compared to others. in the early stages of an epidemic, it is not possible to distinguish between age-differing susceptibility and age-differing symptomatic rate if asymptomatics are not infectious (0% relative infectiousness).we find that our estimates of the kenyan reproductive number (r0), without interventions, depend strongly on the relative infectiousness of the asymptomatic cases. as a baseline, if the symptomatic rate was age-independent, so that age-structured mixing was the only driver of age heterogeneity, then we would expect the reproductive number in kenya to be 38.3% higher than in china, because of the typically higher mixing rates estimated within the kenyan population compared to the chinese population (prem et al. 2017) . in a scenario where younger age groups are developing covid-19 symptoms at a lower rate after infection compared to older age groups and their infectiousness is negligible (0%) then the r0 we predict for kenya is substantially lower than the r0 for china (28.8% lower). this is also true if younger age groups are more resistant to contracting sars-cov-2 (table 1) . however, in scenarios where asymptomatic infected are transmitting sars-cov-2 within the community the predicted r0 for kenya is higher than the estimates for china, and this prediction holds even if the relative infectiousness of asymptomatic cases in kenya is 10% that of symptomatic cases (table 1) .in this modelling study, we are investigating the course of a potential epidemic of covid-19 cases in kenya. we are focused on medium-to-long term predictions, assuming that detection at port-of-entry and within-kenya contact tracing fails to suppress transmission immediately after introduction. the experience of countries which have experienced a substantial epidemic of covid-19 cases has been that the onset of rapid growth in clinical cases, without any obvious transmission pathway between cases (grasselli et al. 2020), was preceded by a period of largely undetected transmission in the community identified subsequently via genetic analysis of sequenced strains (bedford et al. 2020) . we recreate this "invisible" period of spread by assuming that there have been five generations of undetected transmission in nairobi before the first set of kenyan symptomatic cases are determined. in each of the scenarios presented below we present results starting from the exponential growth phase of the epidemic.the underlying transmission scenario cannot be disentangled from the symptomatic rate estimate. we estimate that if the relative infectiousness rate of asymptomatics is higher, then their symptomatic rate must be lower to account for the observed case distribution in china ( figure 1) . consequently, the level of asymptomatic infectiousness in our model influences our expectation of the epidemic's progress after five generations of unobserved transmission. in all scenarios, there were a small (1-6) number of initially symptomatic cases. in scenarios where the relative infectiousness of asymptomatics is higher, we are therefore also initializing with more asymptomatics to match the expected growth of the outbreak before detection.in line with our reproductive ratio analysis, if asymptomatics were contributing a negligible amount of transmission (0% relative infectiousness) then in the absence of interventions we predict a comparatively long epidemic (median estimate being 8 months until new symptomatic incidence ceases, but with a high degree of uncertainty; figure 2 ) with a slow growth rate of daily incidence, and the median estimate of daily symptomatic cases goes above 100 per day about three months after the detection of the first cases ( figure 2 ). left unchecked we would expect an epidemic with 0% asymptomatic infectiousness to result in 1.06 million symptomatic cases of covid-19 in kenya among a 56.3% overall population infection rate, but with an exceptionally high level of prediction uncertainty (95% pi 0 -1.44m symptomatic cases 0-75. 2% population symptomatic infection rate; table 2 ).if asymptomatics are contributing to the epidemic, then we predict a substantially faster spread than in the 0% relative infectiousness scenario. transmission amongst the younger age groups, who are expected to be largely asymptomatic, substantially boosts the early transmission rate within the kenyan population, leading to a rapidly arriving peak (median estimates: < 3 months to peak, and 6 months until end of epidemic, after beginning of exponential growth in symptomatic infections) and a high probability of more than 10,000 daily symptomatic infections around the peak ( figure 2 ). in these scenarios, where asymptomatic infected individuals are contributing to transmission, and in the absence of effective intervention, we made a median estimate that novel coronavirus would spread first from nairobi into the lake victoria regions and central regions. this spread is then closely followed by spread to mombasa and throughout the coastal region. however, the uncertainty intervals on this prediction are substantial ( figure 2 ). our median prediction is that, if unchecked, by 50 days after the establishment of sars-cov-2 circulating in the kenyan population there will be more than 10 symptomatic cases of covid-19 daily in every region of kenya, but that this depends on essentially chance events early in the . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . epidemic ( figure 2 ). for unchecked epidemics with asymptomatic transmission our estimates of total numbers of symptomatic infections over the course of the epidemic range from 1.02 million symptomatic infections, 88.4% population infection rate (95% pis 0.87m -1.13m, 81.5-92.6%) in the 10% relative infectiousness scenario to 0.86 million symptomatic infections, 89.0% total population infection rate (95% pis 0.74m -0.97m, 82.7-92.7%) in the 100% relative infectiousness scenario (table 2) .public compliance with government advice on self-isolation following the development of covid-19 symptoms (50% reduction in the infectiousness of symptomatic cases) and rapid isolation of the first 1000 symptomatic cases (isolation achieved on average by 3.5 days post incubation) would be sufficient to contain a major outbreak in the scenario where undetected cases do not transmit (0% infectiousness), reducing the median predicted symptomatic infections from over 1 million to effectively zero if implemented immediately after first detection (table 2 ). however, case isolation and reduction in infectiousness of the detected/clinical cases alone was insufficient to stop a major outbreak in any forecast simulation with asymptomatic transmission, or even achieve substantial delay in arrival of the peak or reduction in total cases ( table 2 ).the essential difference in our predictions for the scenario with 0% relative infectiousness of asymptomatics and scenarios where asymptomatics are at least 10% as infectious as symptomatic infecteds could be seen in the different predicted age distributions of symptomatic cases. in the scenario with no transmission from asymptomatics the observed epidemic was dominated by cases among the working-age population (figure 3 ), who we estimated as having high rates of assortative (i.e. within same age-group) mixing ( figure 4 ) and a small but not negligible risk of developing symptoms of covid-19 after infection. in scenarios with at least 10% relative infectiousness of asymptomatics then the high rates of disassortative mixing between the elderly (75+ year olds) and children ( figure  4 ), who we expected to have a high rate of asymptomatic infection, led to the majority of observed cases occurring in the elderly population despite their relatively small proportion of the kenyan population ( figure 3 ).in scenarios where asymptomatics are transmitting within the population without being detected, and person-to-person transmission has become established in kenya, it is unlikely that case isolation alone will be sufficient to contain a kenyan outbreak. therefore, we also estimated the impact of wide-ranging social distancing (sd) measures and movement restrictions (mr) on the epidemic progression, in conjunction with case isolation (ci). in reality, an implementation of these measures would include school closures, a ban on mass gatherings, a sharp reduction in non-essential social contacts, and a sharp decrease in the amount of time individuals spend away from home. the estimated effect of social distancing was to reduce assortative social mixing among both children and working-age adults (figure 4 ), thereby reducing transmission overall. however, we expected social contacts to be increased within the household as individuals spend more time at home. this had the effect of increasing the contact rate for 75+ year old individuals compared to before sd measures were implemented, because there is believed to be frequent within-household mixing between the elderly and children/young adults in kenya (figure 4 ).. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .this combination of interventions (sd+mr+ci) was predicted to be sufficient to slow down transmission and flatten the epidemic curve of covid-19 in the scenarios where asymptomatics transmit sars-cov-2; that is, to eventually push the kenyan reproductive number below 1. however, maintaining sd measures for the entire course of the epidemic is extremely challenging socially and economically. therefore, we investigated the effect of implementing the full set of interventions for 90 days after the detection of established transmission within the country followed by a relaxation. we found that despite reducing transmission over the 90 days of implementation (median estimate 0 symptomatic cases after 90 days in all scenarios), there was a high probability of a rebound epidemic rapidly after relaxation of intervention measures. in the absence of a return to strict interventions if incidence rates are observed to increase, or novel effective vaccines/antivirals becoming available, the rebound epidemic was predicted to be similar in magnitude to the avoided epidemic ( figure 5 ).in this modelling study we have integrated existing data on the social structure, and mobility, of the kenyan population with rapidly evolving estimates of the fundamental epidemiology of sars-cov-2 so as to make the best possible prediction of the scale of the epidemic risk that kenya faces from the first coronavirus pandemic. we predict that the impact of an epidemic of covid-19 cases in kenya could be severe, with a high probability of observing more than 750 thousand infections with sufficient symptoms that they would have become clinical cases in the chinese setting, if the epidemic was left unchecked. we predict that in the more pessimistic scenarios, and in the absence of an effective vaccine and/or anti-viral treatments, substantial restrictions on the social mixing and movement of the kenyan people, either lasting for longer than three months, or reimplemented if incidence rebounds, would be required to control a covid-19 epidemic in kenya.in this study we do not attempt to estimate the proportion requiring hospitalization, i.e. those having most impact on the health services, and most at risk of dying -nor estimate deaths. estimating the true impact of the covid-19 epidemic in kenya requires an estimate of the clinical fraction of infecteds, the likelihood of clinical cases being severely ill and a detailed, and spatially explicit, understanding of the capacity of the kenyan health service. early work to assess kenya's health system capacity to absorb likely covid-19 cases, using the predictions from this model on the likely scale of the pandemic, reveal that kenya's health system is likely to be overwhelmed because of limited availability oxygen and other essential devices to facilitate oxygen therapy (such as pulse oximeters), and critical shortages of intensive care beds (icu) and ventilators (barasa 2020) . the analysis reports variation in kenya's surge capacity for hospital beds, with the county with the least surge capacity likely to need 145% of its available hospital beds to accommodate covid-19 cases if the pandemic lasts for 6 months (barasa 2020) . the analysis shows that only 22 out of the 47 counties have at least one icu unit and that the country will need an . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059865 doi: medrxiv preprint additional 1,511 icu beds and 1,609 ventilators if the epidemic will last for 6 months. the authors indicate the need to strengthen lower cost essential services such as oxygen availability before focusing on these higher cost investments.the extrapolation of the symptomatic rate from chinese clinical observations to the kenyan setting is likely to be imprecise, and should be replaced by symptomatic rates estimated from kenyan case data as this becomes available. the chinese epidemiological reports include a substantial proportion (80.9%) of mildly diseased cases (cpere 2020); it is possible that a proportion of mildly diseased individuals in the kenyan setting would not seek medical attention, and therefore would remain invisible to kenyan surveillance. this observation suggests that the symptomatic rate estimated here could be an overestimate of the clinical incidence that will be seen in kenya. on the other hand, it should be noted that our estimate for the symptomatic rate is somewhat lower in some age groups than other estimates in the literature. for example, davies et al (davies et al. 2020 ) make a consensus estimate of the clinical fraction of 0-9 year old infecteds as 20%, whereas we find the symptomatic rate for that age group is likely to be less than 1%.as with all modelling studies, there are limitations in our modelling structure that go beyond uncertainty in parameterization. in particular, it is possible that controlling a covid-19 epidemic in kenya will require measures which can break transmission from household to household. however, an explicit household structure is not part of the kenyacov modelling framework. we replicate the effect of household structure in our modelling of social distancing using a combination of social context dependent agestructured mixing matrices and an effective decline in contact rate as individuals reduce contacts among the general population in favour of repeated contacts with a relatively small group of people within their own household. whilst this is less realistic than a full, individual-based stochastic model, see for example ferguson et al (ferguson et al. 2005) , the benefit of using kenyacov is that, in the event of a substantial covid-19 epidemic in kenya, the model is sufficiently performant that incorporating new information into forecasting could occur in near real-time. as mentioned above, it is critical that estimates of the symptomatic rate, clinical fraction, and rate of severe disease are derived from kenyan case data rather than simply extrapolated from other settings. such kenyanspecific estimates of covid-19, augmented by more recent data on kenyan mobility, will allow us to better understand the link between transmission predictions (as given by kenyacov), and the observed clinical burden of covid-19 in kenya. without understanding the link between transmission and clinical burden the design of public health interventions is done blind, and it is impossible to evaluate intervention success.there remains a very high degree of uncertainty surrounding the underlying epidemiology of sars-cov-2 infection, which inevitably degrades our certainty in the predictive modelling of transmission in kenya. we have attempted to partially account for these underlying uncertainties by drawing some parameters from a plausible range rather than simply using point estimates. however, some of the epidemiological uncertainties are fundamental to the structure of the kenyacov model. first, we treat the rate of developing symptoms as the detection rate in the model, following that the substantial majority of confirmed cases in the china were initially syndromic detections before test confirmation (cpere 2020). however, since the symptomatic rates used in kenyacov were inferred . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .from the age distribution of chinese confirmed cases, this means that our model is predicting the incidence rate of cases that would have been clinical in the chinese epidemic. it could be that the syndromic threshold for detection is different in kenya, which would alter the effective transmission rate of the undetected cases by changing the definition of detected and undetected cases so that infectious and diseased individuals might be missed in the kenyan context who would have been identified in the chinese context. second, and following from the previous comment, the rate of subclinical undetected transmission is critical to the expected outcome of an epidemic in kenya. this reflects the fact that covid-19 disease has been predominantly observed amongst older age groups, and therefore two major possibilities for a country with a younger demography arise. in the first possibility, the relatively large proportion of younger people effectively protect the elderly at-risk groups from transmission. in the second possibility, high rates of unobserved transmission within the young population cause significant numbers of clinical cases among the elderly. we don't know which outcome will occur until a substantial number of cases are observed, and so far, no major covid-19 epidemic has occurred in sub-saharan africa. if there exists climatic incompatibility for this strain of coronavirus and/or inherent resistance in the population then all modelling estimates derived from the chinese experience should be revised downwards. finally, our model presents a partial picture of the likely effects of government interventions to slow the transmission of covid-19. government interventions such as social distancing and movement restrictions have secondary health, social and economic effects that should be considered when making decisions about how to intervene (dahab et al. 2020; barasa 2020) . for instance, these interventions could disrupt routine health service delivery and access (such as vaccinations, and maternal and child health services), cause income and job losses in ways that could push households into poverty, and lead to a shrinking of country economies. incorporating these dimensions in models, and ascertaining net health and non-health benefits of interventions would provide a fuller picture and improve the quality of decision making.we parameterized our sars-cov-2 transmission model from a range of data sources. epidemiological parameters for sars-cov-2 were collected from estimates that have been reported in the literature (table 1) . we followed wesolowski et al (wesolowski et al. 2012) in dividing kenya into 20 regions corresponding to population density concentrations. these regions overlap the 47 counties of kenya, and results for the 47 counties were created from simulations on 20 regions by apportioning infections pro-rata according to the proportion of the region population from each county.we subdivided the population by their home region, and their age category. in this study we consider 17 age categories: 0-4 years old, 5-9 years old, … , 75-79 years old, 80+ years old. the modelled population size in each region/age category was chosen to match the recent 2019 kenyan census findings (denoted !,# for the number of individuals in . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059865 doi: medrxiv preprint region and age group ) (knbs, 2020).we estimated the human mobility flux using mobile phone data on number and duration of trips from home regions to alternate regions (wesolowski et al. 2012) , rescaled to number of journeys per person per day. this allowed us to estimate both: (i) the proportion of time typical individuals in each region spent away from their home region (denoted ! ∈ [0,1] for each region ), and (ii) a probability distribution for where typical individuals travel to when they leave their home region (denoted !$ for probability of a person living in region travelling to region ). the central mobility estimates depended on a reported median 5 nights duration per journey, which is likely to be an overestimate for short-distance journeys and an underestimate for long journeys. if the short-distance journeys are typically shorter than 5 nights, and the long-distance journeys are typically longer then the serial interval of sars-cov-2 then this central mobility estimate will overestimate the rate at which sars-cov-2 spreads spatially in kenya.the rate of contact between individuals currently in the same region, including visitors to the region, was determined by their age group using an estimated age-mixing contact matrix for kenya from the study by prem et al (prem et al. 2017 ). prem et al give estimated contact rates between age groups for 152 countries broken down by contact setting: at home, at work, at school, and other contacts amongst the population.the epidemiological characteristics of sars-cov-2 were drawn from the literature and summarized into a belief distribution for key uncertain parameters (table 3 ). the age-profile of cases used to infer the age-dependent symptomatic rates were from the first 44,672 confirmed cases as published by china cdc on 11 th february 2020 (cpere 2020).we used a variant of the susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (seir) metapopulation model (keeling & rohani 2008) , dubbed kenyacov, to simulate transmission of sars-cov-2 in kenya. the code and open source data for kenyacov can be found at https://github.com/samuelbrand1/kenyacov. individuals divided their time between their home region and other regions according to their age and the region-specific travelling patterns described above. for simplicity, we assumed that age groups of individuals younger than 16 and older than 49 didn't move around the country, therefore we defined the transport matrix, !$;# , as !";$ = !" , if was an immobile age category, !";$ = 1 !" (1 − ! ) + (1 − 1 !" ) ! !" , if was a mobile age category.(1)where 1 !$ = 1 if = and 0 otherwise. the transport matrix defined the proportion of time spent in each region. the force of infection (the rate at which each susceptible becomes infected) on individuals in region i and age group a depended on their movements and age-dependent social contact rates. the force of infection on each susceptible individual currently in region and age group was, . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 (2)where was the sars-cov-2 transmission rate, was the kenyan age-mixing matrix, and 2 $,& and 3 $,& were, respectively, the effective number of infected individuals in, and the effective population size of, age group currently in region . using effective numbers accounted for mobility of individuals and differential transmissibility between clinical cases and asymptomatics,where ' is the infectiousness of a asymptomatic infected relative to a clinical case, and ( was the reduction in infectiousness of clinical cases after they developed symptoms.when individuals are infected with sars-cov-2, and have finished their incubation period, then they either develop sufficient symptoms to eventually become a clinical case (with age-dependent probability # ) or they are sufficiently asymptomatic to remain subclinical and remains undetected (with probability 1 − # ).the model treats population groups as discrete, and follows stochastic dynamics, however, the overall kenyacov dynamical structure is most compactly represented using notation for an ordinary differential equation (ode), the transition rates given in equation (4) should be interpreted as stochastic rates for each event,where !,# , !,# , !,# , !,# , !,# , and !,# were the number of susceptible, latent, infectious with sufficient symptoms to become clinical cases, infectious but subclinical, isolated and removed individuals whose home was region and age group . , , , were, respectively, the per-contact transmission probability, the incubation, recovery rate and exit rate from isolation. note that the transmission structure included both the possibility that infection is spread around the country by the movements of infected individuals, and, . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 by susceptible individuals who contract sars-cov-2 elsewhere and return to their home region.we inferred age-dependent symptomatic rates for each age group by matching the age distribution of clinical cases expected from combining the next-generation matrix for sars-cov-2 with symptomatic rates to the observed age distribution of clinical cases in china on 11 th february.we denote the mixing rate at which individuals in age group contact individuals in age group , estimated for china, ( )*!+# ) #& , as estimated by prem et al (prem et al. 2017) . we use two versions of the age mixing matrix for china in this analysis: )*!+# , which denotes the age mixing matrix including contacts in all social settings, and, )*!+#,*,-. , which denotes the age mixing matrix including contacts only at home.for fitting age specific symptomatic rates we used )*!+#,/0 . our reasoning was that the majority of cases reported in china occurred during severe lockdown restrictions on social contact outside of the household. the next-generation matrix across age groups (expected number of infections generated amongst age group b per infected in age group a) for china during lockdown was:we denote the leading eigenvector of ( *+!,$,+-./ ) $& , as # , normalized so that ∑ # # = 1. # is the expected proportion of infections amongst age group a, during the early stages of an outbreak but after a few generations of transmission (diekmann & heesterbeek 2000) . the probability that amongst a collection of confirmed cases any given case is in age group a. this allowed us to infer a posterior distribution (we assumed flat priors) for the values of # using hamiltonian mcmc with a standard multinomial likelihood of recreating the observed case data in china. this was implementing using the dynamichmc package for the julia programming language. note that # depends on # and ' , but not the per-contact transmission probability or the recovery rate. similarly, # does not change is is scaled by a constant. therefore, we fixed 12 = 0.9, that is we assumed a true symptomatic rate amongst 80+ year olds of 90%.for inferring the per-contact transmission probability, , we matched to r0 estimates in china using the full chinese contact matrix )*!+# by considering the leading eigenvalue of the pre-lockdown next generation matrix. this was chosen to reflect that we are using early estimates of r0 before lockdowns were fully achieved. our estimated r0 for kenya, without interventions, was the leading eigenvalue of kenyan next-generation matrix using the kenyan age-mixing matrix #& .we consider three types of interventions aimed at restricting sars-cov-2 transmission in kenya:. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .• case isolation and reduction in transmission of clinical cases pre-isolation (ci). clinical individuals are isolated from the rest of the population at an isolation/treatment rate ( ), which represented the active intervention of the kenyan health system and has an initial rate (0) = 0 . we assumed that if the cumulative number of detected cases reaches 1,000 individuals (~0.002% of the kenya population) then the health system has reached its capacity threshold and active isolation ceases ( ( ) = 0 after capacity is reached). both before and after capacity is reached, the infectiousness of the clinical cases was reduced by a factor ( ≤ 1 which reflected passive intervention, e.g. public campaigns to raise awareness of sars-cov-2 risk, encourage self-isolation and social distancing of symptomatic individuals, and increased hygiene.• wide-spread social distancing (sd). the whole kenya population is required to minimize unnecessary social contacts, along with closing schools and colleges. we modelled this as decreasing work contacts by 25%, decreasing other contacts by 75%, offset by an increase in home contacts by 25%. we modelled the action of sd on the contact structure of the population by replacing the agemixing matrix by a sd-mixing matrix, 2( ( ) = ( )(1.25 +-./ + 0.75 3-4' + 0.25 -5+/4 ).where the three matrices *,-. , 4,56 , ,7*.5 are the estimated age-structured contact rates in, respectively, the home, work, and other settings (prem et al. 2017) . we followed tang et al (tang et al. 2020) in including a decreasing rate of contacts over time. the decreasing rate of contacts was combined with the change in age structured mixing, and attempted to account for increasing population compliance, a staggered step of extra interventions (e.g. closing nonessential shops and instigating a curfew), and the effective decrease in contacts across the population due to redirecting social contacts towards repeated contacts within the home. specifically, we use the down-ramp function to represent a decrease in contacts by 50% over 30 days after the social distancing intervention: ( ) = 1 − 0.5( − 8 )/30 for times between the intervention time 8 and 30 days after sd intervention• movement restrictions (mr). the whole kenyan population is required to reduce movement around the country, with waivers only for specific reasons e.g. movement of vital supplies, movement of medical professionals. we model this by replacing the transport matrix with a post-movement restriction transport matrix, 9: , constructed by assuming that during movement restrictions 99.9% of the time of typical individuals was spent in their home region.we consider a range of possible levels of infectiousness of asymptomatics relative to individuals with severe symptoms who become clinical cases ( = 0, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 1.). for each relative infectiousness scenario, detection rate, we ran 1000 simulations. we aimed to estimate the distribution of sars-cov-2 epidemic outcomes in kenya over uncertainty in the fundamental epidemiological parameters. we achieved this by, prior to each simulation, drawing mean incubation period and reproductive ratio for china from a belief distribution of the parameter value that encompassed published literature estimates (table  3) . the chinese ; ∼ ( = 100, = 2.5/100), which corresponded to a median belief that the sars-cov-2 ; for china is equally likely to be above 2.5 as below (2.5-97.5 percentiles of belief ; = 2.03 − 3.01). the mean incubation period 1/ ∼ ( = (5), = 0.25); median belief 1/ = 5 days (3.1-8.2 days). we fixed the mean infectious duration as 1/ = 2.5 days, corresponding to the difference in the median serial interval less our median belief of the mean incubation period (table 3) .a key point is that our belief distribution ; is based on estimates derived from data of chinese cases. therefore, the transmission rate used in each simulation, and which corresponds to some ; drawn from our belief distribution, is derived using chinese agemixing data.symptomatic rate constant over ages.susceptibility constant over ages. . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 table 2 : predictions for final numbers of symptomatic cases and peak timing in two scenarios: unchecked epidemic and rapid isolation of first 1000 cases with 50% reduction in infectiousness of clinical cases throughout epidemic.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .basic reproductive ratio ( ; ) ! = 3.8 (3.6-4.0) from early identified cases in wuhan (read et al. 2020 ). ! = 2.2 (1.4-3.9) from the first 425 confirmed patients (q. ). ! = 2.68 (2.47-2.86); from internationally exported cases until jan 28th 2020 . ! = 2.6 (1.5-3.5); based on cases in wuhan by 18th jan 2020 (imperial group report). . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059865 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 1 : estimates of symptomatic rates per age group relative to symptomatic rate for 80+ year olds. 0-4 5-9 10-1415-1920-2425-2930-3435-3940-4445-4950-5455-5960-6465-6970- . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059865 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 2 : baseline estimates of incidence rates and early spatial distribution of incidence. (top) daily incidence of symptomatic infections (median) estimates across kenya for an uncontrolled epidemic and five different rates of subclinical transmission. ribbon plot give median estimates with 95% prediction intervals. (bottom) as top but incidence is given for each county using the 25% relative subclinical transmission scenario as representative. legend is organized by median incidence rate at 40 days. . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . age distribution of cases: uncontrolled epidemic number of symptomatic infections (thousands) 0% rel. infectiousness 10% rel. infectiousness 25% rel. infectiousness 50% rel. infectiousness 100% rel. infectiousness . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059865 doi: medrxiv preprint cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059865 doi: medrxiv preprint figure 5 : 90 days of social distancing, movement restrictions and case isolation of first 1000 clinical cases. the daily incidence across kenya by transmission scenario (as above ribbon plots give median and 95% pi). full restrictions are assumed to apply from time zero until 90 days (black dotted line). the median predictions of daily incidence with only case isolation (ci), but no other intervention, are shown as dashed lines. daily incidence before and after 90 days restrictions (sd+mr+ci)days after established sars-cov-2 transmission daily new sympomatic infections rel. infect. of subclinical: 0% rel. infect. of subclinical: 10% rel. infect. of subclinical: 25% rel. infect. of subclinical: 50% rel. infect. of subclinical: 100%. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059865 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10. 1101 in december 2019, an outbreak of pneumonia due to unknown cause occurred in wuhan, china and rapidly spread throughout the country within 1 month. the pathogen of this disease was confirmed as a novel coronavirus by molecular methods and was initially named as 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov); however, the world health organization (who) announced a new name on february 11, 2020 for the epidemic disease: corona virus disease . to date, covid-19 has affected people in more than 28 countries/regions, including taiwan, and has become a global threat. 1e4 in addition, the coronavirus study group of the international committee on taxonomy of viruses has renamed the virus, which was provisionally named 2019-ncov, as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) based on phylogeny, taxonomy, and established practice. 5 prior to this, on january 30, 2020, the who declared the covid-19 outbreak as the sixth public health emergency of international concern; therefore, this outbreak constitutes a public health risk through the international spread of disease and requires a coordinated international response. increased dissemination of information through use of the internet is associated with increased transmission of information from all geographical regions and across disciplines regarding recognition of sars-cov-2 and covid-19 6 ; nevertheless, important factors associated with covid-19, specifically age and sex distribution, incubation period, clinical features, and optimal treatment, remain uncertain. therefore, herein, we performed a literature review, focusing on the epidemiological characteristics and clinical manifestations of covid-19, including asymptomatic carrier state, acute respiratory disease (ard), and pneumonia.covid-19 was defined as the respiratory disease caused by sars-cov-2 that emerged in china in 2019 (https://www. who.int/westernpacific/emergencies/covid -19) .the clinical manifestations of covid-19 are protean, which include asymptomatic carrier, ard, and pneumonia of varying degrees of severity. first, asymptomatic cases were diagnosed based on positive viral nucleic acid test results, but without any covid-19 symptoms, such as fever, gastrointestinal, or respiratory symptoms, and no significant abnormalities on chest radiograph 7, 8 however, the transmission of covid-19 through asymptomatic carriers via person-to-person contact was observed in many reports. 4, 7, 9, 10 second, patients with ard defined as laboratory-confirmed covid-19 cases had respiratory symptoms; however, chest computed tomography (ct) did not reveal signs of pneumonia. 11 third, patients with pneumonia defined as covid-19 cases had both respiratory symptoms and pneumonia on chest radiograph. this category includes severe pneumonia e either respiratory rate !30/minute, spo 2 93%, or pao 2 /fio 2 300 mmhg, and a critical condition, characterized by respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, shock, or other organ failure requiring icu management. 8as of february 21, 2020, data from the who revealed altogether 76,769 cases of covid-19. 1 thirty-two countries or regions have reported confirmed cases, including mainland china, japan, singapore, hong kong special administrative region (sar), thailand, south korea, taiwan, australia, malaysia, germany, vietnam, the united states, macao sar, the united arab emirates, canada, france, the philippines, the united kingdom, italy, india, russia, finland, sweden, sri lanka, cambodia, nepal, spain, belgium, iran, egypt, israel, and lebanon. in addition, 643 cases were found in international conveyance e diamond princess. china has the largest number of patients with covid-19 (n z 75,543), followed by south korea (n z 204), japan (n z 93), and singapore (n z 85). to date, the reported number of deaths is 2247 and only 11 occurred outside of mainland china, including two each in hong kong special administrative regions (sar), iran, and diamond princess, and one each in taiwan, south korea, japan, philippines, and france. however, asymptomatic patients or patients with mild covid-19 symptoms may not seek health care, nor receive diagnosis, which leads to underestimation of the burden of covid-19.initially, most reported covid-19 cases in wuhan were adult patients; however, all of these cases had pneumonia. 12e14 their median or mean ages were 55.5, 49.0, and 56 years in three separate studies. 12e14 a similar finding was observed in two recent non-peer-reviewed studies: one study with 1099 patients from 552 hospitals in 31 provinces in china, in which the median age was 47.0 years, and 55.1% of the patients were between the ages of 15e49 years; and a second study that included 4021 confirmed cases in 30 provinces of china, in which the mean age was 49 years and 50.7% of patients were between the ages of 20e50 years. 11, 15 both these studies included ard and pneumonia cases. 11, 15 similarly, the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team in china reported that 66.7% (n z 29,798) of 44,672 cases of covid-19 of varying degrees of severity were between 20 and 60 years of age. 8 in korea, ryu et al. found that the initial 15 cases were aged between 25 and 62 years. 16 regarding elderly patients infected with sars-cov-2, one study showed that 14.6% (6 in 41) of patients were aged !65 years, 13 while another study showed that 15.2% (15 in 99) patients were aged !70 years, among pneumonia cases. 12 in addition, two non-peer-reviewed studies showed only 153 (15.1%) patients were elderly patients aged !65 years, 11 and 407 (10.1%) patients were aged >70 years. 15 according to the recent china cdc report, 8 12.0% (n z 5326) of patients were aged !70 years. regarding children with covid-19, nine (0.9%) patients aged 0e14 years were found in only one study, 11 while 14 (0.35%) patients were aged 10 years in another study. 15 the largest study in china showed that 0.9% (n z 416) of patients were aged <10 years. 8 further, wei et al. reported that nine infants under 1 year of age were infected with sars-cov-2 in china. 8 regarding patient sex ratio, male sex comprised more than half of the cases in most covid-19 studies 11e14 and the proportion of males ranged from 51.4% to 73.2%. 8,11e14,16 initially, approximately half of the cases had huanan seafood market exposure and animal-to-human transmission was suspected. 12, 13 however, fewer cases had exposure to this seafood market and an increasing number of cases demonstrated human-to-human transmission. 11, 17 fortunately, no evidence was found for intrauterine infection caused by vertical transmission in women who contracted covid-19 pneumonia in late pregnancy. 18 in addition to family cluster infections due to human-tohuman transmission, 19 nosocomial spread of sars-cov-2 is a serious concern. indeed, one study in a zhongnan hospital of the wuhan university showed 29.0% (n z 40) were medical staff and 12.3% (n z 17) contracted covid-19 during hospitalization. 14 two other studies showed that 2.1% (n z 23) and 3.8% (n z 1716) of patients were health workers. 8, 11 although the risk factors of covid-19 remain unclear, many studies reported that a significant proportion of patients had underlying conditions. 8,11e14 for patients with sars-cov pneumonia, chen et al. showed that 50.5% (n z 51) of patients had chronic medical illness, namely cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases (40.4%). 12 among 1099 patients with sars-cov-2 ard, guan et al. showed that 23.2% (n z 255) of patients had at least one coexisting disorder, and hypertension was the most common underlying disease (14.9%), followed by diabetes mellitus (7.4%). 11 another large study on covid-19 cases of varying degrees of severity also showed that hypertension was the most common underlying disease (n z 2,683, 12.8%), followed by diabetes mellitus (n z 1,102, 5.3%), and cardiovascular disease (n z 873, 4.2%). 8 moreover, patients with severe covid-19 were more likely to have comorbidities than those with non-severe diseases (37.6% vs. 20.5%, p < 0.001). 11 a similar trend was observed in another study of 138 hospitalized patients with sars-cov-2 pneumonia, in which 46.4% (n z 64) of patients had comorbidities and the intensive care unit (icu) patients were more likely to have underlying diseases compared to non-icu patients (72.2% vs. 37.3%, p < 0.001). 14 in summary, these studies disclosed several significant findings. first, although most patients with covid-19 were middle-aged adults, elderly patients and children also contracted covid-19. second, there is a higher prevalence of men with covid-19 than that of women; however, further studies are warranted to confirm this finding. third, health care workers and hospitalized patients could be infected by sars-cov-2 in the hospital setting. finally, at least 20% of covid-19 cases had underlying diseases, and more severe cases were more likely to have comorbidities than non-severe cases.it is essential to know the incubation period, the time elapsing between the moment of exposure to an infectious agent and the appearance of signs and symptoms of the disease, for infection control and guidance for the duration of isolation. initially, li et al. used the data on exposure among 10 confirmed cases in wuhan to estimate the mean incubation period, which was 5.2 days (95% confidence interval [ci], 4.1e7.0); the 95th percentile of the distribution was 12.5 days (95% ci, 9.2e18). 20 one estimation based on 125 patients with clearly defined exposure periods in china indicated that the median incubation period was 4.75 (interquartile range: 3.0e7.2) days. 15 using the travel history and symptom onset of 88 confirmed cases that were detected outside of wuhan in the early outbreak phase, backer et al. estimated that the mean incubation period was 6.4 days (95% credible interval: 5.6e7.7), ranging from 2.1 to 11.1 days (2.5th to 97.5th percentile). 21 however, guan et al., using a large sample for estimation, suggested that the median incubation period was only 3.0 days, but could be as long as 24 days. 11 overall, these estimates will be refined as more data become available. detailed epidemiological information based on a larger sample of patients infected with covid-19 is needed to determine the infectious period of sars-cov-2, as well as to determine whether transmission can occur from asymptomatic individuals during the incubation period.previous reports revealed that there are asymptomatic patients infected with sars-cov-2. 7, 8, 22 these patients can spread the virus and may represent a population that can be easily neglected in epidemic prevention. therefore, it is important to identify asymptomatic patients with covid-19. since these patients are asymptomatic, careful monitoring of the natural course of the disease and contact history may only identify them. based on the current data, we do not know whether these patients are only asymptomatic initially after contracting the disease or if they are asymptomatic throughout the course of the disease.among a pooled analysis of 970 patients with ard (table  1) based on two studies with detail clinical characteristics, 11, 23 males comprised more than half of the patients and the mean age was 45 years. hypertension was the most common underlying disease, followed by diabetes mellitus. approximately two-thirds of patients had cough, but only 44.7% patients had fever. in addition, sputum production was observed in one-third of patients and sore throat was found in 14.0% of patients. only fewer than 5% of patients had gastrointestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. meanwhile, 32.4% of patients required oxygen therapy, but none required mechanical ventilation. only one patient with ard died and the mortality rate was 0.1%.among a pooled analysis of 468 patients with pneumonia (table 2) based on five studies with detailed description of clinical features of the disease, 11e14,23 male sex comprised 60.3% of patients and the mean age was 53 years. approximately one-fifth of patients reported smoking history. hypertension was the most common underlying disease (20.5%), followed by diabetes mellitus (14.4%). additionally, 76.3% of patients had fever and 70.5% of patients presented cough. furthermore, dyspnea and sputum production were observed in approximately one-third of patients. moreover, 8% and 6% of patients had nausea/ vomiting or diarrhea, respectively. in all, 70.9% of patients required oxygen therapy, and 28.8% required mechanical ventilation. moreover, 5.1% and 3.1% of patients required renal replacement therapy and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, respectively. the overall mortality was 8.2% (n z 37); however, 313 (66.9%) patients remained hospitalized.furthermore, patients with pneumonia were older, with a higher prevalence of smoking history, more underlying diseases, and were more likely to have fever, myalgia/fatigue, dyspnea, headache, and nausea/vomiting compared to patients with ard (all p < 0.05) ( table 3 ). in addition, pneumonia cases presented a higher white blood cell count and neutrophil count, but had a reduced leukocyte count compared to ard cases. serum procalcitonin levels of !0.5 ng/ml were found in 6.1% (6/99), 12 7.7% (3/39), 13 to 13.7% (16/117), 11 among sars-cov-2 pneumonia patients reported from three studies. 11e13 moreover, patients with pneumonia were more likely to require oxygenation therapy, mechanical ventilator, renal replacement, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and received more antibiotics and antiviral therapy than patients with ard. finally, pneumonia was associated with a higher mortality rate than ard (p < 0.0001).based on the findings of 1099 ard cases of covid, only 14.7% (n z 162) of patients had an abnormal chest radiograph. 11 in contrast, 840 (76.4%) patients had abnormal and diverse chest ct images, in which ground-glass opacity (ggo) was the most common abnormality (n z 550, 65.5%), followed by local patchy shadowing (n z 409, 48.7%), and interstitial abnormalities (n z 143, 17.0%). in addition, 505 (50.1%) had bilateral involvement. 11 the predominance of ggo and bilateral involvement in chest ct is consistent with previous studies. 24e26 in contrast, other types of abnormalities, such as cavitation, pleural effusion, and lymphadenopathy, were not found. 24, 27 as the disease progressed, follow-up ct showed enlargement and consolidation of single ggo, an enlarged fibrous stripe, and solid nodules. in contrast, a small fibrous stripe, as well as the resolution of ggo, may be associated with improvement in the patient's condition. 28 data are n (%), n/n (%), and mean (sd). copd, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ecmo, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; na, not available.covid-18, were initiated in china, with an estimated end date in early april 2020. in these two trials, the 10-day regimen of remdesivir was 100 mg once daily for 9 days after the loading of 200 mg on day 1. 34 chloroquine is another promising drug. 35, 36 an in vitro study on the timeof-addition assay in vero e6 cells demonstrated that chloroquine functioned at both entry and at post-entry stages of covid-19, and the ec90 value of chloroquine against the 2019-ncov was 6.90 mm. 31 in addition, passive immunization therapy and the use of interferon could theoretically be helpful, but to date there is no evidence to validate this hypothesis. systemic corticosteroid was administered in 18.6%e 44.9% patients in order to control the inflammatory response caused by sars-cov-2 in 4 initial large studies. 11e14 however, corticosteroid therapy could be associated with delayed mers-cov rna clearance (adjusted hazard ratio, 0.35; 95% ci, 0.17e0.72; p z 0.005) for critically ill patients with mers, 40 and early corticosteroid treatment could be associated with higher subsequent plasma rna load of sars-cov for adults with sars. 41 moreover, corticosteroid-associated psychosis and diabetes were observed in the treatment of sars. 42, 43 thus, clinical use of corticosteroids in the treatment of covid-19 was not recommended in the interim, unless indicated for another reason. 44, 45 outcomes according to who reports, the overall mortality rate for covid-19 was 2.9% (2247 in 76,769), 1 however, the mortality rate varied among studies. initial studies reported that the mortality rate associated with sars-cov-2 pneumonia ranged from 11% 12 to 15%, 13 but later studies revealed that the mortality rate was between 1.4% 11 and 4.3%. 14 the differences in the results among different studies could be due to the study population, as well as the differences among the studies in terms of disease severity. in addition, these results need further clarification, since a majority of the reported mortality was all-cause mortality, not covid-attributed mortality; also, the outcome measurement was incomplete because many patients remained hospitalized before publication of the results.several prognostic factors of covid-19 were also reported in these studies. in one study using the mulbsta score system, 46 which includes six indices, namely multilocular infiltration, lymphopenia, bacterial co-infection, smoking history, hypertension, and age, revealed that these indices were poor prognostic factors. 12 another study showed similar findings, and specifically the indicators of disease severity, including oxygenation, respiratory rate, leukocyte/lymphocyte count, and the chest imaging findings, were associated with a poor clinical outcome. 11 moreover, a substantially elevated case-fatality rate included the following patient characteristics: male sex, !60 years of age, baseline diagnosis of severe pneumonia, and delay in diagnosis. 15 similarly, the china cdc reported that patients aged !80 years had the highest case fatality rate, 14.8%, among different age groups, and the case fatality rate of patients in which disease severity was critical was 49.0%. 8 together, these findings suggest that old age and increased disease severity could predict a poor outcome.in this stage of lack of effective drugs, the implementation of infection control interventions and traffic control bundle to effectively limit droplet, contact, and fomite transmission is the only way to slow the spread of the sars-cov-2. these infection control interventions include early identification of cases and their contacts, avoiding close contact with people with airway symptoms, appropriate hand washing, and enhanced standard infection prevention, and control practices in the healthcare setting. 47, 48 uncertain issues although information on covid-19 has increased rapidly since the emergence of sars-cov-2, many issues remain unresolved. first, the clinical manifestation of covid-19 ranges from the asymptomatic carrier state to severe pneumonia; however, most early reports only showed the findings of sars-cov-2 pneumonia, in which the ratio of male patients was much larger than that of female patients, there were no pediatric cases, and the mortality rate was high. 12e14 subsequent to the publication of the studies of patients with only ard or mild pneumonia, we found the ratio of male-to-female patients decreased, children or neonates could contract covid-19, and the mortality rate declined compared to that of previous reports. 8, 11 however, whether children were less susceptible to sars-cov-2, or their presentation was mostly asymptomatic or difficult to detect, remains unclear. 49 in addition, most studies, especially those with a large patient population, were conducted in china, and the study of asymptomatic carriers was limited. more studies are needed to clarify the epidemiologic characteristics of covid-19 and to identify the risk and prognostic factors of patients infected with sars-cov-2. second, zou et al. reported that the viral load detected in asymptomatic patients was similar to that found in symptomatic patients; however, the viral loads from patients with severe diseases were higher than those in patients with mild-to-moderate presentations. moreover, higher viral loads were detected in the nose than in the throat. 50 as there is a concern of virus spread due to severe cough induced by performing a throat swab, nasal swab may be a relatively safe and sensitive alternative to collect the respiratory specimen of patients with covid-19. however, this study involved a population of only 18 patients, including one asymptomatic patient. 49 in addition, every test has its own limitation and sensitivity/specificity; however, the studies investigating the performance of current diagnostic methods of sars-cov-2 among different covid-19 populations, including asymptomatic carriers, ard, and pneumonia, are lacking. the false positive and negative rates of each diagnostic tool among patients with covid-19 presenting varying degrees of severity of the disease remain unknown. this type of information is important for screening patients with covid-19 and to aid isolation and infection control strategies. finally, since sars-cov-2 can be detected in the asymptomatic individual, the prophylactic or pre-emptive use of effective anti-viral agents to reduce the viral load and decrease the risk of virus spread from asymptomatic carriers may help to control the spread of covid-19.this review provides updated information about covid-19. sars-cov-2 can affect patients of all ages. covid-19 can present as asymptomatic carriage, ard, and pneumonia. severe cases are more likely to be older and to have increased underlying comorbidities compared to mild cases. age and disease severity can be correlated with the outcomes of covid-19. to date, effective treatment for sars-cov-2 is lacking; however, two trials investigating the clinical efficacy of remdesivir are underway in china. currently, effective infection control intervention is the only way to prevent the spread of sars-cov-2.the author declares no conflict of interests.this work reviews and develops some suggested models for the covid-19 that can 19 address important questions about global health care and suggest important notes. then, we 20 suggest an updated model that includes a system of differential equations with transmission 21 parameters. some key computational simulations and sensitivity analysis are investigated. 22also, the local sensitivities for each model state concerning the model parameters are 23 computed using three different techniques: non-normalizations, half normalizations, and 24 full normalizations. 25results based on the computational simulations show that the model dynamics are 26 significantly changed for different key model parameters. interestingly, we identify that 27 transition rates between asymptomatic infected with both reported and unreported 28 symptomatic infected individuals are very sensitive parameters concerning model variables 29in spreading this disease. this helps international efforts to reduce the number of infected 30 individuals from the disease and to prevent the propagation of new coronavirus more 31 widely on the community. another novelty of this paper is the identification of the critical 32 model parameters, which makes it easy to be used by biologists with less knowledge of 33 mathematical modeling and also facilitates the improvement of the model for future 34 development theoretically and practically. the idea of chemical kinetic theory is an important approach for understanding and 126representing the biological process in terms of model equations. the important assumptions 127 to build such models are model states, parameters, and equations. this is because it helps 128 the investigation of mathematical modeling effectively and easily [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] infected, shows symptoms of covid-19, and detected by the government, either 185 from a rapid test or from voluntary action to report to the hospital. we assume that 186 all individuals in this class will get a specific treatment and supervision, whether it's 187 through monitored isolation or treatment in the hospital. 188 5. recovered group (r). this group present individual who get recovered from 189 covid-19, and had a temporal immunity. 190the transmission diagram which illustrates the interaction between each group described in 191 figure 1 . where 208 209 furthermore, the model's constant parameters and initial states with their definitions are 210 described in table 1 . using equations (2)-(4), the model dynamics are described by the 211following system of non-linear ordinary differential equations 212the model initial populations are expressed in the following equation 213 co  263  mp  264  utat  265  ion  266  al  267  sim  268  ulat  269  ions  270  for  271  the  272  mo  273  del  274  stat  275  es  276 giv 277 en 278 in system (9) parameter has an effective role in the dynamics of . 4193. the transition rate has also affected asymptomatic infected people, reported 420 symptomatic infected people, and unreported symptomatic infected people. it 421can be seen that the model dynamics for such states become more flat when the 422 value of is increased. this is an important key element for controlling this 423disease. practically discussed and investigated in this area. have improvements in interventions and healthcare programs. 510the used model in this paper has further improved based on the computational results using 511 matlab for different initial populations and parameters. some main results can help in 512 understanding the suggested model more widely and effectively. by using computational 513 simulation, we identify some key critical parameters that have a great role in spreading this 514 virus among the model classes. one of the identified key parameters is the transmission rate 515 between asymptomatic infected and reported symptomatic individuals. this is an important 516 finding in the understanding of the covid-19 and how this virus spreads more quickly. 517 some other critical model parameters have investigated in this paper. for example, the 518 transmission parameter between asymptomatic infected and unreported symptomatic 519individuals has a great impact on the dynamics of the model states. besides these findings 520 provide additional information about estimations and predictions for the number of infected 521 individuals. accordingly, our results in identifying key parameters are broadly consistent 522with clinical and biological findings. 523remaining issues are subject to sensitivity analysis. this is also an important issue that can 524 be further studied. we have applied the idea of local sensitivity to calculate the sensitivity 525 of each model state concerning model parameters for the updated model of the covid-19. 526three different techniques are investigated which are non-normalizations, half 527 normalizations, and full normalizations. these provide us an important step forward to 528 identify critical model elements. by using local sensitivity approaches we concluded 529 that almost all model states are sensitive to the critical model parameters { } . this 530 becomes a great step forward and helps international attempts regarding the covid-19 531 pandemic outbreak. this may help to reduce the number of infected individuals from the 532 disease and to prevent the coronavirus more widely in the community. it can be concluded 533 that the identified factors can be controlled to reduce the number of infected individuals. 534overall, our results demonstrate a strong effect of the key critical parameters on the 535 spreading covid-19. 536 therefore, based on the effect of each involved parameters over the model states, more 537suggestions and interventions can be proposed for controlling the covid-19 disease. that 538 will be useful for any interventions and vaccination programs. accordingly, the healthcare 539 communities should pay more attention to the quarantine places for controlling this disease 540 more effectively. it can be strongly suggested that anyone in the quarantine places should 541 be separated from the others and should use only their separate equipment, bedroom, and 542 toilet to prevent the transmission of the virus through the touching of shared surfaces. 543another suggestion is that reducing the contact between asymptomatic-symptomatic groups 544and susceptible groups, this is effectively minimizing the number of infected people. it 545 seems necessary to plan a certain strategy to put the asymptomatic infected individuals on 546 quarantine places sooner rather than later. future research on identifying key critical 547 elements might extend the explanations of the new covid-19 more widely. it will be 548 important that future research investigates more suggested transmissions between the 549 model groups. for example, the model will further improve by adding two transmission 550 paths, one of them is between unreported symptomatic infected and reported symptomatic 551infected, the other one is between asymptomatic infected and recovered individuals. 552 553infectious diseases impose a major health threat globally, leading to 15 million deaths annually [1] . although the percentage of mortality due to infectious diseases has declined, numerous new infectious diseases have been identified and reported recently. the novel coronavirus disease , caused by the sars-cov-2 virus, was firstly identified in wuhan, china, in late december 2019 as an outbreak of unusual viral pneumonia [2] . later, the world health organization (who) declared a public health emergency worldwide, and the total number of infected cases reached 4.4 million by may 2020 [3] . consequently, educational institutions, business centers, public transport, and other social interaction were locked down points to prevent the spread of covid-19 and ease the burden on health facilities. sars-cov-2 is an enveloped positive-sense single-stranded rna virus with six open reading frames (orfs) that codes for structural proteins, including surface (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleocapsid n proteins [4] . based on the genomic structures and phylogenetic analysis of sars-cov-2, the virus belongs to genera betacoronavirus, which includes sars-cov and mers-cov.yet, sars-cov-2 has differences in its genomic that can influence its pathogenesis.the most effective approach to prevent and mitigate the adverse consequences of this viral pandemic requires the development of effective surveillance programs, incorporated with laboratory preparedness. diagnostic laboratory tests play a significant role in the rapid and accurate detection of new viruses [5, 6] . currently, real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) testing is the main technique used for the diagnosis of covid-19.however, false-negative rt-pcr results occur in up to 30% of covid-19 patients [7] [8] [9] . this could be due to the collection of inappropriate or insufficient sample, inaccurate conditions of sample transportation and storage, as well as collecting the sample too late in the disease process.on the other hand, serology testing could cover this gap since detecting sars-cov-2 igg antibodies could indicate recovery or immunity from covid-19 infection. besides, igm could be detected in the acute phase of infections. although, manual enzyme-linked immunoassay (elisa) kits could be subjected to non-specific binding and cross-reactivity with other coronaviruses such as mers-cov and sars-cov-1, most commercially available antibodies utilize lateral flow assays (lfa) [10] . however, recently elisa and automated-based assays were also introduced.the diagnostic performance, including sensitivity and specificity, of these assays, were better than the lfa [11] . it worth mentioning that there is a high percent of covid-19 asymptomatic patients who could transmit the infection to all communities. for instance, the asymptomatic ratio of covid-19 was estimated to be 41.6% of japanese individuals who were evacuated from china [12] . similarly, 72% of people infected with covid-19 on board the diamond princess cruise ship were asymptomatic [13] . however, the extent of viral transmission from the asymptomatic cases is not clear yet. the positive rt-pcr results only imply the potential infectivity. a prospective study was published on march 28 in which the viral load and clinical manifestations of 2,147 close contacts of symptomatic and asymptomatic covid-19 cases were followed up [15] .the study concluded that the virus infection rate of close contacts with asymptomatic patients was 4.11%.since the transmission ability of asymptomatic individuals should not be ignored, it was of interest to conduct a systemic review to paint a picture of the current status and incidence of sars-cov-2 in asymptomatic patients. therefore, this study would give significant insights into covid-19 infection and help health authorities to determine the need for social distancing close contact restrictions in specific areas or populations.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fwe conducted a systematic review of all literature published on covid-19 in the asymptomatic patients using four databases: pubmed, web of science, scopus, and sciencedirect.the search covered all literature within the databases up to april 2020. the databases were queried with the keywords: "covid-19", "sars-cov-2", "seroprevalence", and "asymptomatic" to ensure complete coverage of all literature. the four databases were searched without filters.therefore, results that were letters and commentaries were also included. all retrieved citations were imported into endnote x8, and duplicates were removed using the endnote x8 built-in "find duplicates" feature. finally, the titles and abstracts of the remaining citations were screened to remove any irrelevant articles.the following inclusion criteria were used in study selection: (i) published in a peerreviewed journal, letters, case reports, and commentaries (ii) articles studying the covid-19 infection in asymptomatic patients, and (iii) articles published in english or at least with an abstract in english. a schematic of the search strategy and study selection process is shown in figure 1 .besides, studies that reported the coinfection of covid-19 with other viruses as well as comorbidities, such as cancer and cystic fibrosis, were also included in this study. no exclusion criteria were followed unless the studies did not report the incidence of sars-cov-2 in asymptomatic patients, published in a non-english language, or do not have full-text access.the studies included in this systematic review were analyzed two times by the same individual to ensure accurate capture of the information. the analyzed data included the incidence the search yielded 505 studies, of which 370 citations remained after removing duplicates ( figure 1 ). after screening the titles, abstracts, and keywords, 312 citations were excluded. the removed citations included irrelevant studies. the remaining 67 citations were screened against the eligibility criteria. of these, one study was removed due to the unavailability of full-text access.furthermore, three studies were removed two for being published in languages other than english with no english abstract. the remaining 63 studies were included in this study for further analysis, and they consisted of letters to the editor, commentaries, case reports as well as research studies.the reviewed studies covered sars-cov-2 incidence worldwide. country-wise, the majority of the studies were from china (n = 44) and included different provinces such as wuhan, shenzhen, guangzhou, beijing, shanghai, hunan, nanjing, guangdong, anhui, hubei, zhejiang, jinan, and hefei ( table 1 ). the remaining studies were published in japan (n = 2), italy (n = 3), germany (n = 1), iran (n = 2), and usa (n = 6), which included studies from texas, washington, and new york. however, there was a lack of sars-cov-2 epidemiological studies from several countries worldwide, tracing the actual incidence of covid-19, especially in asymptomatic patients.looking at all the included studies with a large sample size (n>1000 cases), these studies (table  1 , highlighted with bold text) estimated that percentage of people contracting sars-cov-2 and are likely to be asymptomatic range from (1.2-12.9%). however, the other studies with a smaller sample size (n<1000) reported a much higher incidence and indicated that up to 87.9% of covid-19 infected individuals could be asymptomatic ( table 1) . most of these estimates were based on rt-pcr results. on the other hand, the estimated seroprevalence of antibodies to sars-cov-2 was reported to be higher. for instance, a study that was performed on 2,857 blood donors from rio de janeiro showed 23.7% of igm positive cases, 11.4% of igg positive cases, while both igm and igg was detected in 64.9% [16] . this is could due to the limitation of the nasal swab since the pcr diagnostic could be negative though antibody detection is positive. in fact, this finding was reported in a study where four subjects out of 317 asymptomatic participants had negative pcr diagnostic, while antibody testing was positive [17] . therefore, relying only on molecular testing could significantly underestimate the seroprevalence sars-cov-2, especially in asymptomatic individuals.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fthe spread of covid-19 is an emerging condition with pandemic potential that threatens all countries. over the last four months, more than three million cases of covid-19 have been confirmed worldwide. numerous epidemiologic investigations identified an association with respiratory droplet transmission. yet, understanding of the transmission risk is incomplete. it worth mention that covid-19 asymptomatic individuals may pose a significant public health threat. the majority of these patients might be unaware of their disease and, therefore, not isolate themselves or seek treatment. consequently, unknowingly transmit the virus to others. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic review study that investigated the incidence of sars-cov-2 in asymptomatic patients.a total of 63 out of 505 screened studies reporting covid-19 asymptomatic patients were included in this review. epidemiological data, clinical laboratory results, ct image findings, as well as the medical and contact history of the patient are critical knowledge that should be carefully studied when a new infectious disease emerged [59] . although asymptomatic patients with sars-cov-2 were uncommon, studies showed that the prevalence of sars-cov-2 in asymptomatic patients is underestimated and might increase. for instance, a review paper showed the rate of asymptomatic individuals with the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) ranged from 0% to 28.6% [60] . besides, it was reported that 75% of covid-19 infected individuals could be asymptomatic [55] . [19] . similarly, a study reported in china (wuhan) showed a 3-years old male asymptomatic patient with positive rt-pcr for sars-cov-2 and normal lymphocyte counts and chest ct images [20] . it is unknown yet the reason of having a benign clinical course and low incidence of covid-19 in children compared to adults. a proposed hypothesis suggested that it might be due to the low expression of ace2 receptors, high plasticity of their immune system, or to the exposure of other coronaviruses which are generally common in kids [61, 62] .besides, children may play a major role in community-based viral transmission. for instance, it was reported that viral shedding in the stool sample could persist for several weeks after diagnosis [63, 64] . consequently, it poses a threat of viral transmission through the fecal-oral route, particularly for infants and children who are not toilet trained. most of the reported covid-19cases in children were due to close contact with family members with sars-cov-2 infection (table 1 ). many experts believe that undetermined asymptomatic cases of covid-19 infection could be an important source of contagion [41] . therefore, the early identification of the asymptomatic cases, as well as monitoring and tracing close contact, could help in mitigating the spread of covid-19 infection.another factor that increases the asymptomatic rate of covid-19 is the inaccuracy of diagnostic testing. for instance, a recent article highlighted key important steps to be considered when designing seroprevalence studies, as well as experts' opinion on the recent studies. a major concern raised about the recently published results was the type of antibody test used since most of them inaccurate to support the conclusions [65] . it was reported that the manual elisa kits are subject to cross-reaction with other coronaviruses such as sars-cov-1 and mers-cov [10] . besides, some of the included studies reported that the patients were positive for sars-cov-2 igg, which suggested that the patient was an asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carrier. the differential use of serology for confirming acute infection is not appropriate without the additional collaboration of results. therefore, combining both molecular and serological testing would be the best approach to accurately estimate the prevalence of covid-19 infection, especially if the patient is at later stages of the infection and does not show symptoms [68] .although governments in many countries are planning to conduct largescale seroprevalence surveys, many laboratories try to rely on well-established and validated lab tests, rather than rapid tests. the latter is based on blood collected from finger pricks to detect sars- funding: this work is supported by qnrf grant no. rrc-032 grant was given to g.k.n. we would like also to thank qatar national library (a member of qatar foundation) for sponsoring the publication fees of this article.the work presented in this manuscript does not involve work with animals or with human subjects, and therefore does not require ethics clearance.the authors declare no conflict of interest.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f [58] j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f an outbreak of a novel human coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was first detected in wuhan, china in december 2019 (lu et al., 2020) and became a public health emergency of international concern. the world health organization defines coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) as the infectious disease caused by laboratory confirmed sars-cov-2, with real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) (who, 2020). covid-19 can present as an asymptomatic carrier state, acute respiratory disease, or pneumonia. some studies found that people infected with sars-cov-2 in the asymptomatic or presymptomatic period can be infectious (bai et al., 2020 , mao et al., 2020 . current evidence on how long to quarantine asymptomatic carriers is limited. in recent paper, mao was suspicious about the 14-day isolation period for asymptomatic carriers because it was based only on observations of two cases (mao et al., 2020) . the shortage of isolation capacity in some countries is expected to lead to an explosive increase in covid-19.here, we report the viral kinetics according to absence or presence of symptoms.our study included laboratory-confirmed covid-19 patients admitted to affiliated hospitals of chonnam national university between february 04 and april 07, 2020. rt-pcr was positive if the cycle threshold (ct) value of both the envelope (e) and rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) genes of sars-cov-2 were less than 35. specimens were collected from all patients at least 2 days after hospitalization and physicians checked their symptoms and signs daily. epidemiological and clinical information were obtained.seventy-one patients were hospitalized for treatment or isolation. we analyzed patients who had any of the following features at quarantine release: (1) asymptomatic carrier (n=10) who had no symptoms in the 14 days preceding diagnosis until quarantine release; (2) incubation period patients (n=3) who were asymptomatic during the 14 days preceding diagnosis, but became symptomatic during quarantine. table 1 shows the clinical j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f characteristics of the patients analyzed. the median age of the asymptomatic carriers was 31 (interquartile range 17.8-55.8) years. three patients who were asymptomatic on admission developed myalgia, fever, and cough 1 or 2 days afterwards without pneumonia. in two of the three patients, the viral load in the incubation period was very high (ct value <20), but all patients first reached ct>35 by day 14 (fig 1a) . in the asymptomatic covid-19 carriers, the viral load on admission was not relatively high (fig 1b) . the median time to first ct >35 rt-pcr result after diagnosis in asymptomatic carriers was 4.5 (2.0-8.5) days and all asymptomatic cases first reached a ct >35 result within 14 days after diagnosis (fig 1b) .we found that rt-pcr was indeterminate or negative 14 days after diagnosis in entirely asymptomatic individuals who were not given any antiviral agents. although the presence of viral rna in specimens doesnot distinguish between infective and non-infective pcr was positive on the 19th day of isolation in patients receiving antiviral agents, which might have prolonged virus detection in the two asymptomatic carriers. a modelling study estimated that 18% would be true asymptomatic cases, including the incubation period (mizumoto et al., 2020) . if the percentage of asymptomatic carriers is large, the cost of isolation for public health management may be enormous. our data suggest that 14-days quarantine at home after diagnosis may be adequate in entirely asymptomatic carriers.we found that incubation-period patients had high viral loads before the onset of symptoms, and that some asymptomatic carriers had an initial viral load that might be a living virus. interestingly, this differs from the transmission of sars-cov, which occurred mainly j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f asymptomatic patients has not been reported. techniques to minimize aerosolization and appropriate personal protective equipment may help reduce the risk to healthcare workers in the operating room. some societal guidelines recommend the use of airborne precautions during aerosol-generating procedures on asymptomatic patients during the coronavirus disease pandemic, although evidence supporting this practice is limited. conclusion viral transmission from patients exhibiting no symptoms in the operating room is plausible and efforts to reduce risk to healthcare providers include reducing aerosolization and wearing appropriate personal protective equipment, the feasibility of which will vary based on geographic risk and equipment availability.objectif le risque encouru par les travailleurs de la santé traitant des patients asymptomatiques infectés par le syndrome respiratoire aigu sévère du coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) en salle d'opération dépend de plusieurs facteurs. ce compte rendu examine les données probantes concernant la présence asymptomatique ou présymptomatique du sars-cov-2, le risque de transmission des patients asymptomatiques, et les risques spécifiques associés aux interventions générant des aérosols. nous passons également en revue différentes mesures de protection, telles que la minimisation des aérosols et l'utilisation d'équipements de protection individuelle, dans un contexte de traitement de patients asymptomatiques. source nous avons examiné la littérature publiée ainsi que les directives sociétales. constatations principales selon certaines données probantes, une proportion des personnes infectées par le sars-cov-2 possèdent des charges virales détectables avant la présence de symptô mes, voire même sans manifestation de symptô mes. le degré de risque de transmission des patients asymptomatiques aux travailleurs de la santé dépendra de la prévalence de la maladie dans la population, une donnée difficile à évaluer sans dépistage généralisé. les interventions générant des aérosols augmentent le risque de transmission virale des patients symptomatiques infectés aux travailleurs de la santé, mais la transmission de patients asymptomatiques n'a pas été rapportée. les techniques visant à minimiser l'aérosolisation et les équipements de protection individuelle adaptés pourraient être utiles pour réduire le risque des travailleurs de la santé en salle d'opération. certaines directives régionales et nationales recommandent le recours à des précautions contre la transmission par voie aérienne durant les interventions générant des aérosols pratiquées sur des patients asymptomatiques pendant la pandémie de coronavirus, bien que les données probantes appuyant cette pratique soient limitées. conclusion la transmission virale des patients asymptomatiques en salle d'opération est plausible et les efforts visant à réduire le risque pour les travailleurs de la santé comprennent la réduction de l'aérosolisation et le port d'équipements de protection individuelle adaptés, deux mesures dont la faisabilité variera en fonction du risque géographique et de la disponibilité des équipements.there have been over 5,600,000 confirmed cases of coronavirus disease (covid-19) and 355,000 deaths worldwide to date (27 may 2020). 1 there is concern that viral transmission may occur from patients exhibiting no symptoms, which might pose a risk to healthcare workers (hcws). in this review, we summarize the available evidence on the risk of asymptomatic spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) to hcws, particularly in locations such as the operating room where aerosol-generating procedures (agps) are routinely performed.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 is not the first pathogenic coronavirus to jump from its animal host to humans. of the seven known human coronaviruses, four cause mild symptoms similar to the common cold and three others can cause severe illness in humans. 2 severe acute respiratory syndrome (caused by sars-cov), middle east respiratory syndrome (caused by mers cov) and covid-19 (caused by sars-cov-2) all result from highly transmissible viruses whose natural reservoir is in bats. several factors are associated with pathogen spillover from animal hosts to humans and establishment of sustained spread in humans, such as changes in human behaviour, new technologies and industry, changes in land use, increased international travel, microbial adaptation, inadequate public health measures, and sharing our environment with domestic or wild animals. 3, 4 given that these factors are unlikely to change, we can expect to see more outbreaks of emerging infectious diseases in the future. 5respiratory viruses, like sars-cov-2, are known to spread by direct contact, such as touching an infected person or a surface infected with virus-containing droplets expelled by an infected person. 6 current recommendations to prevent the spread of sars-cov-2, such as frequent hand washing and keeping at least a 2-m distance, would be effective with droplet-borne transmission. recommendations to practice good hand hygiene, physical distancing, and isolation of infected patients to prevent transmission are common across respiratory viruses and organizational guidelines. there has been controversy, even before the emergence of sars-cov-2, over whether respiratory viruses, including coronaviruses (e.g., mers), can effectively spread via the airborne route and whether contact and droplet precautions are sufficient to prevent transmission. 7 the world health organization (who) recommends droplet and contact precautions for avian influenza and mers, while the centers for disease control and prevention takes a more conservative approach, recommending airborne precuations. 7 the who does recommend additional airborne precautions for novel acute respiratory viruses until transmission patterns can be observed. there is some evidence that sars-cov-2 can spread via aerosols, with virus particles found at distances [ 2 m from the source for up to three hours. [8] [9] [10] the infectivity of these viral particles, however, remains to be determined.the median incubation period for sars-cov-2 has been estimated to be 5.1 days, with 97.5% of patients developing symptoms within 11.5 days, which is similar to sars-cov. 11 the upper end of this incubation period forms the rationale for public health recommendations to self-isolate for 14-days after exposure. several studies have shown that viral loads are highest shortly after symptom onset, gradually decreasing over the ensuing 21 days. [12] [13] [14] longer periods of viral shedding (up to 30 days) have also been reported. 15 evidence of asymptomatic/pre-symptomatic carriersthe prevalence of asymptomatic (never develops symptoms) or pre-symptomatic (tests positive prior to symptom development) illness has been documented in several populations. among 565 japanese nationals evacuated from wuhan, china and tested for sars-cov-2 by real time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), 13 tested positive with four (30.8%; 95% confidence interval [ci], 7.7 to 53.8) asymptomatic at the time of testing. 16 of the 3,063 passengers on board the quarantined diamond princess cruise ship who were tested for sars-cov-2, 17.9% of those who tested positive were asymptomatic (95% ci, 15.5 to 20.2). 17 residents of a long-term skilled nursing facility with an early outbreak of covid-19 were all screened for symptoms of illness and viral rna. of the 76/82 (93%) residents tested, 23 tested positive of which 13 (57%) were categorized as asymptomatic at the time of testing. 18 seven days later, ten out 13 previously asymptomatic residents developed symptoms and were reclassified as pre-symptomatic during testing. twenty-four asymptomatic patients in nanjing, china were characterized after testing positive through screening of close contacts. during hospitalized follow-up, five (20.8%) developed symptoms, 17 (70.8%) showed abnormal computed tomography (ct) scans, and seven (29.2%) had normal ct scans and did not develop symptoms. 19 both targeted testing for sars-cov-2 in high-risk icelandic residents and general icelandic population screening for sars-cov-2 showed asymptomatic patients that tested positive for sars-cov-2. in the 1,924 targeted-testing group, 7% had no symptoms, while in the population screening group, 43% of 10,797 icelandic residents testing positive for the virus reported having no symptoms at the time of testing. 20 the available evidence across a range of populations indicates that asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic patients can test positive for sars-cov-2 at rates ranging from 17.9% to 57% of those who test positive showing no symptoms. nevertheless, the overall prevalence of asymptomatic carriers will depend on the distribution and how widespread the disease is in a given population. for example, in the icelandic population, where less than 1% of the population was positive for sars-cov-2 (and 43% of them reporting no symptoms) at the time of screening, the point prevalence of asymptomatic cases was 0.34%. 20 in contrast, in a highly infected environment like the diamond princess cruise ship where 20% of passengers eventually tested positive, 10% of all passengers and crew were asymptomatic at the time of testing. 17 in a study of sars-cov-2 upper respiratory viral loads in 18 patients, one asymptomatic patient was included because of close contact with an infected patient. the viral load that was detected in the asymptomatic patient was similar to that in the symptomatic patients, which suggests the transmission potential of asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic patients. 21 while symptomatic disease is frequently associated with infectivity, there is speculation that for sars-cov-2, the latent period (time from exposure to onset of infectiousness) may be shorter than the incubation period (time from exposure to onset of symptoms), leaving a window of time when the patient is infectious but not yet exhibiting symptoms. this is supported by a study of viral loads in chinese patients, which indicated that presymptomatic viral transmission likely occurred. 13 using data from infector-infectee pairs, the authors estimated that viral transmission may have occurred two to three days prior to symptom onset in up to 44% of patients, indicating a transmission pattern more similar to seasonal influenza than sars-cov. of the 157 locally acquired infections identified in singapore, ten secondary cases (6.4%) were likely acquired prior to the development of symptoms in the index cases. infections happened on average one to three days before symptom onset in the index cases. 22 a familial cluster was identified in anyang, china where one asymptomatic carrier never developed symptoms but tested positive for the virus, and likely infected five family members. 23 in a point-prevalence survey of a skilled nursing facility in king county, washington, 27 out of 48 (56%) with positive tests were asymptomatic at the time of testing. given an estimated doubling time of 3.4 days (95% ci, 2.5 to 5.3) in that facility, viral shedding from asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic residents likely contributed to early transmission to other residents and staff members. 24 healthcare workers are at increased risk for infection through occupational exposure to pathogens such as bacteria, fungi, viruses, and parasites. 25 healthcare providers have been affected by sars-cov-2, with high reported rates of infection 26 and death 27 in the uk, although it is unclear how much nosocomial transmission occurred since frontline staff tested positive at similar rates to non-clinical staff and deaths were not reported in icu hcws, possibly indicating that current infection control practices in the uk have been effective in limiting occupationally acquired hcw infection. nevertheless, hcws have been found to be at higher risk for infection with respiratory pathogens in other settings, particularly those who perform agps. 28, 29 a systematic review showed that, compared with healthcare workers who did not perform aerosol-generating procedures, those who performed tracheal intubation had an increased risk of contracting sars-cov in the 2003 epidemic (odds ratio, 6.6) than those who performed non-invasive ventilation (odds ratio, 3.1), tracheotomy (odds ratio, 4.2), and manual ventilation before intubation (odds ratio, 2.8). 29 nevertheless, the authors note very low quality in all included studies, study designs subject to recall bias, and few clear reports of personal protective equipment (ppe) compliance. low numbers of exposed hcws also limit the generalizability of the study-in the meta-analysis for risk of hcw infection after tracheal intubation, two of the four included studies had five or fewer hcws in the exposed group. a separate study found that the protection guidelines failed to thoroughly prevent the transmission of sars-cov to hcws in 2003 and that 9% of the interviewed healthcare workers who had intubated patients contracted sars. nevertheless, the cause-effect relationship between infection and intubation in these healthcare workers who contracted sars was unknown. 30 techniques to minimize risk to hcws in the operating room since asymptomatic transmission is possible with sars-cov-2, and hcws are at risk of infection, techniques to minimize risk in the operating room are needed. current tests for sars-cov-2 are not sensitive enough to eliminate the possibility of asymptomatic carriers entering the operating room. therefore, other strategies, such as risk reduction through the hierarchy of controls model 31 can be employed (see figure 1 ). strategies include delaying elective surgery in patients at high risk for infection, substituting regional anesthesia for agps when appropriate, reducing aerosolization, clearing aerosols, and providing appropriate ppe for hcws.the american society of anesthesiologists (asa) and anesthesia patient safety foundation jointly recommend preoperative testing of all elective surgery patients where there is sars-cov-2 in the region. 32 patients testing positive should be delayed for non-urgent surgery. they caution, however, that the low sensitivity of viral pcr tests means that up to 30% of patients may falsely test negative. therefore, regardless of a negative test, additional riskreduction strategies are indicated, including airborne ppe when an agp is planned.aerosol-generating procedures, such as intubation and mask ventilation, are thought to create small airborne particles that can be suspended in air and travel long distances. 33 under the assumption that asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic patients carrying sars-cov-2 have the ability to generate aerosolized virus particles capable of transmission to hcws during agps, there may be ways to reduce the risk of aerosolization. these techniques include avoiding mask ventilation if possible, reducing oxygen flows, having a good seal with the face mask through use of a thenar eminence (''ve'') grip, and ensuring profound paralysis prior to airway instrumentation. 34 aerosolization risk from coughing during extubation can be minimized with lidocaine, dexmedetomidine, remifentanil, and fentanyl. 35 innovative barrier techniques, such as plastic cube boxes, screens, and tents, to reduce aerosolization during airway management of patients with covid-19 have been described, but further research is required to prove efficacy or recommend routine use for asymptomatic patients, particularly if they hinder timely airway management, as has recently been shown in a simulation study. [36] [37] [38] operating room ventilation and clearance of aerosols severe acute respiratory syndrome and mers investigations found airborne disease transmission through inefficient hospital ward ventilation systems. 39 fortunately, most operating rooms, owing to their design in protection of the surgical site, have air exchange rates that adequately minimize deposition and floating time of respiratory virus particles (at least 9 per hour). 40 operating room workers should know their local air exchange rates to determine when aerosolized particles are likely to have been cleared, thus reducing the risk of viral transmission to new members of the operating room team entering the room after an agp has been performed. 41 while ppe is important, it is only one of the protective measures used to protect hcws managing airways. 42 early in an epidemic, before viral transmission routes have been well characterized, ppe recommendations for hcws can be chaotic and evolving. 43 during the 2003 sars epidemic, most virus transmission to hcws occurred before ppe was routine, or was associated with ppe breaches. once the epidemic subsided, the dangers of excessive ppe recommendations (e.g., increased contamination during doffing) were recognized, as well as several instances where droplet precautions were effective in preventing transmission, even in settings where intubations occurred. 43 since transmission of sars-cov-2 from asymptomatic patients to hcws has not been reported, there is no clear evidence-based recommendation for appropriate ppe in this setting. evidence that agps actually increase airborne hcw transmission is limited 44 and it is uncertain whether n95 masks offer better protection over surgical masks. 45, 46 regardless of choice of ppe, adequate training in donning and doffing is essential for ensuring both effectiveness and reducing the risk of self-contamination. 47 the asa recommends the use of airborne ppe for all airway-related agps because asymptomatic patients may be harbouring sars-cov-2. 48 in contrast, the united kingdom association of anaesthetists does not specifically recommend n95 masks for asymptomatic patients, although they acknowledge that as population disease burden increases, it might become necessary to treat all patients as high-risk because of the threat of asymptomatic viral transmission. 49, 50 conclusions there is evidence of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic carriers of the sars-cov-2. while transmission from asymptomatic patients to close contacts has been reported, there have been no reports of asymptomatic patients infecting hcws during agps. the risk that an asymptomatic patient poses to operating room hcws during agp will depend on local disease burden.as health systems begin to consider resuming elective surgery, safely navigating agps in those who are asymptomatic will be imperative. identifying asymptomatic patients who may be infectious using imperfect tests, and maintaining operating room safety for patients and providers, all while avoiding ppe shortages, are some of the challenges faced by health systems around the world. there is still much we do not understand about asymptomatic viral transmission and until more is known, a precautionary approach may expose clinicians to lower risk of infection. further research on the risk of asymptomatic spread of sars-cov-2 and appropriate measures to mitigate this risk, particularly during agps, is urgently needed.in december 2019, a novel coronavirus was identified as the cause of many pneumonia cases in wuhan, china [1] . the new virus, now known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), led to the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , first in china and then worldwide, causing an international emergency. despite isolation efforts, due to high transmission rates, eventually a pandemic was declared [2, 3] .covid-19 usually presents with fever, cough, dyspnea, myalgia and/or fatigue and may infect any person at any age [4, 5] . however, many carriers do not present any symptoms [5, 6] . thus, differentiating the new virus from other known infections based on the clinical presentation is practically impossible. a severe disease, usually presenting in the elderly and in those with an underlying disease, may result in progressive respiratory failure requiring intensive care unit (icu) hospitalization [5] . hypertension, cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, smoking, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd), chronic kidney disease and malignancy were shown to be prevalent underlying diseases among hospitalized covid-19 patients [7, 8] . the mortality rate was estimated to be between two and five percent [9] .during the current pandemic, in addition to guidance on staffing, infection control and prevention, guidelines recommended postponing all elective surgeries and procedures [10] [11] [12] .even with elective/non-urgent procedures postponed, urgent and emergent surgeries are still being performed. operating on covid-19 patients raises few critical medical issues, including the optimal anesthesiology, surgical approach and the patient's postoperative outcomes, as well as the exposure of medical staff to the in-hospital covid-19 patients. as suggested by different medical unions, all surgical candidate patients must complete preoperative universal health screening for known symptoms of covid-19.in addition, special consideration is necessary for evaluating the appropriateness of procedural interventions, recognizing the significant resources they require (i.e., equipment, space and staff).according to american guidelines, including the society of gynecologic oncology (sgo) and the society of american gastrointestinal and endoscopic surgeons (sages), preoperative patients should be tested for covid-19, regardless of their symptoms or exposure [11, 13] .the question of whether to test all asymptomatic surgical candidate patients of unknown covid-19 status bothers many surgical staff members and medical authorities. the value of testing asymptomatic surgical candidates of unknown covid-19 differs between countries and continents and depends on underlying prevalence rates, false negative rates of tests, operation types, timing of the test relative to surgery and various epidemiology principles.the purpose of this document is to highlight the published outcomes of asymptomatic patients who were operated during the covid-19 outbreak and were finally found to be infected with the covid-19 during the postoperative period.this report is a review, proposed to find all relevant data on the perioperative period in covid-19 patients who were preoperatively asymptomatic and not tested for covid-19.searches were conducted in pubmed april 4th, 2020 (and reconducted on april 10th, 2020) to identify studies reporting the perioperative course of preoperatively unknown asymptomatic covid-19 patients.the following search terms were used: covid-19 or novel coronavirus or sars-cov-2 or 2019 ncov and surgery or surgical or operation or perioperative or postoperative or anesthesia.all publications of all designs, including original studies, observational studies, case reports, case series and randomized controlled studies were considered for inclusion.there were no date or language restrictions on the search. references of relevant papers were searched manually for relevant studies.due to time constraints, a study protocol was not registered, and one reviewer (c.n) conducted the search, reviewed full texts and extracted data.overall, 430 titles and abstracts were identified through database searching. after screening, 32 potentially relevant reports were evaluated as full text for inclusion. finally, only four reports were found to be published on perioperative risks during the covid-19 outbreak. these publications comprise 64 covid-19 carriers, of them 51 were diagnosed only in the postoperative period [14] [15] [16] [17] . table 1 summarizes the characteristics and outcomes of the undiagnosed covid-19 surgical patients.the earliest report describes the perioperative period of three surgical patients (cholecystectomy, hernia repair and hysterectomy) in tehran, iran, in february 2020 [14] . the covid-19 status was unknown for all patients before surgery. all patients developed postoperative fever and pulmonary complications after uneventful operations. two of the three patients had covid-19 confirmed by a positive real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) test. of these two covid-19 postoperatively confirmed patients, one died due to acute respiratory failure and multiple organ failure (mof). the remaining patient was clinically diagnosed and died due to the postoperative progressive course of covid-19 infection. an additional patient suffered from acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) one day before his scheduled bariatric surgery, and rapidly progressed to cardiopulmonary arrest. pcr was not performed due to rapid deterioration and insufficient testing capacity.the second publication is a case report detailing the perioperative presentation of covid-19 in a liver transplant recipient [15] . this 37-year old showed no respiratory abnormalities upon admission. on the following day of hepatic arterial chemoembolization, his fever spiked up to 39°c. as chemoembolization-associated sterile inflammation was suspected, cephalosporin antibiotic was initiated. in the following days, liver transplant surgery was performed, and immunosuppressive drugs were prescribed. due to persistent fever and a suspected chest computed tomography (ct), rt-pcr was obtained and confirmed positive for covid-19. covid-19 was finally negative on postoperative day (pod) 49, and the patient was discharged from the hospital two months after his surgery.the third publication entails 25 cases of covid-19 infection from a single thoracic surgery department [16] . of these cases, 13 were of hospitalized patients and 12 were of health care staff. of these 13 patients, seven had a severe disease. 12 patients had a positive nucleic test for covid-19, while the remaining patient was clinically diagnosed. reviewing their data, a potential covid-19 perioperative carrier was identified. this patient had localized ground glass on ct imaging, was misdiagnosed before surgery, and his fever elevated only on pod1. on pod 3, his ct scan already revealed severe covid-19 infection. on pod 5, the patient died. during his hospital stay, six health care staff members and five postoperational patients were exposed and found to have a positive nucleic test for covid-19. as mortality rate was significantly high in postoperative patients (5/13), the authors show that chest surgery was significantly associated with death due to covid-19. moreover, they demonstrate that age and copd were significantly associated with a severe presentation and finally death from covid-19.the fourth report details the postoperative outcomes of 34 asymptomatic patients who had underwent elective surgery during the covid-19 outbreak in wuhan, china [17] . of the 34 patients, 20 had one or more comorbidities, most commonly hypertension, malignancy, diabetes and small case series are reporting on the outcome of surgical procedures in patients diagnosed with covid-19. moreover, there are limited case series reporting on the impact of covid-19 in undiagnosed preoperative patients. our review brings to light part of the surgical practice challenges during the covid-19 outbreak, and specifically aims to describe the hazardous postoperative outcomes of undiagnosed covid-19 patients, emphasizing the importance of considering preoperative covid-19 screening. the rationale behind knowing the covid-19 status of any surgical candidate is ensuring patient safety, reduction of postoperative complications [18] and potential transmission of the novel coronavirus from an unknown carrier to medical staff or to other patients [19] . while spreading the virus in the operation room and during hospital stay is potentially managed by personal protective equipment [20] , the complications that may present during patients' recovery are not under our control.the recent accumulation of published data concerning the postoperative outcome of patients diagnosed with covid-19 during the perioperative period suggested a 14/51 (27.5%) postoperative mortality rate and severe mostly pulmonic complications. the latest report by lei s et al. [17] suggested 20% postoperative death, 44% icu admission rate and 100% postoperative pneumonia among 34 asymptomatic covid-19 patients who underwent elective surgery.noticeable are the age differences between studies and their association with fatality rate. in line with previously published studies, and as seen in table 1 , the studies with an older average age resulted in higher fatality rates. though the data were retrieved from a small available number of publications, this morbidity and mortality risk is unacceptable and could be minimized or even avoided primarily by the preoperative diagnosis of patients' covid-19 status, as suggested by the american guidelines.with that said, like all screening tests, a true benefit from preoperative screening depends on covid-19 local prevalence rates and the availability of an accurate objective test. screening is of extra importance in situations that may lead to different clinical management approaches for the patients and staff.to elaborate on these key issues, rt-pcr covid-19 testing was shown to have high specificity with moderate sensitivity, resulting in cases of false negative results [21] . usually, these false results are a consequence of incorrect sampling [22] and could be addressed by education of health care staff. adequate sampling, good laboratory standards and high-quality rt-pcr kits, all reduce inaccurate results [22] .today and especially in the near future, when isolation and quarantine measures ease up, and expecting the comeback of elective surgeries, knowing the preoperative covid-19 status will be of great clinical importance. the preoperative diagnosis will lead health care providers to use the right protocols aiming to reduce postoperative complications and fatal morbidity. most importantly, a known covid-19 status will improve the medical staff decision making concerning the use of protective equipment aiming to prevent the hazardous staff infection. a preoperative screening test may also assist in the decision whether to delay a scheduled operation, and eventually ease answering the risk-benefit question of surgery versus covid-19 exposure and complications.the covid-19 pandemic has presented unique challenges and learning opportunities for surgical centers. the future trajectory of the covid-19 pandemic is uncertain and during this worldwide pandemic the situation is dynamic, policies and recommendations may change at any time. but since our global overarching goal is to continue providing compassionate, safe care for surgical patients and for medical staff, we believe that preoperative screening for covid-19 baseline status and detection of asymptomatic surgical candidates during the covid-19 incubation period is an acceptable requirement. consideration of preoperative covid-19 testing may facilitate the preoperative risk and benefit assessment whether to perform or postpone the individual's surgical procedure during the current pandemic.in conclusion, covid-19 may have potential serious implications on the perioperative course and may result in substantial fatality rates. the presented rates were accumulated from a small number of studies and patients, therefore, future well-designed studies are warranted. nevertheless, knowing the preoperative covid-19 status before any surgical treatment should be considered especially in high prevalence areas. we believe that in light of the observed outcomes, and in order to protect patients and health care staff, a consideration of sampling asymptomatic patients before surgical treatment is needed.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t background since the end of december 2019, pneumonia of an unknown cause started to spread in wuhan, china [1], and on january 8, 2020, severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was found to be the causative microorganism [2] .initially, 49%-66% of affected individuals were reported to be associated with the seafood market [3, 4] , and it was believed that the majority of cases since january have been transmitted from person to person [5, 6] . on january 30, 2020, the world health organization (who) declared it a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) [7] . as of february 15, 2020, the epidemic has spread worldwide, and there have been cases of human-to-human transmission outside china [8] . the wuhan city government announced in january 21 that access to wuhan will be partially restricted and in january 23 the government reported that wuhan outbound railway stations and airports as well as all public transport in the city would stop. this decision made it difficult for foreigners living in wuhan to return to their home countries. in january 28, after negotiations with the chinese government, the japanese government announced that it would send charter flights to wuhan to repatriate japanese residents who wished to leave the city. the government of japan decided to conduct a sars-cov-2 polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test on all returnees, even if they were asymptomatic.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t this study was based on the results of a sars-cov-2 pcr test performed on returnees from wuhan and a follow-up study after returning to japan. the purpose of this study was to determine the prevalence of covid-19 among returnees from wuhan and the clinical course of asymptomatic individuals.this retrospective cohort study included japanese wuhan residents who returned to tokyo international airport (hnd) from the wuhan tianhe international airport (wuh). at wuh, people with symptoms clearly indicative of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) were not allowed to leave wuhan. at the hnd quarantine station, returnees who were suspected of having covid-19 with fever and respiratory symptoms such as cough or sore throat were transported to several medical institutions in tokyo (figure 1 ). returnees who were judged to have no symptoms were transported to the national center for global health and medicine (ncgm), shinjuku, tokyo, where they underwent thermometry and completed a medical questionnaire about contact history and symptoms while on their bus. nurses checked the returnee questionnaires and took body temperatures during transport; those with respiratory symptoms (nasal discharge, sore throat, cough, etc.) or fever 37.5c were taken to an a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t examination room, where a physician performed a pharyngeal swab, and rapid tests for influenza. except for cases where clinical symptoms were clearly judged unlikely to have covid-19, they were admitted to the ncgm or to other hospitals in tokyo for isolation. those who had no problems according to the questionnaire or a normal temperature on the bus were examined in a large hall and pharyngeal swabs were collected. anyone with any respiratory tract symptoms or fever >37.5c at the time of the physician's consultation in the large hall were further examined in the consultation room and admitted to the ncgm or other hospitals in tokyo, except for cases where clinical symptoms were clearly judged not to be covid-19. those who did not need hospitalization after the consultation at ncgm were moved to another accommodation facility and were instructed by the government not to leave the room for 12 days.individuals who developed a fever or respiratory symptoms during the 12 days of quarantine at the accommodation were hospitalized for pcr and were admitted to an isolation room if sars-cov-2 was positive. on the 13th day after returning to japan, a second pcr of the pharyngeal swab was performed, and those who tested negative were released from isolation at the accommodation facility and returned home. those who tested positive were hospitalized and isolated. asymptomatic persons with a positive pcr result were admitted to a medical institution for follow-up and isolation. for asymptomatic pcr-negative persons who stayed at the accommodation facility, the pcr test was repeated on the 13th day. those with negative results were allowed to return home, and those with positive results were a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t transported to a medical institution for follow-up and isolation. as with symptomatic patients, clinical data was collected starting on the date of return. because under japan's infectious disease law, covid-19 patients could not be discharged from the hospital until two negative pcr tests were confirmed, pcr tests were performed 24 hours after symptom improvement for symptomatic patients and asymptomatic patients as appropriate after hospitalization.this study was approved by the ethics committee of the ncgm and all hospital institutions involved (approval no. ncgm-g-003475-00), and informed written consent was obtained from all returnees, except for two who refused medical consultation.the basic characteristics of pcr-positive and -negative cases were examined using fisher's exact test (for categorical variables) and mann-whitney u test (for quantitative variables).a total of 566 japanese wuhan residents returned to hnd from wuh in january 29, (n=206), 30 (n=210), and 31 (n=150), 2020. two were excluded from this study because they refused the pcr test. after going through quarantine for about two hours each, twenty-eight people at a quarantine station had symptoms of sars-cov-2 and a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t were transported to a medical facility in tokyo. a total of 536 people judged to have no symptoms suspicious of sars-cov-2 at the quarantine station were transported to the ncgm, while 36 patients with a fever >37.5c or any respiratory symptoms were hospitalized at the ncgm or other tokyo medical facilities. moreover, 500 were judged to be asymptomatic and moved to an accommodation facility after sample collection ( figure 1 ). table 1 shows the characteristics of the persons evacuated from wuhan to japan. the proportion of pcr-positive individuals that used any drug was higher than that of those who tested negative with the pcr. when the basic characteristics of the patients (age, sex, contact histories, symptoms) were compared between the two groups, no significant differences were observed except for the number of patients who had a fever (p< 0.043).three out of the 206 passengers on the first flight had a positive sars-cov-2 pcr result for pharyngeal swabs collected on january 29. one of them was already isolated in a patient private room of a medical institution as a symptomatic patient (patient s1), but two were asymptomatic and stayed at the accommodation facility. the two asymptomatic individuals were transported to a medical institution, where they were isolated and carefully monitored (patients a1 and a2). among those patients transported directly from the quarantine station to a medical institution, all had negative a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t results on the first test. among them, one person who had pneumonia and was strongly suspected of covid-19 was retested and found to be positive (patient s2) in january 31. one of the patients staying at the accommodation who was reported to be ill with a fever and sore throat, was transported to hospital and isolated in february 6 (patient s3); subsequently pharyngeal swabs collected in february 7 tested positive for pcr. in addition, 201 people who tested negative on the first pcr, were all negative on pcr tests performed in february 11. only two asymptomatic patients of the 210 passengers on the second flight, had positive pcr in 30 january and were transported from the accommodation facility to a medical facility (patients a3 and a4) in january 31.another person, who initially had negative pharyngeal swab results was retested because of the development of pneumonia and was found to be positive (patient s4) in february 3. fortunately, 207 people who tested negative on the first pcr, all tested negative in february 12. two of the 150 passengers on the third flight were positive with the first pcr test: one was already isolated in a medical institution (patient s5), and the other was asymptomatic and stayed in an accommodation facility (patient a5).one asymptomatic person of the 148 people who tested negative on the first pcr tested positive on a second pcr on february 13 (a6). the details of the eleven pcr-positive patients(s1-s5, a1-a6) are summarized in table 2 .a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t notably, among the eleven pcr-positive individuals, five had symptoms due to covid-19 at the time of sample collection (patients s1-s5). at the time of admission, three had a fever 37.5c, three had cough, and two had sore throat. four of the five symptomatic individuals had pneumonia on admission, and the other one(s1) developed pneumonia on the 9th day. all five symptomatic patients were mild and discharged without any sequela. they did not receive mechanical ventilation and were not admitted to the intensive care unit.patient a1, who was initially asymptomatic, had a fever of 38.9c with headache and sore throat 3 days after the 1st pcr screening test. the result of the rapid influenza test was negative. fever and other symptoms lasted for only 1 day, after which they disappeared. patient a2 had diarrhea (5 times per day) without fever or any other respiratory symptoms at day 6, which lasted about 1 day. patient a4 had a fever of 38c when transported from the accommodation facility to the hospital (day 2), but the temperature immediately dropped to 37.2c, and no fever or respiratory symptoms were seen thereafter. the remaining three of the six were consistently asymptomatic from the date of admission to the date of discharge. these six asymptomatic individuals were carefully monitored at the hospital, pharyngeal swabs were collected, and pcr tested as appropriate, and where possible, the viral load was measured (not necessarily measured we reported the results of two pcr tests on 564 returnees from wuhan and the course of positives, of the 564 returnees, eleven were pcr-positive (2.0%), which far exceeded our expectations. according to who situation report, the number of confirmed sars-cov-2 patients in mainland china on january 29 was 5997 [9] , which accounts for only 0.054% of the population of wuhan, and is significantly different from the positive rate of japanese returnees. however, an analysis indicated that there were already 75,815 infected people in wuhan as of january 25, 2020 [10] . from our reported number of positive pcr results, it is estimated that wuhan has more infections than reported. as of march 21, 2020, several cities around the world have locked down in addition to wuhan. our results will provide important insights on responding to returnees from these locked down cities.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t returnees were first sent to a quarantine station where patients suspected to have covid-19 were transported to a hospital in tokyo. additionally, of the 28 people transported from the quarantine to the hospital, only one was positive for covid-19.ten of the eleven persons with positive result were sent to the ncgm with a low likelihood of infection, and the quarantine station detected 9.1% of those positive for covid-19. although quilty et al [11] estimated that 46% of patients will be missed in quarantine screening, the cohort study may have reduced the rate of detection because of the higher proportion of asymptomatic individuals. to find and isolate covid-19 patients among the returnees, they were asked to fill out a simple questionnaire after they were transported from the quarantine station to the ncgm. however, there was no difference between the positive and negative cases regarding the history of contact with patients and the history of contact with patients with influenza-like illness symptoms.the presence of upper respiratory symptoms was not effective for screening, but fever might be effective because among the pcr-positive symptomatic cases, all had fever, but the respiratory tract symptoms varied, and one patient initially had diarrhea only aside from fever. these suggest the difficulty of detecting covid-19 by symptoms alone. naturally, it is not possible to detect asymptomatic patients among pcr-positive cases using a questionnaire. in the early stages of the covid-19 epidemic, many cases a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t were associated with the seafood market, and it was speculated that some wildlife in the seafood market was the source of infection. at this time, the host of sars-cov-2 had not been determined, but it was known that bat coronavirus had high homology with sars-cov-2 [12, 13] , and that bats were sold in the seafood market. however, since the seafood market was closed on january 1, 2020 [5] , and more than 14 days had passed since the closure, this questionnaire did not include a history of visit to the seafood market. nevertheless, we found 11 sars-cov-2 pcr-positive cases. this suggests that the outbreak has already been driven by human-to-human infection, regardless of the origin of index cases. among the 11 positives, the first screening pcr found 7 positives, but 4 were negative. in other words, one screening pcr test missed 36% of true positives who were still in the incubation period at the time of the first screening pcr or just because of false negative. based on reports that 95% of cases developed within 12.5 days of exposure, 5 we performed a second pcr test on the 13th day of return. hoehl et al. reported 126 evacuated germany passengers from wuhan to frankfurt. 14 in this report, 1.8% of returnees had passed the symptoms-based screening and was later found to have evidence of sars-cov-2 in a pharyngeal swab. in our study, of the 11 positives among 564 passengers, 10 passed quarantine screening, seven passed symptoms-based screening at ncgm, and two had negative initial pcr. our a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t report is consistent with their report that symptom-based screening was ineffective and that about 2% of returnees from wuhan were positive. however, to screen patients with high infection rates, such as those returning from wuhan, a single pcr test may miss cases that develop after the incubation period, and a second pcr might be effective.furthermore, of the eleven cases in this study, only one was exposed with a confirmed case of covid-19. in addition, we found sars-cov-2 from 2.0% of the entire subjects. these results might suggest three hypotheses. first, contact history is not a significant risk factor for infection. previous reports suggested that few contacts with covid-19 patients developed covid-19 15 and suggesting that certain clusters were prone to outbreaks. 16 transmission might depend on the environment at the time of contact with the confirmed patient. second, sars-cov-2 can be transmitted from cases other than those with symptoms. rothe et al. 17 reported that asymptomatic individuals were infectious. in addition, patients 3 and 4 had no exposure to the index case and only patient 2 had contact with patient 1, who was then asymptomatic. this suggests that covid-19 is infectious during the asymptomatic period or that it is infectious even during the incubation period. in addition, several reports suggesting infection from asymptomatic infected people have been published. 18 19 other respiratory viruses such as seasonal influenza can also be transmitted by asymptomatic cases; 20 therefore, it is a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t possible that asymptomatic individuals with the same respiratory sars-cov-2 infection are infectious. third, returnees might have underestimated or forgotten their contact history. since the evacuation process in these circumstances is stressful for healthy and asymptomatic people, their self-reported contact history could be biased.additionally, it is possible that they simply forgot their contact history.there were six cases of asymptomatic covid-19; these six asymptomatic individuals had two consultations at the quarantine station and at the ncgm before being reported that sars-cov-2 was detected in nasopharyngeal and pharyngeal swabs of asymptomatic patients for 4 days (from 7 to 11 days after contact with covid-19 patients) [5] . it is reasonable to conclude that the two individuals who have developed sars-cov-2 symptoms were still pcr-positive, but it is surprising that the two cases that did not develop sars-cov-2 symptoms were also positive ten days later. the our study has some limitations. first, pcr screening was performed using pharyngeal swab samples in this study. the use of lower respiratory tract specimens is optimal for diagnosing covid-19 [2] . pharyngeal swabs are less sensitive than nasal swabs [24] and lower respiratory tract specimens; thus, this method may not be able to detect all infected individuals among returnees. second, as mentioned above, our contact history tracing was based on self-reported answers and thus could be biased. although contact a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t history does not seem to be as useful as we expected for identification of infected cases, further investigation would be desirable for this issue. third, after the second positive pcr, the observation was concluded and no one in the population has subsequently been diagnosed with covid-19; however, if any of them had asymptomatic infection after the second pcr, this study did not detect it.in conclusion, we screened 564 returnees from wuhan, of whom 11 were positive for sars-cov-2. our report provides important evidence on the existence of asymptomatic individuals infected with sars-cov-2 and insights into the epidemic situation, where infected people are spreading the infection in wuhan at lease among the japanese resident community. a 13-day observation period and a second round of pcr may be effective to screen all patients, including asymptomatic infections. m a n u s c r i p t m a n u s c r i p t m a n u s c r i p t m a n u s c r i p t the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) pandemic has rapidly spread across the globe infecting more than 4.7 million people, causing more than 316,000 deaths and overwhelming health care systems [1] . despite these staggering numbers, the best strategies to save lives continue to be investigated. at the time of publication, no effective standard of treatment has been established and an effective vaccine is yet to be developed. in the absence of an effective treatment, the current focus remains on human-to-human transmission prevention, including among close contacts and health care workers [1] . this is a huge challenge as evidence is rapidly emerging suggesting transmission by asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic carriers of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the virus causing covid-19.exposure prevention strategies across the globe have included use of personal protective equipment (ppe), social distancing of community members, quarantining known covid-19 positive patients and contact tracing in order to identify exposed individuals [2] . current strategies of relying on presence of symptoms to identify sars-cov-2-infected individuals for transmission control have proven to be a challenge given emerging evidence that transmissibility can occur prior to symptom onset. the median incubation period is estimated to be about 5 days (95% ci, 4.5 to 5.8 days), with a majority of those who develop symptoms doing so within 14 days after exposure [3] . however, majority of patients develop mild to moderate disease and some remain asymptomatic [4] . transmissibility has been shown to begin 2 to 3 days before the appearance of the first symptoms [5] , peaks at 0.7 days before symptom onset [5] and may last for as long as 21 days in asymptomatic individuals [6] .a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 4 in most countries, viral pcr testing to determine sars-cov-2 infection status has focused on symptomatic patients while testing capabilities are being improved upon [7] . the emerging evidence presented below makes a compelling case that asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic individuals are the major drivers of the covid-19 pandemic and argues for reassessment of public health strategies. certain groups serving vulnerable populations (e.g. health care workers (hcws), long-term care facility (ltcf) staff, first responders, etc.) have a higher probability of exposure to sars-cov-2, and thus are at high risk of unknowingly contributing to disease transmission during asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic phases. it is proposed here that the early identification of infected asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic individuals should be an area of focus with priority on universal testing of those who interact with vulnerable populations.the importance of asymptomatic carriers in transmission of infectious diseases has been established in similar respiratory viral outbreaks prior to the sars-cov-2 pandemic. in middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), 12% of patients who tested positive for mers-cov were asymptomatic [8, 9] . during the sars-cov outbreak in singapore in 2003, 7.5% of serology positive hcws and 13% of cases in the general population were asymptomatic [10] . data suggest that sars-cov-2 can be highly contagious in individuals before symptom onset and in individuals who never develop symptoms. researchers have hypothesized that salivary glands may function as potential reservoirs of sars-cov-2 in asymptomatic infected individuals [11] . a study on quantitative viral load found that an asymptomatic individual had similar viral load as symptomatic patients, suggesting a similar a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 5 transmission potential [12] . an asymptomatic 6-month old infant with covid-19 had a high viral load on nasopharyngeal (np) swab, with similar viral load as his symptomatic mother. daily np swabs for this infant remained positive for sars-cov-2 and eventually became negative on day 17 of his admission. his symptomatic mother's np swabs became negative on day 18 of her illness [13] . a mathematical model incorporating asymptomatic carriers indicated that basic reproduction number ro is likely to be from 5.5 to 25.4, with a point estimate of 15.4. this suggests that asymptomatic individuals are major drivers for the growth of covid-19 pandemic [14] .in a study reviewing the temporal dynamics of sars-cov-2 viral shedding, clinical and epidemiologic data was analyzed between cases in transmission chains. the study suggests that viral shedding may begin 2 to 3 days before the appearance of the first symptoms and 44% (95% ci, 25-69%) of secondary cases acquired their infection during the index case's presymptomatic period [5] . additionally, it was found that viral loads decreased each day following symptom onset in a monotonical manner. the infectiousness was determined to peak at 0.7 days (95% ci -0.2 -2.0 days) before symptom onset, suggesting highest viral loads were present immediately prior to or on the day of symptom onset [5] . similarly, a study using 28 pairs of index cases and their respective secondary cases estimated the serial interval for sars-cov-2. serial interval was defined as the time from symptom onset in the index case (infector) to symptom onset in the secondary case (infectee). this interval was found to be 4.0 days (95% cri, 3.1-4.9) and is shorter than the estimated mean incubation period of 5 days, suggesting pre-symptomatic transmission occurs more frequently than symptomatic transmission [15] .not only does the period of transmissibility begin soon after exposure, it can also last longer than a week. among 24 asymptomatic cases exposed to covid-19-confirmed patients in a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 6 nanjing, china, the median period of transmissibility was 9.5 days (with maximum of 21 days).period of transmissibility, or communicable period, was defined in the study as the period during which the case had positive pcr test results. 12 (50%) of these asymptomatic cases had typical changes of ground-glass opacities in their lungs. despite this, only 5 (20%) went on to develop mild symptoms and none developed severe pneumonia or critical illness leading to death. several patients who acquired disease from this group of 24, however, developed severe illness [6] . this suggests that individuals with sars-cov-2 infection who are asymptomatic or have mild disease can unknowingly transmit disease to others who may go on to develop severe disease, and this transmission can happen for up to 21 days.after the first covid-19 related death in italy, the entire italian town of vo' euganeo with a population of 3000, was put into quarantine. every inhabitant of this isolated village was tested for sars-cov-2. this revealed that at the time of the first symptomatic case, 3% (89) of the population was positive [16] . it was suggested that 50-75% of positive individuals were asymptomatic [17] . the rapid identification and isolation of asymptomatic infected individuals led to "eradication" of sars-cov-2 from the town of vo' euganeo [16] .universal pcr testing of japanese nationals evacuated from wuhan, china on chartered flights suggested that 30.8% of positive patients were asymptomatic (95% confidence interval (ci): 7.7%, 53.8%) [18] . data from the diamond princess cruise line in which all passengers were tested for sars-cov-2 found an estimated asymptomatic proportion of 17.9% (95%ci: 15.5-20.2%) [19] . sailors on the united states navy aircraft carrier theodore roosevelt were potentially exposed on march 5 to covid-19. despite isolating the exposed, almost 94% of the 4,500 crew members tested positive by april 16 th . about 60% of the people who tested positive a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 7 have remained asymptomatic [20] . the above data came from unique populations in which all cases were geographically confined without significant turnover.through the boston healthcare for the homeless program, all individuals in a single large shelter were tested over the course of a two-day period regardless of symptom status. this testing was undertaken after expeditiously removing 15 symptomatic covid-19 confirmed patients from the shelter. of 408 guests tested, 36% (147) were pcr-positive for sars-cov-2 and vast majority of the pcr positive guests had no symptoms. prevalence of fever (0.7%), cough (7.5%), shortness of breath (1.4%), was very low and not different among the sars-cov-2 positive guests when compared to those who tested negative. the rapid transmission of sars-cov-2 infection and high prevalence of asymptomatic carriers suggests a universal testing approach instead of symptom-based approach is needed to prevent spread of infection to vulnerable populations from asymptomatic carriers [21] .according to a large pediatric national case series from china, among 2143 pediatric covid-19 cases, 4.4 % were asymptomatic. among the age groups of 6-10 year-old and 11-15 year-old patients, the asymptomatic percentage was as high as 5.7% (30 out of 521) and 6.5% (27 out of 413), respectively. overall, around 94% of patients were asymptomatic, mild or moderate cases [22] . a study mentioned earlier, suggested that the viral load in a 6 month old infant was similar to the viral load in his symptomatic mother. his np swabs remained positive for >2 weeks [13] .several familial clusters with asymptomatic pediatric patients have been described in literature, leading to concern that asymptomatic children may act as facilitators of viral transmission [23, 24] .a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 8 early during the new york city sars-cov-2 outbreak, pregnant women were screened based on symptoms and exposures. however, when asymptomatic pregnant women later developed symptoms during admission, several health care workers were exposed with inadequate ppe, risking further transmission of infection [25] . this led to initiation of universal sars-cov-2 pcr testing for all patients admitted to labor units irrespective of symptoms, exposure and travel history [26] . among 214 women who had pcr testing, 15% (33) were positive for sars-cov-2 infection and 87.9% (n=29) of these women were asymptomatic at the time of testing. this universal approach led to changes in patient isolation and ppe practices with goal of limiting asymptomatic transmission to newborns as well as hospital staff [27] .as more wide-spread viral pcr is being obtained, the presence of asymptomatic covid-19 positive individuals in the population is becoming increasingly obvious. in a family cluster of 6 covid-19 pcr positive patients from china, 5 symptomatic family members contracted the virus from an asymptomatic family member with absence of ct chest findings [28] . another study in singapore identified seven clusters of covid-19 positive individuals among whom presymptomatic transmission likely occurred [29] .in a case report, asymptomatic transmission occurred from a chinese business woman (index patient) to two german businessmen (patient 1 and 2) at a meeting in germany [30] . the index patient later became symptomatic 1-2 days after contact with patients 1 and 2; and tested positive for covid-19. patient 1 developed symptoms 3-4 days after his exposure to the index patient. two patients (patient 3 and 4) contracted the virus from patient 1 within the first 2 days of patient 1's exposure to the index patient while he was still asymptomatic. this cluster a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 9 suggests that transmission occurs before symptom onset and can often occur very soon after exposure.the transmission of sars-cov-2 in the hospital settings, whether it is from patient to patient or patient to hcw has been shown. in a single center case series of 138 patients with covid-19 from wuhan, china, 57 (41.3%) of these patients were presumed to have been infected in the hospital. this population was made up of 17 (12.3%) patients who were already hospitalized for other reasons and 40 (29%) who were heath care workers [31] .in washington state, 76 residents of a ltcf were tested for sars-cov-2 with pcr after a staff member tested positive. of the 76 tested, 48 (63%) had positive results. of these 48 residents, 27 (56%) were asymptomatic on the day of testing. 24 of these asymptomatic individuals subsequently developed symptoms [32] . staff from one uk hospital reported that 50% of the emergency room workforce tested positive for coronavirus [33] . it italy, 10% (12,252) of covid-19 positive cases were hcws by april 5, 2020 [34] . a pediatric hospital in iran, reported that rate of covid-19 infection was higher among pediatric faculty members (8.3%, n=5) than the pediatric patients (0.1% admitted patients, n=3) or general population (0.02%) [35] .according to data from 315,531 covid-19 positive cases reported to cdc using a standardized form between february 12 -april 9, 49,370 cases included information on whether the patient was a hcw. among these, 19% (9,282) were identified as hcws. among the hcws who reported exposures, 55% (780) had contact with a covid-19 patient only in health care settings [36] . as only symptomatic cases were included, hcws with mild or asymptomatic infections might have been less likely to be tested or reported. these numbers, suggesting that 1 in every a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 10 5 covid-19 patients who reported work status was a hcw, highlight the possibility of frequent health care worker disease transmission. it also raises concern for an underrepresentation of infected health care workers with potential for transmission if they remain asymptomatic and continue to work.continued prioritization of sars-cov-2 transmission prevention is essential to reduce global disease burden until an effective vaccine and treatments are developed. current who guidelines for interrupting transmission include: reducing secondary infections among close contacts and health care workers by focusing on rapid identification, diagnosis and management of cases, and identification and follow up of contacts [1]. the us cdc recommends "source control" to control for possibility of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic transmission. this involves use of universal face covers whenever leaving one's house. all individuals entering health care facilities should be screened for symptoms and have face coverings regardless of symptoms [2] . evidence discussed earlier suggests that viral loads for sars-cov-2 are similar in asymptomatic and symptomatic patients, and that asymptomatic patients may continue to test positive for up to 21 days [5, 13] . current cdc guidelines prioritize symptomatic individuals for testing, and asymptomatic individuals are given least priority [2] . viral shedding in symptomatic patients can begin 2 to 3 days before appearance of symptoms, and peaks 0.7 days before symptom onset, after which it decreases [5] . this suggests that testing symptomatic individuals only will miss those infected individuals who have highest transmissibility, and thus universal testing irrespective of symptoms may be needed.a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 11 several population clusters where patients acquired sars-cov-2 from infected sources without symptoms have been described [28] [29] [30] . in several geographically limited sub-populations where almost all inhabitants were universally tested, asymptomatic carrier prevalence was >50% among those who tested positive ( 50-75% in vo'euganeo [16] , 60% in uss theodore roosevelt [20] , >90% in the boston homeless shelter study [21] ). thus, testing of only symptomatic cases may miss more than half of the infected individuals contributing to viral transmission in the community.lastly, studies from around the globe show that hcws make up a significant proportion of covid-19 cases, as shown in the us where hcw were 19% of cases who reported hcw status to cdc [36] and in china where hcw made up 29% of all cases in single-center case series [31] . since asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic hcws may have been underreported, the prevalence is likely even higher due to recurring encounters with infected individuals. hcws also frequently interact with vulnerable, at-risk populations and could transmit the disease unknowingly. thus, when resources are limited, testing should prioritize hcws and other subpopulations (ltcf staff, first responders etc.) who have frequent contact with infected individuals.much is still unknown regarding sars-cov-2; its virulence, transmissibility, and the immune system response it elicits. above evidence is based on highly heterogeneous studies, some of which have been reported in the news media or in pre-print journals awaiting peer-review. there are still gaps in the understanding of effective screening methods during the asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic phase [37] . limitations still exist in the effectiveness of current pcr testing as an infection identification tool [38] . antibody testing for sars-cov-2 is now being used in population-based studies to estimate prevalence of infection and studies report many seropositive patients had no history of symptoms [39] . antibody testing, however, is not a a c c e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t 12 reliable method to screen for asymptomatic carriers due to the temporal lag between viral exposure and development of antibodies, persistence of antibodies beyond infection clearance, and false negative rates with low titers [40] . therefore, in this review, we focus on pcr testing as a means to identify asymptomatic carriers while they are infectious in order to limit transmission through early identification.transmission prevention remains at the forefront of current public health strategies for the covid-19 pandemic with focus on community social distancing, use of ppe and testing symptomatic individuals to isolate positive patients. this review summarizes evidence that sars-cov-2 transmission is not only possible but likely highest during pre-symptomatic and asymptomatic phases. it also highlights the high prevalence of asymptomatic carriers in several universally tested sub-populations with some studies showing that more than 50% of positive individuals were asymptomatic at the time of testing. therefore, strategies to curb viral spread can no longer solely rely on 'symptom onset' to identify all infected individuals. an approach that focuses on universal source control and early identification of infected individuals regardless of symptoms is of utmost importance. universal testing of asymptomatic exposed individuals using pcr testing must be considered. further investigation is needed into transmission by asymptomatic carriers and rapid methods of identification of such carriers. additional epidemiologic research is also needed for the optimal approach in resource limited settings where universal testing cannot be undertaken. surveillance with interval testing of vulnerable populations can be considered, and targeted testing of those with high frequency contact with infected individuals (hcws, ltcf staff, first responders etc.) may be prioritized. m a n u s c r i p t 13 since the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) was reported in wuhan, china, the disease has spread from wuhan to throughout china as well as to other countries and has become a worldwide pandemic [1, 2] . the number of confirmed cases of covid-19 is updated daily and is expected to increase further in countries outside of china [3, 4] , some of which have seen continued community transmission [5] . lu'an city is in central china, next to hubei province, where the most confirmed covid-19 cases and sustained transmission have been reported. however, we were able to block transmission in lu'an, thus preventing further spread caused by the case imported from hubei and limiting the scale of the epidemic. we summarised the overall characteristics of the course of the entire epidemic in lu'an, with a hope that this valuable information will help cities with few imported cases to effectively contain the covid-19 epidemic.as shown in figure 1 , lu'an city is located in the central region of china, adjacent to hubei province. it is the largest city in anhui province, with an area of 15 451 square kilometers and about 5.88 million permanent residents. the distance between lu'an and wuhan, the capital of hubei province, is about 300 kilometers. transportation between the two cities is very convenient, taking about 1.5 h by high-speed train. there are at least 30 000 lu'anese working in hubei, and 20 000 people typically return to lu'an during the spring festival.we defined cases based on the diagnosis and treatment protocol of covid-19 issued by the chinese national health commission. a suspected case was defined as any person with any relevant epidemiological history plus any two clinical manifestations (fever and/or respiratory symptoms, imaging evidence of pneumonia and normal/decreased white-cell count or decreased lymphocyte count), or all three aforementioned clinical manifestations if there was no clear epidemiological history. a confirmed case was defined as a suspected case with respiratory or blood specimens that tested positive for new coronavirus nucleic acid by real-time fluorescent polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr). we defined an asymptomatic carrier as any person with a positive result for new coronavirus nucleic acid by fluorescent rt-pcr without any clinical symptoms. a cluster of covid-19 was defined as two or more confirmed cases or asymptomatic carriers that were found within 14 days in a small area (e.g. a family, work unit or building site) with a clear epidemiological link among those cases. community transmission was identified if one of the following situations was met: (1) the source of infection for two or more confirmed cases or asymptomatic carriers living in the same community or village was unclear, (2) the number of clusters (⩾3) in the same community or village was large, showing a continuous trend of transmission or (3) the scale of a cluster was large, and the cluster-associated cases were distributed in at least two households, communities or villages. we defined a sporadic case as having no epidemiological link to any known confirmed case or asymptomatic carrier that did not result in a cluster later. a first-generation case was defined as the index case for each cluster.all suspected cases, confirmed cases and asymptomatic carriers were documented by clinical doctors in the chinese information system for disease control and prevention (cisdcp), an internet-based, passive infectious disease surveillance system in china. since the beginning of the covid-19 outbreak, the cisdcp has directed local center for disease control and prevention (cdc) offices to launch comprehensive field investigations, conducted by cdc's field epidemiology investigation team (feit). the feits completed an epidemiological investigative report on each case that was discussed among team members. if some details of the report were unclear or more information was needed, an additional investigation was launched. all the data for this study were generated and collected from those field reports, including demographic and clinical information, cluster and community information, source of infection, epidemiological history, distribution through the community and characteristics of the cluster.between 12 january and 21 february 2020, a total of 69 (86.3%) confirmed covid-19 cases and 11 (13.7%) asymptomatic carriers were identified in lu'an. the source of infection for 75 cases (93.8%) was identified by field investigation and traceback. as shown in figure 2 , the epidemic lasted almost 40 days, and the onset of illness peaked from 27 january to 6 february. all hospitalised cases were discharged before 4 march, with no deaths reported. of the 80 cases, 52 (65.0%) were male and 28 (35.0%) were female. the median age was 40 years (range: 10 months to 77 years), with most cases (81.3%) aged between 20 and 60 years. of the 69 confirmed cases, 39 (56.5%) had a fever as the initial symptom, and pneumonia was present in 89.9% of the patients on admission. other symptoms such as cough (37.3%), wei qin et al.weakness (14.5%), chills (8.7%) and headache (7.2%) are summarised in table 1 .for all confirmed cases, we estimated the mean time to recovery was 21.8 days (95% ci: 20.3-23.3), and the mean duration of hospitalisation was 18.2 days (95% ci: 16.8-19.5). we conducted rt-pcr screening in close contacts from 8 february to 22 february. in total, 3596 respiratory or blood specimens were collected and tested, 15 (0.4%) of which were positive. we observed that four out of 15 initially asymptomatic cases developed fever and/or respiratory symptoms within 1-5 days after the screening.as shown in figure 2 and table 1 , of the 80 covid-19 cases reported in lu'an, 60 (75.0%) were cluster-associated cases, and 20 (25.0%) were sporadic cases. in total, we identified 16 clusters that were composed of 60 cases during the epidemic from 12 january to 21 february 2020. each cluster involved a minimum of two cases and a maximum of 13 cases. we regarded the index case for each cluster as a first-generation case. we found 17 first-generation cases and 43 secondary cases. among the 43 secondary cases, 10 asymptomatic carriers screened from close contacts were included, and all were lu'an residents. we found the time interval between two cases (husband and wife) in one cluster was only one day, so we considered both to be firstgeneration cases in that cluster. based on 32 pairs of cases with a clear infector and infectee relationship in 16 clusters, we estimated that the serial interval distribution had a mean of 6.5 days (95% ci: 4.8-8.2). the generations and exposure of the cases are shown in figure 2 . field investigation results showed that 20 cases returned to lu'an from wuhan before onset, indicating that they might have been infected in wuhan or related to wuhan. as shown in figure 2 , 17 cases were due to exposures outside of wuhan during the epidemic. all patients worked in wuhan but had returned to lu'an during the spring festival. we found that 13 cases had contact with patients from wuhan in the city where they had been working before symptom onset, suggesting they may have been infected by this exposure. the other four cases were secondary cases of infection originating in lu'an. among 20 wuhan-related cases, only 25.0% (5/20) of cases generated secondary cases, and 75.0% (15/20) of wuhan-related cases did not. among 43 secondary cases, 38 (88.4%) were residents with no travel or residence history outside lu'an. we found that secondary cases mainly occurred in household members, accounting for 69.8% (30/43). the largest cluster involving 13 cases was caused by an asymptomatic carrier who came back from wuhan on 19 january 2020. we found up to at least fifth-generation cases in this cluster, and the exposure mode of the secondary cases included those who lived together, attended parties or ate together and those who shared entertainment activities.in this study, we regarded communities where the sporadic cases (20 cases) and the index cases of each cluster (17 cases) were found as potential community transmission settings. we found 37 cases were distributed across 36 communities. inevitably, these so-called initial cases may infect more and more people in other communities without effective control measures. however, we observed that only 18.9% (7/37) of these cases seeded the subsequent community transmission. in addition, the number of communities with confirmed cases or asymptomatic carriers increased from 36 to 47 during the epidemic period in lu'an. the median for cluster-associated cases in each community was two cases (range: 1-7). of the seven initial cases that caused community transmission, only one was reported having resided in or having visited wuhan. he was an asymptomatic carrier, so he did not take intense quarantine and social distancing measures before he was identified. the other six initial cases that caused community transmission were characterised as exposure to cities outside of wuhan (five cases) or as a local resident with an unknown source of infection (one case). the results showed that community transmission was more prone to occur if the epidemiological history of the initial case was unclear.although covid-19 is highly contagious and has spread rapidly from wuhan throughout china [6] , we demonstrated the ability to block transmission and prevented further spread in lu'an, limiting the impact and the scale of the epidemic. as a city with 5.88 million permanent residents [7] , the crude covid-19 incidence of only 1.4 per 100 000 population during the epidemic period was seemingly acceptable. here, we summarised the characteristics of the course of the entire epidemic in lu'an to inform the response for regions with imported cases at the early stage of spread.mathematical models have estimated that the reproductive number of covid-19 was about 2.3 [8, 9] , which means 20 wuhan-related cases may have caused at least 46 secondary cases during one maximum incubation period in lu'an. however, we found only five (25.0%) wuhan-related, confirmed secondary cases at the beginning of the covid-19 epidemic in lu'an, suggesting the implementation of containment measures had worked effectively. before the first confirmed covid-19 case was reported in lu'an, the city had been facing the most urgent threat from covid-19 due to its proximity to hubei province and the mass movement of 20 000 people from hubei to lu'an during the spring festival. however, the infection status of those people was unpredictable. therefore, five specific measures were taken by the local government for people who came back from wuhan, which included distributing a letter of sympathy, a card for reporting one's condition, a card with covid-19 prevention information, a thermometer for temperature measurement and a bottle of cleaning product for daily disinfection. additionally, before and at the early stage of the epidemic, knowledge about disease prevention (such as selfisolation and social distancing) had been popularised to improve public health literacy and skills. our results showed that most community transmissions were not caused by wuhan-related cases, which indicated that a series of public health interventions were associated with improved control of the covid-19 outbreak in lu'an. most importantly, the non-pharmaceutical outbreak containment strategies in china, including public health interventions, appear to have been effective [10] [11] [12] . recent studies showed that the transmission window in the community was shortened when infectious individuals were isolated more quickly [13] . fortunately, at the early stages of the epidemic and even as it progressed, strict containment measures such as movement and traffic restrictions, self-isolation, centralised medical observation, social distancing and closure of public places were taken, which might have contributed to interrupting local covid-19 transmission in lu'an.we observed that only seven (18.9%) index cases resulted in community transmission during the epidemic in lu'an. interestingly, community transmission was not caused by those wuhan-related cases. in contrast, it was caused by cases of infections in cities outside of wuhan in residents with unknown sources of infection or by those who were asymptomatic carriers.since the epidemiological history of those cases was not obvious, the diagnosis of covid-19 and implementation of related control measures such as isolation were delayed. therefore, parties and other social activities continued as usual before the cases had been diagnosed, which may have increased the risk of community transmission. we also found that the largest cluster outbreak was caused by an asymptomatic carrier who came back from wuhan, which further supports the human-to-human transmission of covid-19 from asymptomatic carriers [14, 15] . at first, the patient had noted the risk of infection at wuhan, so he had a physical examination on 23 january (this third day back from wuhan) with normal findings. frustratingly, this favourable outcome might have promoted reduced patient vigilance in implementing infection control measures. had his infection been immediately identified and had he subsequently isolated, the number of covid-19 cases in lu'an might have been decreased by 15%. furthermore, we found that the proportion of asymptomatic infection was as high as 13.7%. assuming these events involving asymptomatic carriers are not isolated, perhaps more people will be infected in lu'an. therefore, we should be concerned about asymptomatic carriers, who represent an enormous challenge to containment in other countries responding to the covid-19 epidemic.several limitations should be considered in interpreting our findings. first, since cisdcp is a passive surveillance system, mild cases or asymptomatic carriers who did not seek medical help may not have been identified. as a result, the number of covid-19 cases may have been underestimated in our study. second, the source of infection in at least five cases was not investigated clearly, and whether these cases were caused by an asymptomatic carrier or community transmission should be seriously considered.our study showed that covid-19 community transmission in lu'an city was blocked effectively at the early stage, thus limiting the scale of the epidemic. our results highlight the fact that asymptomatic spread may represent a substantial challenge in response to covid-19. we believe it is beneficial to enhance the sensitivity of covid-19 diagnostic tests and to increase the public health authority's capacity for surveillance.peng an 1,2, *, ping song 1,3, *, yong wang 4 , bo liu 2to the editor, since the outbreak of the new coronavirus in wuhan in december 2019, it has now spread to more than 100 countries around the world. the cumulative number of confirmed cases is as high as 1.1 million, with 58,000 deaths, bringing huge challenges to the people world-wide. the chinese government has curbed the rising epidemic situation in china through strict prevention and disease control mechanisms (1) (2) (3) . at present, there are only 1,021 confirmed cases and only 300 critical cases (4) . hubei province, the epicenter of the epidemic, has been deregulated, whereas wuhan will be deregulated on april 8. however, while celebrating the victory over pneumonia, we should not ignore a very serious challenge. there may be many asymptomatic patients in china. as yet, there are 1,400 known asymptomatic patients in china (4). since many asymptomatic patients are unknown and therefore not isolated, it is very difficult to control the outbreak. therefore, in this study, we present 25 asymptomatic patients that we hope will give significant insights into covid-19. this work was approved by the ethics committee of xiangyang first people's hospital affiliated to hubei university of medicine [(2019) lsz (s109)] and informed consent was obtained from the patients for clinical research. of these 25 patients, 22 were family members who took care of confirmed patients with covid-19. the other three patients were staff involved in cleaning of medical waste and in transportation in the hospital. two out of the three cases were men. most of these cases were young patients with an average age of 42 years. an interesting finding was that most of the asymptomatic patients had blood type o. table 1 provides a detailed description of the patients' characteristics. table 2 shows the characteristics of chest computed tomography (ct) scans of asymptomatic patients. in total, 24 of these 25 patients had abnormal ct findings in the lung. approximately two-thirds of the patients had an involvement of a single lobe, and two-thirds had only a ground-glass density shadow. the least common ct finding was interlobular septal thickening ( figure 1 ). all the patients were isolated after diagnosis. in total, 16 of them recovered without any symptoms. however, nine patients developed mild cough and/or other symptoms. these nine patients received medication (chloroquine phosphate, 500 mg twice daily for seven days and abidol, 200 mg three times a day for no more than ten days) and their symptoms improved over time. control chest ct was performed in all patients 7-30 days after isolation. it was observed that there was improvement in lesions and their involvement had decreased in 24 patients. none of them had further radiological progress. in the patient who did not have any radiological findings at the time of diagnosis, no radiological findings were observed on the follow-up ct. according to the "pneumonia diagnosis and treatment program for new coronavirus infection (trial seventh edition)" issued by the national health commission, the diagnosis of covid-19 pneumonia is mainly based on the comprehensive judgment of epidemiological history, clinical manifestations, imaging examination, and detection of new coronavirus nucleic acid. although nucleic acid detection is fig. 1. a 59- year-old man presented to the hospital because of close contact with a patient with covid-19. chest ct at admission shows multiple ground-glass shadows with interlobular septal thickening (a). after 14 days of isolation, chest ct results were normal (b). the patient recovered and was then discharged from the hospital.ct: computed tomography the gold standard for the diagnosis of covid-19, false negative test results are not too low because of many factors such as test kit, sampling tube, specimen sampling, drugs administered to patients etc. (5) . chest ct is of great value in the diagnosis of covid-19 because of its simplicity and ease, especially in patients with or without clinical symptoms (3, 6, 7) . chest ct examination is particularly important because it is conducive to the early detection of asymptomatic infections, hence resulting in early isolation of the positive cases and reduction of infections in people in contact (8) .in this study, we observed that one-third of the asymptomatic patients with covid-19 developed symptoms at follow-up. these asymptomatic patients are usually young and have an excellent prognosis. more than 90% of these asymptomatic patients have radiological abnormal findings in diagnosis. these pulmonary lesions are mostly below the peripheral pleura of the lower lobes and are characterized by ground-glass density shadow. as a result, chest ct plays an important role in the early diagnosis of covid-19 and leads to the early isolation and treatment of asymptomatic patients. we believe that this process is vital in controlling the outbreak. ground-glass density shadow alone ground-glass density shadow + consolidation shadow ground-glass density shadow + stripe shadow ground-glass density shadow + interlobular septal thickening 16 (66.6) 5 (20.8) 2 (8.3) 1 (4.1)resolved lesions or reduction of involvement area progressive lesions 25 (100.0) 0 (0.0)asymptomatic patients with novel coronavirus disease (covid-19)coronaviruses are non-segmented positive-stranded rna viruses with a roughly 30 kb genome surrounded by a protein envelope. most coronaviruses cause diseases in their particular host species; 1 those that can infect humans through cross-species transmission have become an important threat to public health. two serious coronavirus disease outbreaks have happened in the past two decades: severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2003, 2 and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in 2012. 3 since december, 2019, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has been recognised as the causal factor in a series of severe cases of pneumonia originating in wuhan in hubei province, china. 4 this disease has been named coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) by who. sars-cov-2 has been shown to cause disease via a mechanism analogous to the sars coronavirus, with potential damage to vital organs such as lung, heart, liver, and kidney, and infection poses a considerable risk to patients by the high prevalence of pneumonia. 5 by march 1, 2020, sars-cov-2 had led to 80 981 confirmed cases of covid-19 in china, and 44 067 cases in 117 countries. 6 a cohort study of 44 672 chinese cases reported that 2·1% of patients were younger than 20 years, and 1·2% were asymptomatic. 7 pneumonia is the leading cause of mortality in children. 8 distinct immunological responses to viral infections can exist in children and result in severe damage to vital organs. 9 although short-to-medium-term outcomes for children who recovered from sars seemed good, the disease caused exercise impairment after more than 6 months. 10 a comprehensive literature search indicated that mers was rare in children (31 cases identified between 2012 and 2016), 11 because transmission depends heavily on animal exposure and direct contact in the household or health-care facilities. collectively, these two coronavirus diseases did not widely affect children because of the short-term epidemic of sars and the strict transmission route of mers. in a study of 15 children with covid-19 (aged 4-14 years), six patients had small nodular ground-glass opacities in the lungs. 12 at the time of the covid-19 outbreak, all schools were on the spring festival holiday, which might have prevented children from exposure to transmission sources. however, the school community is a place that can enhance rapid spread of the highly infectious sars-cov-2.ningbo and wenzhou are two cities in zhejiang province, located 900 km east of wuhan. on jan 17, 2020, the first covid-19 case was reported in wenzhou. up to march 1, 2020, 661 cases of covid-19 had been reported in ningbo and wenzhou, of which 36 were in children. we aimed to describe the epidemiological and clinical features of these paediatric patients, information that is urgently needed for prevention and treatment of covid-19 in children.we did an observational cohort study at three hospitals in zhejiang province, china (ningbo women and children's hospital, the third affiliated hospital of wenzhou medical university, and wenzhou central hospital of wenzhou). we included all paediatric patients (aged 0-16 years) with laboratory confirmed covid-19. the diagnosis of covid-19 was based on guidelines issued by the national health commission of the people's republic of china. 13 we screened all patients who had cough, fever, and radiographic presentation at the initial assessment, or who underwent epidemiological investigation because of a history of exposure to epidemic areas or close contact with an infected individual. we confirmed sars-cov-2 infection by rt-pcr of samples taken from upper nasopharyngeal swabs. epide miological investigation was focused on the route of transmission, and we assessed travel history, residence in epidemic areas, and close contact with patients with confirmed covid-19 within 14 days.this study was approved by the ethics committee of ningbo women and children's hospital and followed the declaration of helsinki. written consent was obtained from the guardians of the patients.sample collection, rt-pcr, and interpretation of results was done as previously described. 14 15 on admission, patients were assessed for clinical type, according to guidelines for scoring paediatric patients with covid-19 (recommendations issued by the paediatrics branch of the chinese medical association; panel 2). 16 the therapeutic principles included general support therapy; monitoring of lung, liver, kidney, and myocardial functions; active control over high fever; oxygen uptake if necessary; and antiviral treatment with interferon alfa and lopinavir-ritonavir. treatmentevidence before this study we searched pubmed from nov 1, 2019, to march 1, 2020, for studies published in any language using the terms "covid-19", "coronavirus disease 2019", "novel coronavirus", "pediatric patients", "children", "transmission", "clinical feature", and "epidemiological features". we found 13 studies about coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in children. these studies were related to treatment recommendations, ct features in 15 children, case reports, and covid-19 in infants. to our knowledge, no study has been done to comprehensively investigate a cohort of paediatric patients with covid-19 and their distinctive clinical features. published work about adult patients has shown that manifestations vary strikingly by individual. since children are different from adults in many aspects, such as immunological development, we aimed to investigate the clinical and epidemiological features of paediatric patients with covid-19.between jan 17 and march 1, 2020, 661 cases of covid-19 were reported in ningbo and wenzhou (zhejiang province, china). of these cases, 36 were in children. all children with covid-19 had been infected either by close contact with adults infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) or by exposure to the epidemic area. although fever, cough, and pneumonia were the most common signs, about half the children had mild disease with no presenting symptoms. fewer children with covid-19 had obvious symptoms compared with adult patients with covid-19 and paediatric patients with h1n1 influenza described in previous studies.by contrast with findings in adults, children with covid-19 had milder clinical manifestations; nearly half of paediatric patients were asymptomatic (ie, no fever and no cough). this asymptomatic condition is relevant if community-acquired transmission becomes the primary mode; identification of paediatric patients without presenting symptoms will become a great challenge. fortunately, the number of children infected with sars-cov-2 accounted for a small proportion of total people infected, and paediatric patients also had clear epidemiological information. devising measures to protect children from infection with sars-cov-2 is very important.outcomes were defined as improved, cured, and failed. improved outcome referred to the end of fever and improve ment in pneumonia (via ct scan) and improvement in upper respiratory manifestations. cured outcome referred to normal body temperature for 3 days, plus improved outcomes and two negative results on rt-pcr for sars-cov-2. failed outcome referred to disease progression to critical illness or death. patients who were discharged from hospital had to be quarantined for 2 weeks. we obtained data retrospectively from electronic medical records, and these were reviewed by two trained doctors (lh and yl). information retrieved included demographic data, medical history, exposure history, underlying comorbidities, symptoms, laboratory examina tions, chest ct scans, and treatment. laboratory examinations included routine testing, analysis of immuno logical responses, and measurement of bio markers for monitoring lung, liver, myocardial, and renal functions. we compared the prevalence of abnormal clinical indices of the paediatric patients with previously reported data for 175 adults with covid-19 in wenzhou, 17 we presented continuous variables as mean (sd) and categorical variables as number (%). we compared means of continuous variables between groups using independent group t tests when values were normally distributed; otherwise, we used the mann-whitney u test. we compared proportions for categorical variables bet ween groups using fisher's exact test, because of limited numbers. we judged a two-sided α less than 0·05 statistically significant. all data analyses were done with spss version 20.the funder had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. the corresponding author had full access to all data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication. generally, two types of abnormal radiographic presentations were seen: multiple opacities and patchy opacities. 19 (53%) paediatric patients had pulmonary ground-glass opacities on ct scan, suggesting pneu monia (figure 1). pneumonia plus either fever or cough was seen in 11 (30%) paediatric patients and eight (22%) had pneumonia as the only symptom. ten (28%) children showed no symptoms of pneumonia, five (14%) reported fever only, and two (5%) only had a dry cough. with moderate clinical type also had a positive pcr result for longer (p=0·0050) and spent more days in hospital (p=0·017) than did those with mild clinical type. table 2 shows findings of laboratory examinations related to immunological responses and cardiac, liver, and renal damage, according to age group. ten patients were aged 5 years or younger and 26 patients were 16 years or younger but older than 5 years. the older children had decreased lymphocytes (p=0·029), elevated procalcitonin (p=0·032), and decreased creatine kinase (p=0·032) compared with the younger patients.treatments and primary manifestations were traced to assess disease progression and outcome, and four case types were identified: asymptomatic, upper respiratory symptoms or fever only, pneumonia only, and both pneumonia and upper respiratory symptoms or fever (figure 2). on admission, all children were treated with interferon alfa by aerosolisation twice a day, 14 (39%) received lopinavir-ritonavir syrup twice a day, and six (17%) needed oxygen inhalation (table 1). in the 13 patients with fever, mean duration of fever was 3 (sd 2) days. improve ment in pneumonia was seen 4-10 days after treatment initiation. sars-cov-2 rt-pcr results became negative after a mean of 10 (sd 2) days of treatment, regardless of the various initial manifestations of patients (figure 2). the mean number of days in hospital was 14 (sd 3) days. by feb 28, 2020, all patients were cured, according to the criteria for cured outcome, and quarantined for a further 2 weeks. follow-up is continuing every week, with samples taken to measure serum igg and igm and sars-cov-2 in blood, faeces, and nasopharyngeal swabs.the comparison of paediatric patients with covid-19 with adult patients with covid-19 in the same city (table 3) showed that paediatric patients had a significantly lower prevalence of abnormal values of several variables indicating disease severity, such as fever (36% for children and 86% for adults), cough (19% and 62%), pneumonia (53% and 95%), elevated c-reactive protein (3% and 49%), and severe disease type (0% and 23%; p<0·0001 for all features). nevertheless, no differences were noted between children and adults in prevalence of leucopenia, lymphopenia, and elevated myocardial enzymes. when compared with children with sars, paediatric patients with covid-19 had much milder disease in terms of the prevalence of fever, cough, pneumonia, and severe case type. compared with children with h1n1 influenza, paediatric patients with covid-19 had fewer upper respiratory symptoms (eg, cough and pharyngeal congestion) but pneumonia was more frequent. notably, when the three groups of patients with coronavirus infections were compared with the paediatric patients with h1n1 influenza, the most striking difference was that patients with h1n1 influenza had a much higher prevalence of pharyngeal congestion and a lower prevalence of pneumonia. history of exposure to epidemic area 2 (20%) 10 (38%) ..family members with covid-19 10 (100%) 22 (85%) 0·60dry cough 1 (10%) 6 (23%) ..body temperature, °c 37·7 (0·3) 37·9 (0·4) 0·16fever (body temperature >37°c) 3 (30%) 10 (38%) ..pulmonary ground-glass opacities 6 (60%) 13 (50%) 0·70white blood cells ( unclear routes of transmission, were identified. this transmission feature means that identification of these paediatric patients was straightforward. however, previous work has shown that potential transmission routes of sars-cov-2 can be highly variable, 20 compared with mers coronavirus, which is less transmissible. 11 this situation could be altered if covid-19 persists for a long time in an area with increased risk for communityacquired infections. among the paediatric patients in our study, just under a third were asymptomatic. moreover, a fifth had pneumonia only and needed radiographic examination to be identified. symptoms seen on admission were variable, including cough and fever. all asymptomatic patients and children who did not present with pneu monia needed laboratory and radiographic examinations for diagnosis. the large proportion of children with asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection contrasts with paediatric patients with h1n1 influenza 19 and sars, 10 and adult patients with 17 in terms of presenting symptoms such as cough and pharyngeal congestion (table 3) , indicating sars-cov-2 has little effect on the upper respiratory tract of children. covid-19 is highly transmissible, similar to sars and h1n1 influenza, but can have a covert presentation in children.pneumonia is the leading infectious cause of death in children younger than 5 years. 21 although covid-19 in children seemed to be mild in term of presenting symptoms, the prevalence of pneumonia with covid-19 (53%) was higher than with h1n1 influenza (11%), but very similar to the prevalence with sars (65%). 18 a striking characteristic of covid-19 is that it affects several vital organs (eg, lungs and heart), as shown by increased amounts of myocardial enzymes, even though all children with covid-19 had the mild or moderate clinical type (table 3) . with high mortality in adult patients with covid-19 in epidemic areas 6 (eg, >4% mortality in wuhan), paediatric patients should continue to be monitored after discharge from hospital.compared with adults, children rarely have comorbidities such as hypertension, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. paediatric patients in our study had a lower prevalence of pneumonia and symptoms such as fever, cough, and dyspnoea compared with adult patients with covid-19 (table 3) . however, in our study, the prevalence of leucopenia, lymphopenia, and increased myocardial enzymes in children with covid-19 was similar to that in adults. notably, adults have a much higher prevalence of increased c-reactive protein than do children, suggesting a much milder immunological response in children and less immune damage. 22 except for antiviral drugs, no special treatments (eg, glucocorticoid therapy and invasive mechanical ventilation) were administered, and few children needed inhaled oxygen. taking all these findings into con sideration, the presentation of covid-19 in paediatric patients is much milder than in adults. it is noteworthy that few patients with coronavirus disease (ie, covid-19 and sars) have pharyngeal congestion or sore throat, which contrasts with patients with h1n1 influenza, despite the high prevalence of cough and fever in all patients. pharyngeal congestion is more like an upper respiratory symptom than is fever (which is a systemic symptom) and cough, which can also be induced by a lower respiratory infection.the findings of our study also showed that, although all paediatric cases were mild or moderate, the number of days spent in hospital and time needed for these patients to have negative pcr results was still considerable (table 1, figure 2) . the time to achieve a negative pcr result seemed to be unaffected by severity of disease in terms of symptoms and the presence of pneumonia and treatment choices. nevertheless, fever resolved faster in mild cases than in moderate cases (figure 2). considering that delayed clearance of viral rna in patients' stools is a potential risk for transmission, 23 particularly in patients in rehabilitation, the reliability of viral rna-negative criteria in asymptomatic patients, in the long run, needs further investigation.the major limitation of our study was the small sample size. however, most results were consistent within the study and, with several case reports on children with covid-19, we believe our conclusions are valid. since covid-19 is spreading in more countries and has become an urgent public health event, we present an early report on paediatric patients and expect additional data to improve our findings. in conclusion, our study shows that paediatric patients with covid-19 have a simple transmission mode, either by close contact with infected adults or by exposure to epidemic areas. although fever, dry cough, and mild pneumonia are common manifestations, nearly half of patients have neither obvious symptoms nor abnormal radiological findings. the proportion of asymptomatic cases indicates the difficulty in identifying paediatric patients without clear epidemiological information. this finding suggests a dangerous situation if communityacquired infections occur.hq and jw designed the study and did the literature search. lh and yl were responsible for disease diagnosis and treatment and data collection. dc collected and analysed data. qs analysed data and wrote the report.we declare no competing interests.originally reported in december 2019 as "pneumonia of unknown cause" in wuhan city, hubei province, china, covid-19 has spread rapidly and progressively to other regions of china as well as adjacent asian countries (2) . the international health regulations emergency committee of the world health organization officially declared the outbreak a "public health emergency of international concern" on january 30, 2020, and the disease was declared pandemic on march 11, 2020 .recently, the international cruise ship "diamond princess", carrying about 3,700 passengers, temporarily became the largest cluster of covid-19 cases outside china (3) . the cruise ship docked at yokohama bay, japan, on february 3, 2020, and after quarantine, passengers started to disembark on february 14, 2020. the ministry of health, labor, and welfare from japan reported that of the 1,723 national passengers, a cumulative number of 454 cases were recognized as pathogen carriers on real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr), including 189 asymptomatic cases who initially tested negative on february 17, 2020. during and after the quarantine period, passengers and crew members were referred to the japan self-defense forces central hospital by the government.the clinical course and spectrum of radiological patterns seen in covid-19 have gradually become apparent with recent publications; however, most publications have been focused on symptomatic cases occurring in china (9, 13, (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) . this prompted us to undertake the present study to retrospectively evaluate the computed tomographic (ct) findings in laboratory-confirmed cases of covid-19, conveniently sampled from the passengers and crew members of the "diamond princess" cruise ship in japan. we specifically compared the radiological findings of covid-19 infection between asymptomatic and symptomatic cases.this study was approved by the institutional ethics review board, and written informed consent was obtained from all cases. in this retrospective study, the medical records were reviewed for clinical and imaging findings of cases diagnosed with covid-19 from february 7th to 28th, 2020.passengers and crew members of the "diamond princess" cruise ship underwent rt-pcr during the quarantine period, and those who showed positive results were transferred to hospitals in japan. among all rt-pcr positive cases from the cruise ship, asymptomatic, mildly symptomatic, or familial clusters with infection among relatives were admitted to the japan self-defense forces central hospital (tokyo, japan) for further investigation. consecutive cases from this singlecenter cohort who had confirmed covid-19 infection and underwent chest ct were included.those who showed negative results on rt-pcr underwent repeat rt-pcr examination. on admission, all cases underwent chest ct irrespective of the rt-pcr results, based on the following grounds: (1) a previous report describing positive ct findings in cases with rt-pcr positive status without symptoms (4, 5), (2) previous reports of person-to-person transmission from asymptomatic cases (6) (7) (8) , and (3) the need to judge the precaution level necessary on admission to prevent nosocomial infection in the hospital. based on our previous experience, ct parameters were optimized to minimize patient exposure to radiation as detailed below.the following data were extracted from the medical records: demographic data, medical history, presence or absence of underlying comorbidities, symptoms, and signs. cases were classified as symptomatic if they had any signs or symptoms of pneumonia, including fever (>37.5℃), cough, dyspnea, and fatigue on admission. otherwise, cases were classified as asymptomatic.non-enhanced chest ct was performed using a 6-row multi-detector ct unit (somatom emotion 6 scanner; siemens, tokyo, japan) on admission with the following parameters: tube i n p r e s s voltage, 130 kvp; effective current 95 ma; collimation, 6×2 mm, helical pitch, 1.4. acquisition parameters were modified to minimize patient radiation exposure while maintaining sufficient resolution for chest ct evaluation. based on measurements of the dosimetry phantom (diameter 32 cm, length 35 cm) under automatic exposure control (care dose4d; siemens, tokyo, japan), the radiation exposure of each subject was estimated to be less than 2.8 msv. ct images were acquired during a single inspiratory breath-hold to minimize motion artifacts. a 2.0-mm gapless section was reconstructed before being reviewed on the picture archiving and communication system (pacs) monitor.image analysis was performed independently by three chest radiologists (a. f., m. j., and s.i. with 31, 19 and 6 years of experience, respectively), who were blinded to the clinical data, followed by joint consensus. the chest ct findings were recorded based on the fleischner society glossary of terms (9) (10) (11) (12) . parameters evaluated included: the presence or absence of ground-glass opacity (ggo), consolidation, intra-or interlobular septal thickening, linear opacities (including subpleural curvilinear opacities), and "reversed halo" sign. according to the proportion of each pattern in comparison with the totality of the lung opacification, cases were classified as ggo dominant or consolidation dominant, if the proportion of each one of the patterns was respectively greater than 50% of the total (13) . zonal distribution patterns of the lesion were visually classified as peripheral predominant (involving mainly the peripheral one-third of the lung), central or peribronchovascular predominant, or mixed (without predilection for subpleural or central region) (14) .the number of lobes involved and laterality of lung abnormalities were determined. a semi-quantitative scoring system was used to quantitatively estimate the pulmonary involvement of all these abnormalities on the basis of the percentage of the total lung involved per lobe (9, 15) .the extension of the lung opacification was visually scored from 0 to 5 as follows: score 1, 1-5% involvement; score 2, 6-25% involvement; score 3; 26-50% involvement; score 4, 51-75% i n p r e s s involvement; score 5, 76-100% involvement. total lung scores were calculated as the sum of individual lobe scores.the presence or absence of pleural effusion, thoracic lymphadenopathy (as defined by lymph node size of ≥ 10mm in short-axis dimension), airway abnormalities (i.e. airway wall thickening, bronchiectasis, and endoluminal secretions), and any underlying lung disease, including emphysema or fibrosis was also recorded.statistical analysis was done using the spss 11.0 statistical software program (dr. spss ii for windows, standard version 11.0; spss inc, chicago, il, usa). quantitative variables were expressed as mean±standard deviation (range), and the categorical variables were presented as the percentage of the total. the comparisons of categorical data were evaluated using pearson χ 2 test and non-paired quantitative data using the mann-whitney u test, according to the normal distribution assessed by the shapiro-wilk test. statistical significance level was set at p <0.05.demographics and clinical characteristics of the study population are summarized in the frequencies of the major chest ct findings of all cases are summarized in table 2 .abnormal lung opacities (ggo and/or consolidation) and airway abnormalities (bronchiectasis i n p r e s s and/or bronchial wall thickening) were present in 63 (61%) and 29 (28%) of the whole cohort, respectively. lung opacities on ct were found in 41 (54%) of 76 asymptomatic. twenty-two (79%) of 28 symptomatic cases had abnormal ct findings consistent with viral pneumonia.comparing the two groups, symptomatic cases showed lung parenchymal and airway abnormalities on ct more frequently than did asymptomatic cases [symptomatic vs asymptomatic, ct patterns were compared between asymptomatic and symptomatic cases who had positive lung parenchymal ct findings. the results are summarized in table 3 . of 41 asymptomatic cases with lung opacities on ct, 17 (41%) cases had pure ggo, 7 (17%) ggo with intra-and interlobular septal thickening without consolidation, and 17 (41%) ggo with consolidation. of 22 symptomatic cases who had lung opacities on ct, 5 (23%) cases had pure ggo, 4 (18%) ggo with intra-and interlobular septal thickening and without consolidation and 13 (59%) ggo with consolidation. in terms of the predominance of the lung parenchymal findings, asymptomatic cases showed ggo predominance over consolidation, while symptomatic cases were more likely to show consolidation predominance over ggo [asymptomatic vs symptomatic cases; ggo predominance: 34 (83%) vs 13 (59%); consolidation predominance: 7 (17%) vs 9 (41%), p=0.038]. in terms of the number of lesions, asymptomatic cases had a single lesion in 9 (22%) and more than 2 in 32 (78%) cases, compared to symptomatic cases, who had a single lesion in 4 (18%) and more than 2 in 18 (82%) cases. in terms of the axial distribution, more than half of the cases in each group showed a peripheral dominant distribution [24 (59%) asymptomatic vs 11 (50%) symptomatic cases]. on the other hand, only asymptomatic cases [4 i n p r e s s or multiple lobes. symptomatic cases were more likely to show a mixed distribution (coexisting peripheral and central distribution) than asymptomatic cases [11 (50%) symptomatic vs 13 (32%) asymptomatic cases]. in both groups, the lower lobes were the most frequently affected; left and right lower lobe involvement were present in 17 (77%) and 17 (77%) of symptomatic cases and in 29 (71%) and 29 (71%) of asymptomatic cases. in addition, more than 2 lung lobes were affected in more than 75% of cases and bilateral lungs in more than 80% in both clinical groups. the ct severity score was significantly higher in symptomatic cases than asymptomatic cases in the right and left lower lobes and overall lung [symptomatic vs asymptomatic cases; right lower lobe: 2 ± 1 (0-4) vs 1 ± 1 (0-4), p=0.048; left lower lobe: 2 ± 1 (0-4) vs 1 ± 1 (0-3), p=0.019; total lung score: 7 ± 5 (1-17) vs 4 ± 2 (1-11), p=0.025].airway abnormalities included dilated bronchi in association with ggo or consolidation (i.e., as "air bronchograms"), without airway secretions. cavitation, thoracic lymphadenopathy and pleural effusion were not observed.in this study, we investigated the chest ct findings in laboratory-confirmed covid-19 cases in an environmentally homogenous cohort of cruise ship passengers and crew members, comparing the ct characteristics of asymptomatic and symptomatic cases. although lung parenchymal and airway abnormalities were more frequent in symptomatically than asymptomatic cases, noticeably, we found lung parenchymal changes on ct in up to 54% of the asymptomatic cases. in those who showed ct abnormalities, asymptomatic cases showed significantly predominance of ggo, while consolidation was predominant in symptomatic cases. similarly, the ct severity score was significantly higher in symptomatic cases than asymptomatic cases in both lower lobes and on total lung assessment.although various ct findings were observed in cases with covid-19, we found several common characteristic ct patterns, such as (1) single or multiple half-round or rectangular-shaped ggo in subpleural area with or without intra-or interlobular septal i n p r e s s thickening (figure 1) , (2) single or multiple rounded ggo in both peribronchial and subpleural areas (figure 2) , (3) bilateral diffuse or multiple patchy ggo with or without intra-or interlobular septal thickening or consolidation in both peribronchial and subpleural areas, with a lower lobe predilection (figure3) . dilated bronchi were frequently associated with all of these ct patterns.these observations are mostly consistent with those of previous studies from china (9, 13, 15-19) .all of the above-described characteristic ct patterns were found in both groups. however, differences were observed in the extension of the lung involvement as calculated by the mean ct severity score. the maximum total lung ct score was 11 in asymptomatic cases and 17 in symptomatic cases. in addition, the predominance of opacities also differed between the two groups; ggo was predominant in asymptomatic cases, whereas consolidation was predominant in symptomatic cases.some studies have reported clinical-radiological dissociation in covid-19 (20) . for instance, several previous reports described asymptomatic cases who had evidence of lung i n p r e s s cases in this cohort is a conundrum that still needs further investigation.rt-pcr is currently considered as the gold standard diagnostic method for covid-19.however, the sensitivity of this method in throat swabs in covid-19 is around 59% (23). to date,in several studies the sensitivity of chest ct has exceeded that of rt-pcr, and the authors emphasized the potential of chest ct as the primary screening tool for covid-19 (24, 25) . the sensitivity of chest ct is unquestionable and encouraged for cases where there is need to determine the extension of disease and alternative diagnoses. the results of this study, however, do not directly allow the conclusion that all persons with positive rt-pcr findings should undergo chest ct for screening purposes. before arriving at any such conclusion, the bioactivity and clinical impact of asymptomatic ct findings in covid-19 infection will have to be investigated.one important issue is the need to distinguish the natural history of symptomatic and asymptomatic covid-19 cases presenting with ct abnormalities, including the potential for infectivity and progression to acute severe respiratory distress. more appropriate use of ct will be possible when this information becomes available.this study has various limitations. first, it included only adult cases. second, because it included only passengers and crew members of a cruise ship, we acknowledge a selection bias.however, this environmentally homogeneous cohort enabled an investigation that eliminates other potential geographic confounders.in conclusion, this study documented a high incidence of subclinical ct changes in covid-19. asymptomatic cases showed more ggo over consolidation and milder extension of lung parenchymal opacities. further studies still are warranted to uncover the underlying mechanism responsible for the clinical-radiological dissociation seen in some of asymptomatic covid-19 cases, as well as to determine the impact of these findings on clinical decision-making.i n p r e s s in south korea, the largest cluster of cases related to the religious group shincheonji was recognized in daegu city from 12 february 2020 [1] . korean epidemiological teams meticulously sought out the close contacts of this religious group and performed extensive laboratory tests for sars-cov-2 in all the identified close contacts. as a result, 3081 cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) were confirmed in daegu city alone as of 2 march 2020, approximately 70% of whom were related to this religious group [1] .as a result of the sharp increase in the number of patients with covid-19 in daegu, the korean government decided to admit those without moderate-to-severe illness or risk factors for poor prognosis to a non-hospital facility for isolation and monitoring. this policy provided a unique chance to assess the prevalence of asymptomatic individuals in this outbreak and to characterize the symptoms of people with mild covid-19.as of 2 march 2020, a total of 19 636 diagnostic tests for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) had been performed in the daegu area [2] . of these tests, 12 947 (66%) were performed in the general population in daegu city and 6689 (34%) were performed in those related to the shincheonji church; of the latter, about 60% had positive results [2] . as such, a total of 3081 individuals were diagnosed in the daegu area, almost 70% (2136/ 3081) of whom were related to the religious group [2]. these 3081 individuals with confirmed covid-19 were isolated in hospitals and community isolation facilities, depending on their risk assessment. among 17 community isolation facilities, our facility housed 260 individuals. the korean government and daegu local government allocated individuals with mild covid-19 to dedicated isolation facilities and the remaining individuals with moderate-tosevere covid-19 (early warning score for sars-cov-2 infection patients 4) or those with high risk to hospitals [3] . the high-risk factors for covid-19 were as follows: (a) 65 years, (b) chronic underlying diseases (e.g. diabetes mellitus, chronic renal failure, chronic liver disease, chronic lung disease, chronic cardiovascular disease), (c) haematological malignancy, and (d) those receiving chemotherapy or immunosuppressive agents. regardless of their symptoms, all confirmed patients were isolated in hospitals or isolation facilities according to their risk assessment.we conducted a questionnaire survey from 12 to 16 march 2020 in a community facility designated for the isolation of individuals with covid-19; this facility is located approximately 50 miles from daegu city. diagnosis of covid-19 was based on the results of realtime rt-pcr (allplex 2019-ncov assay kit; seegene, seoul, south korea), for sars-cov-2 e gene, rdrp gene and n gene using nasopharyngeal swab samples as authorized by the korean government. written informed consent was obtained from each participant who agreed to participate in this questionnaire study. missing data were acquired with telephone interviews by trained doctors. the study protocol was approved by the institutional review board of asan medical centre (seoul, korea).of the 260 pcr-confirmed individuals with covid-19, 213 (81.9%) participated in this study. of them, 41 (19.2%, 95% ci 14.5%e 25.1%) had remained asymptomatic until admission.in the remaining 172 individuals, the median duration from the first symptom to laboratory confirmation was 14 days (interquartile range 8e17), and the median duration from laboratory confirmation to admission was 3 days (interquartile range 3e6). cough (40.1%; 69/172) was the most common symptom, followed by sputum (39.5%; 68/172), hyposmia (39.5%; 68/172), and nasal congestion (34.3%; 59/172). of the 68 individuals with hyposmia, 61 (90%) had accompanying symptoms such as hypogeusia, nasal congestion or rhinorrhea. fever (>37.5 c) was noted in only 20 (11.6%) individuals. the detailed clinical characteristics of the symptomatic patients are shown in table 1 (and see supplementary material, fig. s1 ), and table s1 (see supplementary material) shows the distribution of the symptoms according to different time-points (i.e. symptom onset, at diagnosis, at admission).the presence of asymptomatic cases of covid-19 was noted in early reports on the outbreak [4, 5] and a large study on 72 314 chinese patients reported that 1% were asymptomatic [6] . however, the majority of those cases were included from hubei province, where the sudden shortage of health-care resources may have resulted in selection bias towards the exclusion of those with mild symptoms. therefore, the actual prevalence of asymptomatic cases of covid-19 could not be determined. we found that as much as one-fifth of individuals with covid-19 had remained asymptomatic from potential exposure to laboratory confirmation and facility admission. hence, our data fill an important gap concerning the prevalence of asymptomatic individuals, who constitute the base of the disease pyramid [7] . previous studies reported that viable sars-cov-2 was isolated from asymptomatic individuals and that certain groups of infections had been transmitted from asymptomatic patients [8e10]; therefore, the notably high proportion of asymptomatic individuals in our data further supports the value of social distancing for the control of the current pandemic until a vaccine becomes available.separating individuals with suspected covid-19 from other patients in outpatient clinics is critical for preventing a potential outbreak in the health-care setting. therefore, it is important to delineate the epidemiological risk factors and clinical features of covid-19. furthermore, the pandemic spread of sars-cov-2 may weaken the role of epidemiological risk factors and clinical features of covid-19 will become more important for screening. however, there are limited data on the symptoms of individuals with mild covid-19. a recent chinese study on 13 individuals with mild covid-19 reported that nasal congestion (62%) was the most common symptom [11] . in our 172 individuals, the most common symptom was cough, followed by hyposmia and sputum, while fever (>37.5 c) was only observed in 11.6%.interestingly, hyposmia was quite frequent among individuals with mild covid-19. although hyposmia is caused by postviral olfactory dysfunction [12] , further studies are needed for the specificity of this symptom in covid-19. in addition, pathophysiological studies are needed to determine whether this unique symptom is associated with nasal congestion, dysfunction of the olfactory nerve due to sars-cov-2, or other co-morbidities.this study has several limitations. first, the study population shows a dominance of young age and female sex, which is largely due to the fact that most individuals were associated with a single religious group. therefore, the results of this study may not be directly applicable to older populations or to males. nevertheless, this is the largest study to date on the prevalence of asymptomatic patients and the detailed clinical symptoms in individuals with mild covid-19. second, the study design has inherent recall bias. however, the study participants were well educated and cooperative, so this bias may not have substantially affected our main findings. third, we did not compare the symptoms of individuals with covid-19 from those of patients with other respiratory viral infections, so further studies are needed on whether some dominant symptoms, such as hyposmia, are helpful to differentiate individuals with covid-19 from those with other respiratory viral illnesses. fourth, we did not perform other diagnostic tests to rule out the presence of co-infections. as a result, some of the symptoms presented in the study population might be associated with co-infections. a recent study reported that 20% of individuals with covid-19 in northern california had one or more respiratory pathogens, including rhinovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, human coronavirus and influenza virus [13] . therefore, our findings on the symptoms of individuals with mild covid-19 should be considered with caution. finally, some selection bias may have been introduced in this survey-based study considering that approximately 18% of patients at the isolation facility did not participate in the study.in conclusion, approximately one-fifth of individuals with mild covid-19 were asymptomatic at admission and the most common symptoms of mild covid-19 were cough with or without hyposmia and sputum. further research on the contribution of asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic individuals to the community spread of covid-19 is essential for effective control of the pandemic spread of sars-cov-2.this study was supported by a grant from the korea health technology r&d project through the korea health industry development institute (khidi), funded by the ministry of health & welfare, republic of korea (grant no. hi16c0272).there are no potential conflicts of interest for any authors.gk, shr and shk contributed to the analysis and interpretation of data; gk, mjk, shr, jl, sb and jj collected and assembled the data; gk, mjk, shr, shk were responsible for the concept and design of the study; and shk drafted the article and obtained the funding. gk, mjk, shr, jl, sb, jj and shk were responsible for the critical revision for important intellectual content and for the final approval of the article.this paper is an effort to model the epidemiology and stop the spread of the novel coronavirus, which is causing huge detrimental effects all around the world. the ultimate goal is to slow the spread of the virus, using evidence based public health interventions, which includes early case recognition, isolation and contact tracing. this disease has grown from being a small cluster of pneumonia in china to a global pandemic causing huge loss of life. therefore, there is a huge need for modeling the disease, and simulation of various control strategy implementation is necessary to make well informed decisions.incidence is the number of new cases of coronavirus in a particular population in a period of time. in general, incidence is reported for each country's population. the table below gives the incidence of all the country that has been affected majorly. 27 april 2020 [1] the incidence per 1million calculated in the table gives a better picture than the number of cases, on how the country is affected. for example, by comparing india and singapore, india has twice the number of cases than in singapore, and it does not mean that india more is affected. the incidence per 1 million for singapore is more than 100 time to that of india's. it is because the population of singapore is far less than india.the death per 1million data also gives the information on how each country is handling the infected cases.among all the countries, spain is in a very bad state with a mortality rate of 11.16%. the united states of america has the most number of cases (1.2 million as of may 8th, 2020) and has more than 75,000 deaths.the coronavirus spreads mainly from person to person, through respiratory droplets from an infected person (via. coughs or sneezes). these droplets can go into people who are nearby. it spreads, when people are near to each other. the droplets do not hang around in the air and can not go more than six feet from the source (about two meters).covid-19 spreads sustainably in a community in many affected regions. people are getting infected with the virus, mostly without knowing where they are infected.people also get infected when they come in contact with an infected surface and then touches their eyes or face.symptoms for covid-19 is not constant, and ranges from mild disease to severe illness. symptoms usually appears 14 days after being exposed to the virus. major indications of covid-19 are cough, shortness of breath or difficulty breathing, fever, chills, muscle pain, sore throat, new loss of taste or smell [2] .medical attention should be sought immediately if the following symptoms are noticed: trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion or inability to arouse, bluish lips or face [2] .with the restricted availability of testing kits, not everyone is eligible for being tested. if it only causes mild illness, people are asked to recover at their home itself. decisions on who to be tested are made by health departments and healthcare providers.by the end of april, a viral test has been authorized by the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) that lets people to collect a respiratory sample (a swab inside of the nose) at home, and send it to a laboratory for analysis. in most areas the collection kits were made available via healthcare workers [3] . .things to do to implement social distancing: avoid contact with people who could be at risk, avoid public places, gathering and crowds, avoid clinics and hospitals, and avoid restaurants.it is every individuals responsibility to prevent this virus from spreading, and social distancing is a way collective effort in stopping the spread of this disease. in case of 3 emergencies in which we can not avoid going to different places, one should maintain at least a distance of 6 feet from one another.contact tracing is carried out by a public health staff. they get data from the patients with coronavirus to help everyone they have had contacted during the previous weeks while they were infectious. the identity of the patient is not revealed for their privacy. traced individuals are given information on the risk of being infected, and are asked to separate themselves from other susceptible people, and check for symptoms and illness. they are asked to monitor their body temperature twice a day, and if they have symptoms, they should isolate themselves and report to a health care worker.hospitalization or isolation is the process of separating the sick people from the non sick ones. with a steady rise in new cases of coronavirus, hospitals are working at maximum capacity, and infected individuals are admitted only when they show severe symptoms or have extreme illness. temporary medical clinics can be setup in areas where most infections occur can reduce the spread of the disease.quarantines are used by governments to prevent the spread of the virus. it is especially for individuals have no symptoms but were exposed to the sickness. it is important to keep them separated from susceptible people so that they don't infect others without their knowledge. quarantines are used during an outbreak, or an epidemic, or during a pandemic.it has been debated whether masks are effective or not. the truth is that it works. the effect of face masks is illustrated very clearly in the paper, 'to mask or not to mask' [14] .both hands should be cleaned before wearing the mask. there should be no gaps between ones face and the mask. never touch the mask, and discard them in a closed bin quickly, once they are damp. masks are effective only if the hands are washed properly and the used masks are disposed properly.individuals with medical conditions like heart/lung disease or diabetes are at a greater risk for developing serious illness due to the disease [4] . people who are most affected are ones with the following conditions: asthma, immunocompromised conditions, severe obesity, chronic kidney disease undergoing dialysis, and liver diseases.the kermack-mckendrick model [5] is a sir epidemiological model. it explains the rapid rise and fall in the number of infected cases reported in an epidemic. the model assumes that there is no change in the total population size (i.e., no vital dynamics and deaths due to disease), and that there is no incubation period.the model has three nonlinear odes:where, s is the number of susceptible people, i is the number of infected people, r is the number of recovered people who gained immunity, β is the infection rate, and γ is the recovery rate.the reproduction number of this model is was called as epidemiological threshold.to control the disease outbreak, r 0 should be less than 1. this basic model structure first published in 1927 have been developed into many complex epidemiological models over a century, and currently there are thousands of published models. this paper also uses the same type of modeling methodology.as there are many uncertainties in hoe the corona-virus is spreading, there is is a huge need for modeling the spread of the disease. many papers are being published once the pandemic began. the most predominant modeling papers are discussed here.a mathematical model for simulating the transmission of wuhan novel coronavirus [6] is a different paper than other modeling papers being published. they have developed a bats-hosts-reservoir-people transmission network model. they have simplified their model as reservoir-people transmission network. it is a brief paper with the modeling framework, the nonlinear equations and the first generation method derivation for the reproduction number.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.a mathematical model for the novel coronavirus epidemic in wuhan, china [7] . the model is a basic seir compartments with a v compartment(concentration of the coronavirus in the environmental reservoir) at the end. the model also includes the vital dynamics of the population. they got a high reproduction number estimate of 4.25. the inclusion of the vital dynamics in the model seems to have increased the ability of the disease to spread more. it is also noticeable that they have modeled three different transmission rate for every class that can be infectious. the paper is concentrated towards wuhan and therefore the dynamics vary a little from other modeling papers.report 9: impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare demand. [16] this report is a very important, because many policies in the uk and other countries are made based on it. it discusses about various non-pharmaceutical interventions that are aimed at reducing contact rates in the population, and the conclusion was that no intervention can impact the contact rate if they are implemented separately. all interventions should be implemented to achieve a synergistic effect.forecasting the impact of the first wave of the covid-19 1 pandemic on hospital demand and deaths for the usa and 2 european economic area countries. [8] . this paper used data identification tools and statistical modeling to model the disease. they have predicted a huge demand for hospital and icu bed-days, and their estimation of the number of deaths of around 1,584,737 in usa from the first wave of seems unlikely. this gives us an idea on how compartmental modeling is better than statistical data analysis for epidemiological models.flattening the curve before it flattens us: hospital critical care capacity limits and mortality from novel coronavirus (sars-cov2) cases in us counties. [9] . this paper concentrates on the relation between available critical care and deaths that occurs when critical care bed limits are exceeded. they have devised for 4 critical care surge response scenarios. their concern is that the mortality data does not include normal patients with injury, who could not get treated due to suddenly overloaded healthcare system.to mask or not to mask: modeling the potential for face maskuse by the general public to curtail the covid-19 pandemic. [14] . this paper considers the importance of face mask in the prevention of the disease. two models, one with no mask use and the other with mask use and control strategies are created. simulations are done in both these models and the results are compared. it talks about inward efficiency (prevention from catching the disease) and outward efficiency (preventing the transmission of the disease). the model for the exponentially decaying infectious contact rate in this work is inspired from this paper. the model is parameterized for the data for new york and washington. they found that the usage of masks have a huge impact than what we already believed it to have.a case study of the covid-19 coronavirus. mathematical modeling of epidemic diseases. [10] . this paper deals with simple models, but demonstrated the effects of various control strategies. it begins with an explanation of the basic sir model,cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . followed by compartmental seir models for the coronavirus. the paper also compares two scenarios where in one, the recovered people gets lifetime immunity, and the other has re-susceptible factor in the model. other simulations such as short lock down, and healthcare system saturation is also presented.refined compartmental models, asymptomatic carriers and covid-19. [11] . this paper talks about the various possible compartmental models which can be used as the base model for the novel coronavirus. a discussion on these models (modified seir, splitting the exposed group into different compartments, and including asymptomatic population), explains them well. this paper is highly illustrative with many simulations.construction of compartmental models for covid-19 with quarantine, lockdown and vaccine interventions [12] . many epidemiological models are formed and the dynamics are analysed. they also explore the transmissibility of the viral infection during different control strategies like quarantine, lock-downs, and vaccinations. the dynamics of coronavirus is simulated for the data in ghana. it is interesting to see that the basic reproduction number is less than 1, and they expect that the disease will be gone in two to four months. the graphical representation of the model framework used in this work is inspired from this paper.modeling the spread of covid-19 with comsol multiphysics [13] . comsol multiphysics is a virtual dynamical simulation software. they have used the software to simulate the compartmental models with an aim to flatten the curve. they have presented a basic seir model an a seir model with many sub-compartments of exposed and infectious class. it is amazing how a physics simulation software can be used to simulate dynamics of epidemiology.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. a deterministic model of the coronavirus 2019 disease transmission, is used to estimate the parameters in the united states of america. this model includes factors which reduces the transmission of the disease, such as social distancing, hospitalization and contact tracing of asymptotic individuals. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. .the modeling framework consists of susceptible, exposed, pre-symptomatic infectious, symptomatic infectious, asymptomatic infectious, hospitalized-non icu, hospitalized icu,and recovered, with the classes respectively denoted s(t), e(t), p(t), i(t), a(t), h(t), c(t), and r(t). in addition, a cumulative death class is also included and is denoted as d(t).after the incubation period in exposed class, they become infectious, but they are pre-symptomatic for a period; a part of them eventually become symptomatic and the others asymptomatic. a fraction of detected infectious individuals (by symptoms for i(t) class; by contact tracing for a(t) class) are moved to the hospitalized class (non-icu), h(t), where they are isolated from general public. some fraction of hospitalized patients ultimately require critical care and they are moved to hospitalized icu class. some fraction recover and some die in the classes i(t), a(t), h(t) and c(t). based on these assumptions, the deterministic model for the transmission dynamics of covid-19 is given by the framework in figure 1 , and the corresponding deterministic system of nonlinear differential equations is given below.where, n is the total population. n = s + e + p + i + a + h + c + rall the parameters in the model is defined and a default value is estimated. they are found by searching research literature, official reports or by fitting the model to the available data. β(t) is the time dependent infectious contact rate, which has a exponentially decreasing structure [14] . the decrease is due to the prevention measures put into action by the 9 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . government and good will of the people.we assume that β decrease right from the beginning (without delay) because our initial condition β 0 for the model is set to be on 01-march-2020, during when they started to implement preventive measures. it decreases to β min as the time passes at the rate of r. β min required to get to disease free equilibrium is calculated from conditions for the basic reproduction number. the β min and r are fixed during the model fitting process. η the relative infectiousness of asymptomatic carriers compared to symptomatic carriers, and it is assumed that symptomatic individuals are 50% more infectious than the asymptomatic people [16] . the value is set to 0.44.σ is the transition from exposed to pre-symptomatic class, where 1 σ is the incubation period (average 5 days [17] for coronavirus). so, the value of σ is 1 5 . σ p is the transition from pre-symptomatic to infectious class (i or a)). calculated similar to σ. the period of stay in this class is an average 3 days. "this virus continues to spread across the country, because we have asymptomatic transmitters and we have individuals who are transmitting 48 hours before they become symptomatic" -cdc director [19] .f is the fraction of pre-symptomatic individuals who eventually becomes asymptomatic. there is a lot of uncertainty in this fraction [20] . the average value is set to be 0.5. φ i h is the rate of hospitalization of symptomatic people. the median interval from symptom onset to admission was 7 days (interquartile range [iqr] = 3-9 days) [21] . the percentage of hospitalization is 20 [22] . so, φ i h = (1/7)*0.2 = 0.028. σ a is the rate at which asymptotic individuals are detected using contact tracing and hospitalized. it is the product of the percentage of contact-tracing execution and the rate of asymptomatic hospitalization. contact tracing reduced the time taken to identify and isolate patients after onset of symptoms to 2.7 days [23] . ct ia control variable (varied in the simulations)default ct is taken to be 0.1. therefore, default σ a is (1/2.7)*0.1 = 0.037.φ h c is the rate of icu admission from hospitalization. in a study by chen wang et al. [25] , of the patients hospitalised 32% required admission to an intensive care unit. in another report from imperial college [24] , they calculate bed demand numbers assuming a total duration of stay in hospital of 8 days if critical care is not required and 16 days (with 10 days in icu) if critical care is required. with 30% of hospitalised cases requiring criticalcare, they obtained an overall mean duration of hospitalisation of 10.4days, slightly shorter than the duration from hospital admission to discharge observed for covid-19 cases internationally. therefore, if someone needs critical care, on an average they stay in the hospital for 6 days before moving to icu. so, φ h c = (1/6)*0.32 = 0.0533. also γ h , the recovery rate of hospitalized people for whom critical care is not required is 1/8; and γ c , the recovery rate of hospitalized in need of icu is 1/9 [26] .both γ i , the recovery rate of symptomatic individuals and γ a , the recovery rate of asymptomatic individuals, is on an average found to be 1/7. it is because, on an average the people in these classes recover in 7 days. δ i , the death rate of symptomatic individuals. it is found that the average duration between the onset of symptoms and death is 22 days [26] . the mortality rate among the cases found is 3.4% [28] . so, δ i = (1/22)*0.034 = 0.00154. δ a is the death rate of the asymptomatic population, is assumed to be half of δ i [29] so, δ a = δ i / 2 = 0.00077.δ h (death rate, hospitalized -non icu) it is found that the average duration between hospitalization and death is 8 days [26] . with the mortality rate of 3.4%, δ h = (1/8)*0.034 = 0.00425. δ c (death rate, hospitalized -icu) it is found that the average duration between icu admission and death is 7 days [26] . with the mortality rate of 3.4%, δ h = (1/7)*0.034 = 0.00485.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098418 doi: medrxiv preprintthe state-level time series for both cumulative mortality data and cumulative case data, compiled by center for systems science and engineering at johns hopkins university [31] , from march 1, 2020, through april 27, 2020, is used to calibrate the model initial conditions i(0) and infective contact rate, β 0 , when β(t) is taken as an explicit function of time. other parameters are fixed at default values in table 2 . parameter fitting was performed using nonlinear least squares algorithm im-plemented using the lsqcurvefit function in matlab.parameters calibrated for the model fitted for the mortality data (with β m set to be 0.1):the initial condition i(0) is fitted to be 11222.24501, that is 11223 cases should have been actually reported on march 1, 2020, but this condition seems to be high compared to the actual case data on that day.the infective contact rate, β 0 is fitted to be 1.16562. even though the model fits the death data nicely, the the number of cases through the time simulated is underestimated, and the initial case number i(0) is overestimated. therefore, the case data should also be used while fitting the model.parameters calibrated for the model fitted for mortality and case data (with β m set to be 0.1) are the initial condition and β 0 .the initial condition i(0) is fitted to be 5848.92619, that is 5849 cases should have been actually reported on march 1, 2020, and this condition could have been the actual case data (combining the reported and unreported cases) on that day.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. from the fitting the data for the united states, the best fit parameters are i(0) = 5849; and the initial infective contact rate β 0 of the time varying β(t), with fixed r = 0.04day −1 and β m = 0.1day −1 , is found to be 1.33877day −1 .next generation matrices is the best way to find the basic reproduction number, beacuse it is good to follow the infection as seen in van den driessche p., watmough j. [30] , f v −1 is the next generation matrix for the system at disease free equilibrium.where,the system is global asymptotic stable (gas) iff all eigenvalues of the next generation matrix have norm less than one, that is the spectral radius of the next generation matrix 13 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. .(ρ(f v −1 )) is less than one. in epidemiological models this spectral radius is called as the basic reproduction number of the model (r 0 ).therefore, in order to get the corona-virus to disease free equilibrium, the r 0 given above should be less than 1.currently, the β value is found to be approximately 0.5. therefore, by using all the default values given in table 2 , r 0 is found to be 2.71914.in the r 0 equation, after taking β out as a common factor, it has three parts summed up together, which needs to be decreased in order to bring r 0 to be less than one.the first part ( η σ p ) is a constant term since both η and σ p is fixed, and can not be controlled. using the default values this fraction is calculated to be 1.32.φ i h +γ i +δ i ), with default values for the uncontrollable variables f ,γ i ,and δ i , the only controllable variable is φ i h (the rate of hospitalization of the symptomatic people). to reduce the value of this whole fraction, φ i h needs to be increased, by reducing the number of days it takes to admit individuals after symptom onset. this can be implemented by increasing the number of temporary hospitalization facilities in places where the cases are increasing steadily; and by increasing testing speed and availability. if the maximum possible φ i h (0.033) is considered, the second part is calculated to be 2.7846.the third part( ηf ct.φa h +γ a +δ a ), with default values for the uncontrollable variables η, f ,γ a , δ a , and φ a h , the only controllable variable is ct (the percentage of contact tracing execution). if ct is implemented at maximum capacity (0.7), the third part is calculated to be 0.5446. therefore when the maximum possible rate of hospitalization is executed and contact tracing is implemented in full capacity,14 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . the infectious contact rate must be brought less than 0.215 to control the disease, even when the hospitalization rates are increased, and the contact tracing is implemented at full potential.as presented in the report from the center of evidence based medicine [20] , the percentage of people remaining asymptomatic varies drastically in many different case studies. therefore, analyzing uncertainty in f is important. as seen in the figure 4 , even 10% deviation of f from the default value causes a huge difference in the model simulation. it is always better to expect the worst case scenario in situations like this and make decisions so that many lives can be saved.it can also be observed that the actual data till 4/27 lies well within the range, and the future data is expected to be within the limits till 08/28 as shown in the simulations.the infectiousness vary from person to person, this factor is very sensitive and affects the predictions hugely. therefore, analyzing uncertainty in η is also important.as seen in the figure 5 , even 4% to 6% deviation of η from the default value causes a huge difference in the model simulation. it is always better to expect the worst case scenario in situations like this and make decisions so that many lives can be saved.it can also be observed that the actual data till 4/27 lies well within the range, and the future data is expected to be within the limits till 08/28 as shown in the simulations.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . it is important to analyze how changes in control parameters of our mathematical model affects the whole model. this can be done by analyzing correlation of the parameters with reproduction number.the correlation between r 0 and β is clear from the r 0 equation, they are positively correlated.all the parameters in the equation is positive, therefore,r 0 and β has a positive correlation.when β is increased r 0 is also increased. therefore, to keep the reproduction number as low as possible, the infectious contact rate must be maintained as low as possible. this can be done by implementing various control strategies such as social distancing.the correlation between r 0 and ctall the parameters in the equation is positive, therefore,16 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098418 doi: medrxiv preprint r 0 and ct has a negative correlation.when ct is increased, r 0 decreases. therefore, to keep the reproduction number as low as possible, the implementation of contact tracing of asymptomatic individuals is crucial, and it must be maintained as high as possible.the correlation between r 0 and φ i hall the parameters in the equation is positive, therefore,r 0 and φ i h also has a negative correlation.when φ i h is increased, r 0 decreases. therefore, to keep the reproduction number as low as possible, the hospitalization rate should be be maintained as high as possible.one key difference between isolation by contact tracing and hospitalization, is that when people are traced, they don't even know that they could be sick, but for hospitalization a patient need to have a severe illness.simulations of the epidemiological model is performed in matlab. the differential equations are solved using the function called ode45, which solves non-stiff differential equations using medium order method. the sample code is given in the appendix for reference three control strategies (social distancing, contact tracing asymptotic population, and increasing hospitalization rate) are simulated, and the parameters responsible for implementing these strategies are varied and plotted together to analyze and compare. these kind of simulations helps in making decisions during a pandemic.strict rules on social distancing should be implemented and followed, to prevent the spread of the disease. the simulation in figure 6 shows that, if strategies to increase social distancing are implemented (that is, reducing β), the number of new cases can be reduced, and the recovery from the coronavirus pandemic is quicker. the number of estimated deaths also decreases by a significant amount in the order of 10 5 .two new conditions (with β = 1 and β = 0.5) are simulated along with previously simulated model, and the plots are shown in figure 6 for comparison.the time taken to reach reasonably low number of cases is reduced by at least two weeks. considering that the control measures are implemented continuously, the best possible time to remove social distancing without getting the disease back again, would be by early august of 2020.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . with pressure from many groups of people who are affected financially, and with the government stuggling to handle the economy, the social distancing control measure is expected to be stopped in may,2020, bringing a lot of concern on how to stop the spread. the plot of simulations in 7 shows what will be the situation if that happens (say from 05/20). the number of cases will start to rise again, this eventually will force us to maintain social distancing again. therefore, there will be a bigger peak in the number of reported cases, and it will take 5 more months to get out of this situation. the number of deaths will also increase as it takes longer to stop the spread of the disease.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . the plot of simulations in 8 shows what will be the situation if the same thing happens from 06/09. the number of cases will start to rise again, this eventually will force us to maintain social distancing again. even though, the peak in the number of reported cases is not increased more than what was already reached, it will take more than 8-9 months to get out of this situation. this shows us how important social distancing is. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . distancing at all after 06/09. the simulation is frightening as the number of cases goes upto 40 million.the majority of new infections are created by infected people who is showing no symptoms, they can either be totally asymptomatic or presymptomatic. to reduce the spread through them, contact tracing should be implemented. it is done by finding about all the people who were contacted by symptomatic individuals in the last two weeks. if they are tested to be positive of the disease, then they are hospitalised.it is also possible that the person traced was the one actually who got infected, when they got in contact with this symptomatic person. either way, contact tracing is a way to find and isolate people who could potentially carry the virus around and causing new infections. this process of isolating those who could potentially carry the disease around, is not executed at full potential, because not everyone who are exposed or asymptomatic can be found out by tracing previous contacts.the simulations in figure 10 shows the predictions for two new values for the percentage of contact tracing implementation ( ct = 0.3 and ct = 0.7), along with the default value of 0.1. there is significant reduction in the number of cases over the month of may and after.it can also be seen that the number of recorded death estimate increases, this is because the people who will die from this disease without knowing they had the disease, are now found and tested using contact tracing, and their deaths are recorded. hospitals are struggling to handle the load of new cases. therefore, it is reasonable to increase the number of temporary facilities and in many areas as possible. this will reduce the time taken from symptom onset to hospital admission, and thus the hospitalization increases.φ i h is increased in the simulations as shown in figure 11 . two new rates -φ i h = 0.04 (in which takes 5 days to hospitalize someone), and φ i h = 0.05 (in which takes 4 days to hospitalize someone), are simulated. it can be seen that there is a decrease in the number of reported case estimate. increasing φ i h did not impact the number of cumulative deaths very much, as seen in the simulations below. from the simulations of the three control strategies, social distancing seems to have a bigger reduction in the number of diagnosed cases. no single control meothod will give the best result. it is only when all the control strategies are implemented, the considerable change is seen.a good compartmental framework of the model is designed by including all major classes of people. the most unnoticed classes during the modeling process of the coronavirus are the pre-symptomatic people and those that are in need of critical care. they are included in the model, and the model parameters are defined using the data from various research papers, official reports, and interviews. once the parameters are fixed, model is fitted to the cumulative case and mortality data given by john hopkins university. the fit gave the values for β 0 to be 1.33877 and i(0) to be 5849, which actual infected cases in the us (on march 1, 2020).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . different aspects of the model have been analyzed and the effect of various control strategies have been simulated.the disease free equilibrium is discussed and using the threshold analysis, basic contact rate to achieve dfe is calculated to be 0.215. the basic reproduction number is also calculated using the default values, and is found to be 2.71914, which is in the range similar to what most modeling papers produce.uncertainty in the fraction of the infectious people being asymptomatic and in the infectiousness of people with no symptoms are simulated, and the worst case scenarios are found. in the worst case, the number of cases can go up to 1.9 million by second week of march, 2020. the death toll can go up to 0.5 million by the end of august, 2020.basic sensitivity analysis is performed, and the correlation between different control parameters and the basic reproduction number are found. β 0 is the positively correlated, and therefore should be reduced. the contact tracing implementation and hospitalization rate of symptomatic people are inversely correlated, and therefore they must be increased as much as possible.the control strategies are simulated and the results are analyzed. the social distancing strategy seem to be best possible one right now. with the absence of vaccines, it is better to prevent the disease. if the social distancing strategy was highly implemented as shown in the simulations the number of cases during the peak can be reduced up to 1.1 million. the duration of the implementation is also reduced by at least two weeks.other simulations have also been added to discuss what will happen if the social distancing is stopped in mid of may, 2020, or june, 2020 and then the control measure is followed again. if the distancing is stopped in may and implemented again, it will take till the end of the year to recover from the disease. if the distancing is stopped in june and implemented again, it will take us to first few months of next year, which is not a welcomed situation.another simulation in which the social distancing is stopped totally on 06/09 is plotted and the results are alarming. the peak will drastically rise up to 40 million, and the death toll will go upto 4.5 million. fortunately, this will not happen, because the control measure can not be stopped abruptly as done in the simulations, and the government will take actions before something like that happens.another control strategy is contact tracing of asymptomatic individuals. the simulations shows that the number of cases can be decreases, though the change is not as predominant as it was in the case of social distancing. anyhow, implementing contact tracing along with social distancing will produce a good improvement of the control of the disease.the last control measure simulated was the hospitalization rate. increasing this rate is difficult , but even minor changes can bring a huge change. the current time it takes to hospitalize someone showing symptoms is 7 days. the simulation shows the effect of reducing this time to 5 and 4 days. as the rate increases to 0.05 (that is 4 days for. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20098418 doi: medrxiv preprint admission), the peak number of cases could have been reduced to 1 million.in summary, this paper shows the advantage of mathematical modeling and their simulations during a pandemic like covid-19. the process helps in making good well informed decisions. in our case the united states of america should stay in lock down at least until july, 2020, to prevent major catastrophe. despite the protest against the lock down and people's social needs, the control strategies should be implemented for the greater good. it is only when humanity works together, this pandemic can be eradicated.appendix: matlab implementation of the model simulation . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 18, 2020. . delta_i = 0.00154; delta_a = delta_i/2; delta_h = 0.00425; delta_c = 0.00485; r = 0.04; b_m = 0.1; dcdt=zeros(9,1); n = c(1)+c(2)+c(3)+c(4)+c(5)+c(6)+c(7)+c(8); dcdt(1)= -(1/n)*(b_m+((beta-b_m)*exp(-r*t)))*c(1)*(c(4)+eta*(c(5)+c(3))); dcdt(2)= (1/n)*(b_m+((beta-b_m)*exp(-r*t)))*c(1)*(c(4)+eta*(c(5)+c(3))) -sigma*c(2); dcdt(3)= sigma*c(2) -sigma_p*c(3); dcdt(4)= (1-f)*sigma_p*c(3) -phi_i_h*c(4) -gamma_i*c(4) -delta_i*c(4); dcdt(5)= f*sigma_p*c(3) -phi_a_h*c(5) -gamma_a*c(5) -delta_a*c(5); dcdt(6)= phi_i_h*c(4) + phi_a_h*c(5)-phi_h_c*c(6) -gamma_h*c(6) -delta_h*c(6); dcdt(7)= phi_h_c*c(6) -gamma_c*c(7) -delta_c*c(7); dcdt(8)= gamma_i*c(4) + gamma_a*c(5) + gamma_h*c(6) + gamma_c*c(7); dcdt(9)= delta_h*c(6) + delta_c*c(7) + delta_i*c(4) + delta_a*c(5); enddecember 2019 1 . the literature demonstrates geographical variation with regards to estimates of infection incidence, suggesting that covid-19 has been underdiagnosed in certain regions 2, 3 . the rate of asymptomatic infection has been estimated to be as high as 30.8%, which may help explain variation in incidence, particularly in regions with differing screening practices 3 . transmission of covid-19 by asymptomatic carriers has been reported in multiple family units, indicating that this mode of infection is important in understanding disease epidemiology and population risk 4, 5 .in one study, in individuals who were asymptomatic at the time of confirmed covid-19 infection, the median communicable period (defined as time from positive test to negative test) was 9.5 days (range 1-21 days), and approximately 21% of these patients went on to develop symptoms, suggesting that individuals may be infectious prior to the development of symptoms 5 . as such, identifying asymptomatic individuals is likely important in containing the spread of the virus. with the temporary closure of many ambulatory care settings, the emergency department (ed) has become a focal point in covid-19 related healthcare delivery in many communities. however, due to various factors including limited testing capacity, data regarding the yield of routine screening of asymptomatic individuals is limited. furthermore, while the utility of screening asymptomatic individuals has been explored in high-prevalence regions, studies have not been published for low-prevalence regions 6, 7 .in the present study, we aimed to describe screening for covid-19 in asymptomatic ed patients in a low-prevalence region.this was a retrospective cohort study of data from the study site's electronic health record (ehr). the study was approved by the study site's institutional review board.the study site is an urban, level 1 trauma center and tertiary referral center with an annual ed volume of 82,000 patients. it resides in a county with a population of 1,527,718 people. we included all ed patients who had a covid-19 test ordered under the site's asymptomatic screening protocol, either in the ed or within 24 hours of admission from the ed. the study site was also performing asymptomatic covid-19 testing at one of its clinics, for patients scheduled for surgical procedures.patients were excluded if they incorrectly presented to the ed for this asymptomatic screening. on april 4, 2020, the study site began testing for covid-19 in asymptomatic ed patients who werethis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved placed on involuntary psychiatric holds. this testing process began due to concerns that covid-19 infections would be difficult to control in the close living environments of psychiatric hospitals, and the study site wanted to ensure patients did not have covid-19 prior to transfer to these facilities.on april 14 th , the asymptomatic screening protocol expanded to include testing for all patients admitted to the hospital from the ed and all patients awaiting placement in other close living environments (i.e. skilled nursing facility, jail or other congregate living facility). when ordering asymptomatic covid-19 testing, the provider was required to enter the indication for testing, including "other" if the reason for testing was not listed. all patients undergoing asymptomatic testing were required to wear surgical masks, and all ed providers were also required to wear surgical masks.no further isolation (contact or airborne) was implemented as part of the asymptomatic screening protocol.detection of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was performed by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, using samples obtained from nasopharyngeal swabs.two assays were used during the study period, both of which were sanctioned by the food and drug administration's emergency use authorization, and validated for use with nasopharyngeal swab samples. one assay was run on a high-throughput platform (cobas 6800, roche diagnostics, pleasanton, ca) and one assay was run on a medium-throughput platform (bdmax, becton dickinson, franklin lakes, nj). data was collected from april 4. 2020 to may 13, 2020 (40 days).the following data were explicitly defined and collected from the ehr for each patient meeting inclusion criteria: age, sex, emergency severity index (esi) triage criteria, homeless status, indication for asymptomatic covid-19 testing, covid-19 test order, covid-19 test result, and admission team. esi is a triage scheme that stratifies patients into five categories from one (most severe) to five (least severe) 8 . homeless status was categorized as "yes" or "no", based-on patient self-report.indications for asymptomatic covid-19 testing included the following: 1) admission to the hospital, 2) involuntary psychiatric hold, 3) placement in a close living environment, and 4) "other". when the indication of "other" was selected, providers were required to insert the reason as free-text. in the case of cancelled covid-19 tests, data regarding the reason for cancellation was not captured for individual patients. however, tests were usually cancelled because of an inadequate sample or because the patient refused testing. the primary outcome measure was the result of the covid-19this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved testing. the infectious disease service was consulted to assist with management of patients with positive test results. data are described with simple descriptive statistics. continuous data are presented as mean ± one standard deviation. ninety-five percent confidence intervals (95% ci) one of these cases underwent repeat testing the next day (while admitted) and tested negative and remained asymptomatic during hospitalization. this case was considered by the infectious diseases consult team to either be a false positive test or an asymptomatic infection. the other positive patient, when evaluated by the infectious diseases consult team, was determined to have both a cough and close contact with covid-19 infected individuals and thus was deemed a symptomatic infection.during the 40-day study period, the study site tested 886 symptomatic patients for covid-19 and 37 (4.2%, 95% ci [3.0, 5.7%]) tested positive.as covid-19 testing capacity increases with time, more institutions will likely seek to adopt an asymptomatic screening protocol for admitted patients or for patients who will be transferred to other inpatient settings, to control nosocomial spread of the virus. in this study, we describe the testing of asymptomatic ed patients for covid-19 in a low-prevalence region of the united states.prior studies on asymptomatic screening are from high prevalence regions. during the study period, 526 cases of covid-19 were diagnosed in the study site's county (40-day incidence: 34 cases per 100,000 population) 9 . the centers for disease control and prevention reported a national incidence that varied significantly by region, ranging from 20.6 to 915.3 cases per 100,000 population, during a time period just prior to the present study (february 12 th to april 7 th , 2020) 10 . thus, the study sitethis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved represents a low prevalence region. in our study population, we found a very low true positive rate among asymptomatic patients undergoing testing. while the rate of asymptomatic infection was low, testing led to the diagnosis of covid-19 in one inpatient, who then was placed in appropriate isolation. had this patient not been tested via the asymptomatic screening protocol, this covid-19 infection would not have been identified, potentially exposing healthcare workers and other patients.when performing disease surveillance in low-prevalence regions, the presence of false-positive test results is inevitable. in our study, one of the two patients with positive test results was likely a false positive. this asymptomatic individual was retested the next day and found to be negative.the present study must be interpreted in the setting of its limitations. this was a single-center study, so our results may not be generalizable to other settings. as the prevalence and impact of covid-19 is very regional, local covid-19 infection trends must be considered. this study was retrospective, thus it is limited by the data available in the ehr and subject to the limitations of a retrospective study. as the data were downloaded from the ehr, errors in manual data abstraction were minimized. finally, a small percentage of patients (7%) had their test cancelled. it is possible that some of these patients may have tested positive.screening asymptomatic ed patients for covid-19 in a low prevalence region is of very low yield. the decision to test asymptomatic ed patients should be made on an institution-by-institution basis, dependent on regional prevalence and test availability. only individuals who consented to participate in the study through a telephone call and gave written consent at the time of study initiation underwent surveys at local public health centers. each participant responded to a questionnaire on exposure and provided a blood sample. following the first serologic test by an enzymelinked immunospecific assay (elisa), positive or borderline cases were tested using an immunofluorescence assay (ifa) and a plaque reduction neutralization antibody test (prnt).mers-cov antibody levels in all sera collected from contacts were measured using a recombinant s1 protein-coated human anti-mers-cov (immunoglobulin g [igg]) elisa kit (euroimmun, luebeck, germany), which was used according to the manufacturer's protocol. the results of the tested samples were determined by calculating the ratio of the optical density (od) value of the sample to the od value of the calibrator. ratios ≥ 1.1 were considered positive, ratios ≥ 0.8 to < 1.1 were considered borderline, and ratios < 0.8 were considered negative.ifa slides were coated with mers-cov non-infected or infected vero cells. serum samples were diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (pbs) to 1:10, 1:100, 1:250, and 1:1,000, transferred to ifa slides, and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°c in a humidified chamber. the ifa slides were washed 3 times in pbs-t for 5 minutes transmission [7, [9] [10] [11] , followed by intra-familial transmission.according to data reported to the world health organization, the rates of asymptomatic or mild infection were 44 of 398 (28.60%) in saudi arabia, the united arab emirates, and the islamic republic of iran between april and june 2014, and 32 of 113 (28.31%) in saudi arabia in june 2014 [12, 13] . however, oboho et al. [14] reported that 78.79% (26 of 33) of initially reported asymptomatic patients had at least 1 symptom. in korea, among the 186 confirmed cases, 3 asymptomatic cases were detected among healthcare workers via screening tests (1.61%) [15] . in serologic studies using indirect immunofluorescence tests for healthcare workers who were at mers-affected hospitals, 2 of 457 (0.44%) had positive results [16] . however, no report has been published regarding the asymptomatic infection rate among non-healthcare workers in korea. there is a considerable chance of human-to-human transmission, as well as direct infection via the dromedary camel [17] [18] [19] . therefore, it is necessary to identify the rate of asymptomatic mers infections in healthcare workers and non-healthcare workers.this survey was conducted between august 2015 and february 2016 after the last mers case diagnosed in july 5, 2015. based on a database of quarantined individuals provided by the department of epidemiologic investigation of the korea centers for disease control and prevention (kcdc), individuals from 4 regions with major outbreaks-seoul, gyeonggi, chungcheong, and jeonbuk -were selected. individuals whose mers status was diagnosed as positive using a polymerase chain reaction test were excluded from the analysis of this study. from the 14,831 quarantined individuals, 7,233 residents (48.8%) living in the 4 major mers outbreak regions were selected. of these individuals, calls requesting participation in this study were made to 3,291 individuals (45.5%) according to prioritization groupings. a total of 1,610 individuals (48.9%) ultimately participated in the study ( figure 1 ). those who refused to participate have been described in another study [20] .the study individuals were prioritized in groups according to the transmission intensity of the mers case they were exposed to, as follows: contact with super-spreading events (5 or more individuals infected) [21] , contact with spreaders who infected 1 to 4 individuals, and contact with non-spreaders. we selected study subjects according to this prioritization of groups, and the selection rates were 48.8, 16.4, and 15.8%, respectively. we also categorized the subjects according to their exposure intensity (i.e., status when they were exposed to the mers case), as follows: inpatients or outpatients at a mers-affected hospital, cohabiting family members or paid caregivers of the mers case, visitors of the hospitalized mers case, healthcare workers employed at a mers-affected hospital, and colleague of the mers case. we selected more subjects from the categories of family, patients, and visitors (table 1 ).syndrome (mers) serologic survey in korea. 1 major mers outbreak areas including seoul, gyeonggi, chungcheong, and jeonbuk in korea. 2 selection rates were different by characteristics of exposed mers case and status of subjects (see the table 1 ). each and incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated rabbit anti-human igg (abcam, cambridge, ma, usa) diluted at 1:800 for 30 minutes at 37°c in a humidified chamber. after washing 3 times in pbs-t for 5 minutes, the slides were embedded with a mounting fluid, topped with a cover glass, and observed under a fluorescent microscope. the neutralizing antibodies in the serum samples were measured by prnt. the prnt procedures were performed as follows. in brief, 1:10 diluted sera were heat-inactivated at 56°c for 30 minutes. heat-inactivated sera were diluted serially 4-fold. after an equal volume of virus (mers-cov/kor/knih/002_05_2015) was added to the volume of serum dilutions, these mixtures were incubated at 37°c for 2 hours. the mixtures were added to each well of the 24-well plate cultured with vero cells. the plate was incubated at 37°c for 60 minutes, and 1 ml of 1.5% carboxymethylcellulose overlay medium was then added. after incubation for 3-4 days, cell staining was performed by crystal violet. the titer of neutralizing antibody by prnt 50 was calculated using the kärber formula, as described previously [22] . a titer above 1:20 was interpreted as positive. all sera with a positive or borderline reaction in elisa were tested by the ifa and prnt assays for confirmation, and cases with positive results from any 2 assays were con-sidered to be anti-mers positive.this study received approval from the bioethics committee of the kcdc (2015-08-exp-03-p-a) and the institutional review board of the national cancer center (ncc 2016-0058). informed consent was obtained from study participants or their parent or legal guardian for children under 14.among the 3,291 selected individuals, the response rates of contacts with super-spreading events (5 or more individuals infected), contacts with spreaders who infected 1-4 individuals, and contacts with non-spreaders were 39.8% (552 of 1,388), 40.3% (139 of 345), and 59.0% (919 of 1,558), respectively. according to their status when they were exposed to the mers case, the highest response rates were found for healthcare workers (99.4%), and family members (97.1%), followed by visitors (75.8%), colleagues (49.0%), and patients (36.8%) ( table 1) .the seropositive rate using elisa was 1.05% (6 of 574) in patients, 0.33% (1 of 307) in healthcare workers, and 0.43% (7 of 1,610) overall. among the 7 elisa-positive individuals, 3 had contact with a super-spreading event (patient zero, case #1) who table 1 . study subjects and seropositive participants by characteristics of the mers case they were exposed to, and status of subjects upon mers exposure in the 2015 korean outbreak characteristics of exposed mers case status of subjects when they were exposed to mers 1 selection or response rate (% inpatients or outpatients at a mers-affected hospital, family of people living with or a paid caregiver of the mers case, visitors of the hospitalized mers case, healthcare workers employed at a mers-affected hospital, and colleagues of co-workers of a mers case. 2 selection rates varied by characteristics of the mers case subjects were exposed to (i.e. transmission intensity) and the subjects' status (i.e. exposure intensity).infected 28 individuals [23] , 1 had contact with a spreader (case #118) who infected 2 individuals, and 3 had contact with a nonspreader (case #89). among the elisa-positive individuals, only 1 was both ifa-positive and prnt-positive. therefore, the confirmed rates of asymptomatic mers infection were 0.17% in patients and 0.060% (95% confidence interval, 0.002 to 0.346) overall ( table 1) . the confirmed asymptomatic case, patient zero, and 11 secondary mers patients were hospitalized on the same floor of the hospital at the same time [23, 24] . the asymptomatic case was quarantined at home for 2 weeks after discharge. the case had underlying diseases that included hypertension, angina, and degenerative arthritis. the case reported no fever, cough, myalgia, or gastrointestinal symptoms during hospitalization or quarantine (table 2).limited information exists regarding mers-cov seroprevalence among populations other than confirmed mers cases. saudi arabian data showed that the seroprevalence of mers-cov igg among the general population was 0.15% [25] , suggesting that a number of cases of asymptomatic or mild infections may be present in the general population.despite a high prevalence of 186 confirmed mers cases during the outbreak of mers in korea, the rate of asymptomatic infection (1.60%) [15] was lower than expected. the rates of asymptomatic infection confirmed using ifa and prnt in the present study were 0.06% (1 of 1,610) for all contacts and 0.17% (1 of 574) for patients. these results are markedly lower than the rates of 0.27% (2 of 737) among healthcare workers, and 0.44% (2 of 457) among healthcare workers at mers-affected hospitals in korea [16] . moreover, the rate of asymptomatic or mild infection in sau-di arabia, the united arab emirates, and the islamic republic of iran was approximately 28.00% [12, 13, 18] .the confirmed asymptomatic case presented in this study was a patient at the same hospital as confirmed mers cases and, unlike in previous studies, was neither an intra-familial infection nor a pediatric infection [26, 27] . the low rate of asymptomatic infection in korea is attributable to the different transmission pathway of mers infections compared to the middle east. in korea, most of the mers cases were healthcare-associated infections, and none were from an animal. the low asymptomatic infection rate is also attributable to the extensive epidemiological investigation conducted in korea, including close monitoring of contacts with mers patients; this helped identify almost all mers patients. this may also have been attributable to the promotion of proactive identification of patients via mass media and the establishment of communication networks by the government, leading to voluntary reports by people, active quarantine, and countermeasures to this public health crisis [10, 28, 29] .elisa is appropriate as a screening tool, as it is 10-fold more sensitive than ifa. however, it may cross-react with seasonal human coronavirus antibodies, so a spike protein-specific ifa is required for confirmation. prnt is a definitive test when elisa and ifa have inconclusive results [25] . only 10% of elisa-positive results are positive on a neutralization assay [25] . in our study, 1 of 7 patients with borderline or positive elisa results also had positive results in prnt. therefore, the results obtained in our study are accurate because elisa, ifa, and prnt were used.a previous study predicted the pandemic potential of mers-cov to be ≤ 5%; however, this does not indicate that the risk has abated [30] . prerequisites for reducing the risk include improved surveillance, active contact tracing, and the initiation of animal host searching [30, 31] . during the outbreak in korea, mers was classified as a notifiable infectious disease and was subjected to surveillance [32] . since mers is an imported disease in korea, it is recommended that precautions be taken before travel and that the time of returning from travel and incubation period be considered. this study showed a low seropositivity in the population of individuals quarantined due to contact with mers cases. however, there is a possibility that the seropositivity rate was underestimated for the following reasons. firstly, the participants of the present study were mostly non-healthcare workers and were relatively healthy. thus, the risk of infection was low. secondly, the overall participation rate was 48.9%, whereas it was 36.8% in the patient group at a higher risk of infection. moreover, we only surveyed 10.9% of the quarantined individuals. therefore, the actual rate of asymptomatic infections may be higher than reported in the present study. lastly, the present study may have been conducted too late. in a previous study, mers-cov elisa results indicated that the antibody response was highest after 3 weeks from symptom onset [33] . although no reports have analyzed the duration of antibody presence in mers patients regardless of symptoms, a recent study of severe acute respiratory syndrome and mers reported that antibodies in some patients persisted for up to 2-3 years after infection [34, 35] . blood sampling for serologic test in this study was performed on contacts between october and december 2015, while exposure to the confirmed case occurred between may and june 2015 (a gap of 5 months). thus, a loss of the mers-cov antibody titer could have taken place despite actual asymptomatic infections; therefore, the actual rate of asymptomatic infection may be higher than the rate presented in this report.in conclusion, among 1,610 contacts, only 1 non-healthcare worker who was a patient in a mers-affected hospital had an asymptomatic mers-cov infection. to understand new emerging infectious diseases such as mers, more intensive epidemiologic research is needed, including an analysis of asymptomatic infections.since december 2019, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection emerged in wuhan, china, and rapidly spread throughout the world. 1, 2 as of 13 march 2020, a total of 132 536 confirmed patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) have been reported in 123 countries with 4947 deaths. 3 the epidemiologic, clinical, and radiologic characteristics of covid-19 have been described by several studies. 1, 4, 5 guan et al, 5 analyzed the clinical characteristics of 1099 patients with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 and found that the covid-19 has a wide spectrum of severity. the clinical spectrum of covid-19 ranges from mild to critically ill cases with fatal outcomes. 5 previous studies have only described the general epidemiological and clinical findings of patients of covid-19. recently, several studies have reported asymptomatic cases of sars-cov-2 infection. [6] [7] [8] [9] however, these asymptomatic cases were followed for a very short period.specific information that characterizes asymptomatic patients remains unknown. as reported by the previous study, fever as one of the dominant symptoms of covid-19 was identified in only 43.8% of the patients on presentation, while 88.7% of patients developed a fever after hospitalization indicating that some asymptomatic covid-19 cases before admission may develop symptoms during the hospitalization. 5 however, few studies have reported sars-cov-2 infected patients with completely asymptomatic throughout the disease course.in this study, we investigated the epidemiological and clinical features of patients infected by sars-cov-2 with completely asymptomatic throughout the disease course.patients with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection were retrospectively recruited from 10 designated hospitals in 10 cities of jiangsu province, china (xuzhou, lianyungang, suqian, huai'an, yancheng, nantong, taizhou, yangzhou, changzhou, and suzhou) from 18 january 2020 to 26 february 2020. all confirmed patients were diagnosed according to the criterion of the world health organization (who) interim guidance. 10 patients with completely asymptomatic throughout the disease course were included for the final analysis.the study was approved by the institutional ethics board of hospitals, with a waiver of informed consent.the medical records of confirmed cases were reviewed by at least two healthcare staff in each hospital. the demographic characteristics, comorbidities, exposure history, symptoms, laboratory test results, radiological data, treatment, and outcomes were collected. the data were cross-checked by researchers to avoid errors. unclear information of patients especially for the symptoms of the patients was further clarified through contacting the specific clinicians directly who were responsible for the treatment of patients. the criteria for discharge of patients was according to the guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of novel coronavirus infection by the chinese national health commission (trial version 5). 11 all patients were confirmed by throat swab samples or anal swab samples detecting by a real-time reverse transcriptasepolymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) according to the protocol by the who. 12 elevated serum crp (≥10 mg/l) was observed in 6 (40.0%) patients (table 3) . table 4 ). severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the causative agent of coronavirus 32 disease 2019 , was first reported in wuhun, hubei, china in late december 2019 [1, 2] . 33 sars-cov-2 is a positive-sense single-stranded rna virus in the family coronaviridae [3] . it is the 34 seventh known coronavirus capable of infecting human, after hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, hcov nl63, 35 hku1, mers-cov, and the original sars-cov. the former four typically cause non-lethal mild upper 36 respiratory diseases, while the latter two and sars-cov-2 can cause severe lethal respiratory 37 illnesses [4, 5] . 38 39 on 30 january 2020, approximately one month after the first reported outbreak of sars-cov-2 in 40 china, the virus was found to spread to 19 countries, and the world health organization (who) 41 declared the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern [6] . after the virus 42 was found to spread to 114 countries, the who recognised covid-19 as a pandemic on 11 march 43 2020, the first one to be caused by a coronavirus [7] . as of now (27 may 2020), the virus had spread 44 to 213 countries and territories around the world, infecting more than 5,700,000 people [8] , and this 45 rapid surge of patients had quickly overwhelmed hospitals in many countries. although the case-46 fatality ratio of sars-cov-2 (~3-6% [8, 9] ) is lower than those of sars-cov (11%) [10, 11] and cov (34-37%) [12] , due to the great number of infected cases, the number of deaths caused by 48 sars-cov-2 is much greater than those by sars-cov and mers-cov. to date, at least 350,000 49 deaths had been reported to be associated with sars-cov-2 infection [8] . 50 51 the incubation period for covid-19 is ~4-5 days, with most cases (97.5%) develop symptoms within 52 11-12 days of infection [13] . however, studies have reported that 5-80% of infected cases might be 53 asymptomatic [14] . several asymptomatic (and presymptomatic) transmissions have been reported 54 [15] , suggesting roles of asymptomatic infections in the transmission and spread of the disease. 55indeed, it has been proposed that "asymptomatic carriers is a challenge to containment" [16] and 56 that "asymptomatic transmission of sars-cov-2 is the achilles' heel of . to effectively combat with the spread of the disease, this is therefore important to understand 58 the covid-19 pathogenesis, and its underlying factors. 59 60 several host factors that are positively correlated with the covid-19 severity have been identified, 61 including patient age [9, 18] , low level of cd4 + and cd8 + t cell counts, and the high levels of il-6 and 62 . on the other hand, viral factors associated with the covid-19 severity are still yet to be 63 determined. there are currently more than 30,000 genomes of sars-cov-2 sampled from around 64 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 the globe made publicly available on the database of the global initiative on sharing all influenza 65 data (gisaid) initiative [20] , and many of these sequences had patient data. this enabled us to 66 examine viral genetic variations that might be correlated with the severity of covid-19 on the global 67 scale. in this study, we performed a genome-wide association study (gwas) on 152 sars-cov-2 68 genomes to identify potential viral genetic variations that might be associated with the covid-19 69 severity. 70 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 results and discussion 71 sars-cov-2 genome sequences with patient status 72 sars-cov-2 genomes with patient status were retrieved from gisaid [20] . at the time of this study, 73 152 genome sequences were full-length (>29,000 nucleotides (nt)), generated from original clinical 74 samples, and had unambiguous patient status, which could be confidently determined either as 75 "asymptomatic" or "symptomatic" (see materials and methods). to allow for accurate identification 76 of viral genetic factors associated with covid-19 severity, only these sequences were analysed. 77together with 500 randomly sampled sars-cov-2 genomes from gisaid, all which were full-length 78 and had a high sequencing coverage (but did not have clear patient information), we reconstructed a 79 maximum likelihood (ml) phylogeny to examine how these 152 sars-cov-2 isolates are related to 80 one another and to other sequences. we found that they covered a wide diversity of sars-cov-2, 81 distributing across the entire tree (figure 1 ). according to the classification scheme and method 82 described in [21] , these 152 genomes comprised 16 distinct lineages of sars-cov-2 ( table 1) . the 83 distribution of asymptomatic and symptomatic sars-cov-2 were different across lineages however 84 (χ 2 test: score = 50.67, degree of freedom = 28, p-value = 0.005). while symptomatic sars-cov-2 85 were found across almost all 16 lineages, majority of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 in this dataset were 86 predominantly found to be those of lineage b and b.5. mirroring this observation, asymptomatic 87 viruses in this dataset were mostly isolated from patients exposed to the virus in japan (60/72 = 88 83.33%) and india (6/72 = 8.33%), while symptomatic cases were found around the globe ( table 2) . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 asymptomatic 1 1 1 0 50 4 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 14 0 0 72 symptomatic 0 4 0 1 17 37 1 2 5 2 0 2 1 2 3 3 80 total 1 5 1 1 67 41 1 2 5 2 1 2 1 16 3 3 152 100 2 2 6 10 1 3 10 1 3 1 77 1 1 1 1 16 152 102 genetic variations at nucleotide position 11,083 is associated with covid-19 severity 103 to identify potential viral genetic variations associated with the covid-19 severity, we performed a 104 gwas by using treewas [24] -a phylogenetic-based approach for gwas of microbial genomes, 105 which can take into account the observed virus population structure. the estimated ml tree ( figure  106 1) was used for the population structure correction. our analysis identified genetic variations at the 107 nucleotide position 11,083 (with respect to the reference sars-cov-2 genome sequence, accession 108 number: nc_045512) to be significantly associated with the disease severity (figure 2 ). by applying 109 this analysis to all bootstrap trees, we found that this genomic position was identified 751/1,000 = 110 75.1% of the times, suggesting that our result was robust to the population structure uncertainty. 111 112 two genetic variations were observed at the nucleotide position 11,083, namely thymine (11083t, 113 75/152 = 49.34%) and guanine (11083g, 72/152 = 47.37%). 5 sequences (5/152 = 3.29%) had 114 undetermined nucleotides at this site. we found that asymptomatic sars-cov-2 tended to have 115 11083t (n(11083t)/n(11083g) = 60/7), while viruses causing symptomatic cases tended to have 116 11083g (n(11083t)/n(11083g) = 15/65) (figure 2) . the relative risk ratio of developing symptoms 117 given 11083g to 11083t is (65/72)/(15/75) = 4.51 times (95% confident interval = 2.85-7.14), and 118 the odd ratio was estimated to be 37.14 by the wald method (95% confident interval = 14.17-119 97.33). a study of sars-cov-2 from a shanghai cohort has indeed identified the 11083t variant to be 120 more prevalent in asymptomatic cases (9 in 91 cases = 9.89%) compared to symptomatic cases (1 in 121 21 cases = 4.76%), but the association was not significant [19] . this was likely due to their relatively 122 small data set (n = 112), and different groupings of the disease outcome (where mild symptomatic 123 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20114546 doi: medrxiv preprint and asymptomatic cases were grouped together as one and was compared against severe and 124 critical cases), which could potentially mask the effect we observed. another study identified this 125 nucleotide position as being under a positive selection pressure [25] , consistent with our finding. the 126 closest relative of sar-cov-2 currently known is the bat coronavirus ratg13 (genbank accession 127 number: mn996532) [26] , and it has a g at this position, suggesting that g is the ancestral state. we 128 hence designated this mutation 11083g>t. this mutation locates in the coding region of non-129 structural protein 6 (nsp6, nt 10973-11842), coded by orf1ab (nt 266-21,555). 11083g>t is a non- . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. interaction between host micrornas (mirnas) and viral transcripts has been implicated in 148 pathogenesis of viral diseases [27] . in this study, we examined whether the two virus variants have 149 different modes of binding to human mirnas by querying their nucleotide sequences against the 150 mirna database mirdb [28] . although a coronavirus genome is a positive-sense rna, negative-151 sense genomic rnas are nonetheless generated during their replication, presenting a possibility that 152 it might also interact with human mirnas. we therefore examined both positive-and negative-153 strands of sars-cov-2 genome sequences. 154 155 on the positive strand, two mirnas were predicted to uniquely target the 11083g with the same 156 (highest) scores, namely mir-485-3p (5'-gucauacacggcucuccucucu-3') and mir-539-3p (5'-157 aucauacaaggacaauuucuuu-3'). these two mirnas belong to the same mirna cluster (chr14: 158 101,047,321-101,047,398, and chr14: 101,055,419-101,055,491, respectively), and share identical 159 seed sequences (5'-ucauaca-3'), spanning the nt 11,083 (11,082-11,088) (figure 3) . by using the 160 negative-sense sequence as a query, mir-3149 (5'-uuuguauggauauguguguguau-3') was 161 predicted to bind to the 11083g variant, and not the 11083t variant (nt c11087-11080). our 162 analyses did not identify mirnas that specifically target the 11083t variant but not the 11083g 163 variant. this suggested that the two variants might interact with these three mirnas differently. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20114546 doi: medrxiv preprint regarding mir-539-3p, a recent study showed that it suppresses expression of the pro-angiogenic 188 factor jagged1 [33] -a ligand for the notch signalling pathway which controls cell proliferation and 189 differentiation of various cell lineages, including blood vessel formation and sprouting [34,35]. 190 similar to the case of mir-485-3p, the viral rnas produced by the 11083g variant might sequester 191 mir-539-3p, leading to up-regulation of jagged1 and subsequently angiogenesis, as observed in 192 several symptomatic covid-19 patients [36] . in addition to cell proliferation, mir-539 is also known 193 to upregulate autophagy [37], the process by which cells degrade and recycle cellular components 194 [38] . incidentally, nsp6, the viral protein which the 11083g>t mutation directly affects, has also 195 been reported to interfere with the host autophagy, restricting autophagosome expansion [39, 40] . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 conclusion and final remarks 209 an unprecedented number of sars-cov-2 genomes have been generated at a rapid rate and made 210 publicly available in near real-time like never before. to date, there are more than 30,000 sequences 211 of sars-cov-2 genomes made publicly available on the gisaid database [20] , and many of these 212 sequences have patient information available. this allowed us to investigate viral genetic factors 213 that might be associated with the covid-19 severity. 214in this study, we performed a gwas on 152 sars-cov-2 genomes, and identified nucleotide 216 variations at the genomic position 11,083 to be associated with the disease severity. most of 217 symptomatic cases were found to be infected with the 11083g variant, while the 11083t variant 218 appeared to be associated more often with asymptomatic infections (relative risk ratio = 4.51 (2.85-219 7.14); odd ratio = 37.14 (14.17-97.33) ). the two nucleotide variants, 11083g and 11083t, are non-220 synonymous, corresponding to l and f at the amino acid position 37 in the nsp6 protein, 221 respectively. our results have potential applications for the development of better, and more 222 informative test kits, potentially allowing for asymptomatic cases to be distinguished from 223 symptomatic cases. continual surveillance of covid-19 should monitor this genomic region as well 224 as its surrounding neighbourhood as they might affect the pathogenesis of 226 bioinformatic analyses suggested that the two variants might interact with the human host mirnas 227 differently. in particular, the 11083g variant was identified as a potential target of mir-485-3p, mir-228 539-3p, and mir-3149, while the 11083t variant was not. these differences might contribute to the 229 observed differential association between the two variants and the disease severity. our results 230 warrant further experimental confirmations to validate biological significance of these genetic 231 variations and their consequences. 232 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 methods 233 sars-cov-2 genome sequences with patient status 234 genome sequences of sars-cov-2 with patient status were downloaded from the gisaid database 235[20] on 18/05/2020 with their metadata. to allow for accurate determination of genetic factors 236 associated with covid-19 severity, we only analysed sequences whose patient status could be 237 unambiguously determined as either "asymptomatic" or "symptomatic". we designated a virus to 238 cause an asymptomatic infection if its patient status was either "asymptomatic/released" or 239 "asymptomatic". a virus was determined to cause a symptomatic infection if the patient status was 240 either "hospitalized in icu", "hospitalized/deceased", "icu; serious", "intensive care unit", 241 "pneumonia (chest x-ray)", "severe/icu", or "symptomatic". sequences that were not generated 242 from original clinical samples were excluded. those with ambiguous nucleotides greater than 5% of 243 the total sequence length, and whose total lengths were less than 29,500 nucleotides were also 244 excluded from downstream analyses. although epi_isl_417919 was found to fit the inclusion 245 criteria, manual inspection revealed that it contained many unique nucleotide variants surrounding 246 its multiple undetermined regions of "n"s, likely due to sequencing and / or assembly errors, and 247 had about 4.28% of undetermined nucleotides. it was thus also excluded from our dataset. in total, 248 our dataset comprised 152 sequences. a table of acknowledgements for the sequences used in this 249 study can be found in table s1 . (table  258 s1), all of which were full-length and had a high sequencing coverage. together with the 152 259 genomes with patient status, a manually-curated multiple sequence alignment of 652 sars-cov-2 260 genomes was constructed. potential recombination within the alignment was checked by using rdp, 261 geneconv, chimera, maxchi, and 3seq, all implemented in recombination detection program 4 262 [42] . sites with more than 50% ambiguous nucleotides were excluded from recombination analysis. 263sites with the most common nucleotide present in more than 99% of the sequences were also 264 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. defined as two discrete traits: "asymptomatic" and "symptomatic". the estimated ml tree was used 275 for the population structure correction. the tree was rooted by assuming that lineage a and b of 276 sars-cov-2 are monophyletic, and was pruned to contain only those with patient status before the 277 analysis as recommended. three tests of association were performed, including the "terminal", 278 "simultaneous", and "subsequent" tests. sites with more than 50% ambiguous nucleotides were 279 removed. sites with the most common nucleotide present in more than 95% of the sequences were 280 also removed. only 15 variant loci remained after the filtering. ancestral states of both genetic and 281 phenotypic data were inferred under a maximum likelihood framework as implemented in the 282 package. the number of sites simulated for estimating the null distribution was 1,000×15 = 15,000 283 sites. the overall threshold of significance was set to 5%, and corrected to be 5%/15/3 = 0.11% in 284 each test under the bonferonni multiple-testing correction criteria as recommended. an association 285 was considered significant if it was detected by at least one of the three tests aforementioned. we 286 also apply this analysis to all of the 1,000 trees in the bootstrap tree distribution obtained from the 287 phylogenetic analysis described above to examine the robustness of the result. our analyses robustly 288 identified nucleotide variations at the genomic position 11,083 (with respect to the reference sars-289cov-2 genome, nc_045512) to be significantly associated with the disease severity. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.27.20114546 doi: medrxiv preprint data availability 296 all sequence data used in this study were retrieved from gisaid. the table of acknowledgement of 297 the sequences used can be found in table s1 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 2, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 the ongoing outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19), known as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was first reported in wuhan, china in dec 2019 [1] . as the outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) surges worldwide, this emerging pandemic has affected more than 1,200,000 patients globally. the dynamic profile of viral replication and shedding along with viral antigen specific antibody responses among covid-19 patients started to be reported [2] but there is no consensus on their patterns. the longitudinal profiles of viral rna and antibody response are urgently needed to guide clinical diagnosis, treatment, infection control and vaccine design [3] .in this respective study, we serially analysed the virus rna test results in swab samples, along with anti-sars-cov-2 igm and igg responses among 21 covid-19 patients at the second hospital of nanjing and the affiliated hospital of xuzhou medical university in jiangsu province, china. patients with suspected sars-cov-2 were confirmed after two sequential positive respiratory tract sample results. throat swab samples were collected every 1-2 days. anal swab samples were also obtained for rna testing since 27 february 2020, as anal swab samples with prolonged viral shedding were observed during clinical practice [4] . viral rna was tested using real-time reverse transcriptional polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) kit (bgi genomics, beijing, china) as recommended by chinese center for disease control and prevention (cdc) following who guidelines [5] . the serum samples retrieved from routine biochemical or immunological testing were inactivated at 56°c for 30 min. these samples were later stored at −80°c for later serological detection. the igg and igm antibody responses against sars-cov-2 spike protein and nucleocapsid protein were tested by gold immunochromatography assay supplied by innovita co., ltd, china (cfda approved).the demographic information and disease severity of covid-19 patients were obtained from their electronic medical records. patients who had any of the following features during covid-19 disease progression were classified as severe cases: (a) respiratory distress; (b) hypoxia (spo 2 ≤93%); (c) abnormal blood gas analysis (pao2/fio2 ≤ 300 mm hg); or (d) severe disease complications including respiratory failure which requires mechanical ventilation, septic shock, or nonrespiratory organ failure. the illness severity was defined according to the chinese management guideline for covid-19 (version 6.0) [6] . asymptomatic carriers were defined as individuals who were positive for covid-19 nucleic acid but without any symptoms during screening of close contacts. this study was approved by ethics committee of each medical centre, and information consent was waived as part of a public health outbreak investigation.between jan 25 and march 18, 2020, 21 patients were enrolled including 11 (52.4%) non-severe covid-19 patients, 5 (20.8%) severe patients, and 5 (20.8%) asymptomatic cases with sars-cov-2 infection. as of march 24, all patients have been clinical recovered and discharged. the characteristics of each group were summarized in table 1 . the dynamic viral shedding from throat swab and anal swabs were analysed ( figure 1 ). for non-severe patients, the respiratory swab remained positive for a median of 10 (range 2-21) days since symptom onset, whereas a median of 14 (range 9-33) days for severe patients. for asymptomatic cases, the period of positive respiratory swab lasted for a median of 18 (range 5-28) days. despite of no statistical difference between groups, non-severe covid-19 group was prone to become respiratory swab rna negative in shorter period, compared to the group of severe patients and asymptomatic cases. among 15 patients who tested for anal swab samples, 3 (18.75%) anal swabs remained positive for sars-cov-2 since their respiratory swab samples turned negative for sars-cov-2. our serial sars-cov-2 rna testing identified a prolonged viral shedding for asymptomatic cases compared to covid-19 patients, suggesting the importance of early identification and timely quarantine for these asymptomatic carriers. consistent with previous studies [7] , we also found that the anal swab was able to maintain positive for weeks even after respiratory samples turned negative, validating the efficient replication in gastrointestinal tract during later stage of covid-19 and a possible faecal-oral transmission route.the longitudinal antibody responses were also determined in our cohort ( figure 1 ). all of 17 symptomatic patients (100%) were seropositive at the time point of discharge or during follow-up period. specifically, among 11 non-severe patients, 3 (27.2%) patients seroconverted within week 1, 7 (63.6%) patients were anti-sars-cov-2 positive during week 2, while 9 (81.8%) patients showed positive antibody responses within week 3, and 11 (100%) patients were seropositive within week 6. for 8 (72.7%) of 11 patients, the first detection of antibody responses occurred during the period when their swab samples converted to rna negative, suggesting that antibody responses might facilitate the viral clearance especially for non-severe covid-19 patients. furthermore, for all 5 severe covid-19 patients, antibody responses were detected within 2 weeks. of note, 3 out of 5 severe patients generated viral specific igg responses prior to viral clearance. it is possible that significantly high level of sars-cov-2 viral load observed in severe cases [8, 9] drives an early antibody response produced by immediate activation of extrafollicular b cells during acute infection [10, 11] . moreover, we also observed well-maintained antibody responses for all seroconverted individuals during our observation period, at least lasting for 6 weeks.only 1 (20%) out of 5 asymptomatic cases generated sars-cov-2 specific antibody responses (table 1 and figure 1 ), and this patient (patient 17) was not seroconverted until week 3 since her diagnosis. consistent with her delayed antibody responses, the throat swab sample converted to rna negative as late as week 3. for the remaining 4 asymptomatic patients, 2 patients were not seroconverted within week 2 and week 3, respectively; while 2 patients remained anti-sars-cov-2 negative during week 4. it is not known whether they become seropositive later. it is possible that such seronegative asymptomatic carriers were resulted from low level of data are presented as n (%) or median (range). viral load, but the false positive nucleic acid test results cannot be ruled out.our current study has revealed important implications to understand the dynamic interplay between sars-cov-2 and humoral responses. first, seroconversion was observed in 100% (17/17) of symptomatic patients during the observation period, suggesting that the serological test could serve as a complementary testing assay to nucleic acid test for those symptomatic covid-19 patients, especially given the potential false negative viral rna results using throat swab samples. nevertheless, we also noted only one person with humoral responses among asymptomatic carriers. additional viral and immunological analyses are warranted to understand this observation. better understanding on the biological significance of asymptomatic cases without seroconversion is urgently needed.although it is generally considered a beneficial role of specific antibody response during viral infection, we did not identify a strong association of seroconversion and disease severity in our cohort. for both non-severe and severe covid-19 cases, the viral specific antibody responses were detected. meanwhile, our study revealed an early induction of antibody responses in severe cases. consistently, a recent study also revealed that high level of antibody titer might be independently associated with a worse disease severity for covid-19 patients [12] . a similar clinical observation was also observed from a previous study of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), in which deceased infected patients reached the peak of antispike neutralizing antibody much earlier than that of the clinical recovered patients [13] . however, only measurement of peripheral antibody responses may not be sufficient. we can also speculate that high level of initial viral load early in infection may lead to severe covid-19 cases. such high viral load can drive strong extrafollicular b cell responses leading to rapid antibody responses which do not follow the sequence of igm to igg development stages [10, 11] . such high quantity of antibodies produced from extrafollicular b cells can contribute greatly to the inflammatory responses by promoting monocyte and macrophage accumulation and the massive cytokine storm including il-8 and mcp-1, which might be responsible for fatal acute lung injury, as indicated during sars-cov infection [14] . also, antibody might facilitate the infection of target cells by promoting the uptake of virion-antibody complex via fc receptors (fcr) [15] . whether the acute anti-sars-cov-2 antibody responses attributed to disease progression of covid-19 disease deserves further investigation. on the other hand, a graduate development of viral antigen specific b cells undergoes the somatic hypermutation and affinity maturation at the traditional germinal centre, which ultimately lead to high affinity protective antibody responses as observed in non-severe covid-19 patients.our study also has several limitations. first, our study is limited by small sample size, thereby it is not known whether our finding could be generalized. nevertheless, our cohort is representative of different covid-19 disease spectrum, including non-severe cases, severe cases, and asymptomatic carriers. furthermore, the quantitative viral load and titers of antibody response were not available, so the kinetics of viral shedding and the magnitude of antibody response during covid-19 disease progression remained unknown in this study.collectively, our study of serial nucleic acid and serological testing among various covid-19 patients indicated distinct dynamic patterns among three groups of sars-cov-2 infected individuals. our findings contribute to the evolving understanding of the sophisticated interaction between this emerging sars-cov-2 virus and host immune system.background: several countries have imposed a mandatory 14-day period of quarantine on individuals arriving from countries considered high-risk for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) infection however, it is not clear how long asymptomatic patients infected with sars-cov-2 can be an asymptomatic carrier case presentation: we experienced a case of an asymptomatic female patient infected with sars-cov-2 with abnormal chest computed tomography findings she did not develop a fever during hospitalized isolation she remained reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction-positive for 24 days conclusion: an asymptomatic patient diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection remained reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction-positive for 24 days, although she was quarantined in an isolation hospital this finding suggests that an asymptomatic patient diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection with abnormal chest computed tomography findings can be an asymptomatic carrier for more than 3 weekspersistence of positive severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction test result for 24 days in a hospitalized asymptomatic carrierbackground: several countries have imposed a mandatory 14-day period of quarantine on individuals arriving from countries considered high-risk for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) infection however, it is not clear how long asymptomatic patients infected with sars-cov-2 can be an asymptomatic carrier case presentation: we experienced a case of an asymptomatic female patient infected with sars-cov-2 with abnormal chest computed tomography findings she did not develop a fever during hospitalized isolation she remained reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction-positive for 24 days conclusion: an asymptomatic patient diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection remained reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction-positive for 24 days, although she was quarantined in an isolation hospital this finding suggests that an asymptomatic patient diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection with abnormal chest computed tomography findings can be an asymptomatic carrier for more than 3 weekspersistence of positive severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction test result for 24 days in a hospitalized asymptomatic carrieron january 30, the cabinet of japan classified coronavirus disease 2019(covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) as a "designated infectious disease" that legally allows compulsory hospitalization. additionally, on february 14, the cabinet orders (cabinet order nos. 28 and 29 of 2020) allowed that the government may isolate an asymptomatic carrier with a positive sars-cov-2 test result by hospitalizing him/her in an entrusted medical institution designated for infectious diseases.we report the case of an asymptomatic patient infected with sars-cov-2 with abnormal chest ct findings who remained reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) positive for 24 days although she was quarantined in an isolation hospital.on february 15, 2020, a 64-year-old asymptomatic woman on board the cruise ship was tested for sars-cov-2 using rt-pcr test performed using a throat swab sample because her husband was diagnosed with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 and transferred to an isolation ward at a healthcare facility. although she remained asymptomatic without fever on february 20, she was diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection and was transferred to our hospital for quarantine.the patient had been in her usual health without fever after her husband developed fever approximately 10 days before her current admission. her medical history included hypertension. her regular medications were amlodipine, accepted article candesartan, hydrochlorothiazide, and atenolol. upon initial examination, her blood pressure, pulse rate, and body temperature were 108/57 mm hg, 57 beats per minute, and 36.6°c , respectively. while she was breathing ambient air, her respiratory rate and oxygen saturation were 18 breaths per minute and 98%, respectively. physical examination revealed the absence of cough and vesicular sound without crackles. based on the patient's laboratory test results, her white blood cell count and c-reactive protein level were 7300 cells/μl and 0.41 mg/dl, respectively (table 1) . chest x-ray showed no abnormal findings. chest computed tomography (ct) revealed patchy ground-glass opacities in the peripheral areas under the pleura on the right lower lobe ( figure 1 ).the patient was quarantined in a single room with a bathroom. she was not allowed to move outside the room. she did not develop fever during her hospitalized isolation ( figure 2 ). follow-up with chest x-ray and chest ct was not performed.ten days after the first day of acquiring a positive rt-pcr test result, rt-pcr was performed on nasal swabs every few days following the instructions of the quarantine station.march 9 was the first day of continuous negative rt-pct test results. all the following criteria had to be met so that an asymptomatic patient infected with sars-cov-2 can be discharged from a hospital: (1) hospital isolation longer than 12.5 days, (2) normal temperature lasting longer than 3 days, (3) absence of respiratory symptoms, and (4) two consecutively negative rt-pcr test results separated by at least 12 hours. since she has met the criteria for the discontinuationthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved of quarantine in japan on march 10, she was discharged in our hospital on march 11.the major finding of the present case indicated that an asymptomatic patient diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection remained rt-pcr positive for 24 days, and the potential communicable period was 24 days although she was quarantined in an isolation hospital. this finding suggests that an asymptomatic patient diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection can be an asymptomatic carrier for greater than 3 weeks.a previous study has shown that sars-cov-2 infection appears to have been transmitted during the incubation period of a patient who was diagnosed with covid-19 (2) . however, it is still unclear whether asymptomatic individuals are potential sources of sars-cov-2 infection causing the current outbreak. leekha et al. revealed that the patient with non-enveloped virus infection remains pcr positive was shedding virus as a carrier (3) . this case possibly suggests that asymptomatic patients diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection continuously transmit sars-cov-2 for greater than 3 weeks.a previous study has indicated that recovered covid-19 patients had positive rt-pcr test results 5 to 13 days after the discontinuation of quarantine although they met the criteria for hospital discharge including the absence of clinical symptoms and radiological abnormalities with two negative rt-pcr test results (4) . typical ct images with ground-glass opacities in the lung, respectively (1) . in our case report, the patient did not develop fever, cough or fatigue, and there were no abnormalities on chest x-ray, but she had patchy ground-glass opacities in the peripheral areas under the pleura on the right lower lobe. we defined the communicable period as the interval from the first day of a positive rt-pcr test result to the first day of continuous negative test results (1) . the same study also revealed that the communicable period of sars-cov-2 infection ranged from 1 to 21 days (median, 9.5 days; interquartile range [iqr], 3.5-13.0 days,) in the whole cases, and the communicable period was 4.0 days (iqr, 2.0-15.0) in patients who are asymptomatic with normal chest ct findings (1) . however, to the best of our knowledge, the communicable period in asymptomatic patients with abnormal chest ct findings was not mentioned in any studies. in our case report, the patient was asymptomatic with abnormal chest ct findings, and the communicable period wasthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved 24 days. this result suggests that abnormal chest ct findings would prolong the potential communicable period in asymptomatic patients infected with sars-cov-2.although several countries imposed a mandatory 14-day period of quarantine on individuals arriving from countries considered high-risk for sars-cov-2 infection, our findings suggest that prolonged period of quarantine might prevent the outbreak of covid-19. however, a previous study has revealed the negative association between covid-19 mortality and healthcare resource availability (7) . in general, asymptomatic patients infected with sars-cov-2 are identified only from systematic screening, which includes the assessment of their close contacts with covid-19 patients or covid-19 suspected patients. by performing chest ct, the clinician could identify asymptomatic patients with abnormal chest ct findings as high risk for a prolonged potential communicable period.the present finding shows that an asymptomatic patient infected with sars-cov-2 with abnormal chest ct findings remains rt-pcr positive for 24 days, and the communicable period might be greater than 3 weeks. disregarding healthcare recourse availability, we could perform a chest ct scan in order to identify the patient as high risk with a prolonged potential communicable period among asymptomatic patients. this finding suggests that prolonged communicable the patient did not develop fever and was asymptomatic during quarantine in a cruise ship and yokohama rosai hospital.o n 30 january 2020, the cabinet of japan classified coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) as a "designated infectious disease" that legally allows compulsory hospitalization. additionally, on 14 february 2020, the cabinet orders (cabinet order nos. 28 and 29 of 2020) allowed that the government could isolate an asymptomatic carrier with a positive sars-cov-2 test result by hospitalizing him/her in an entrusted medical institution designated for infectious diseases.we report the case of an asymptomatic patient infected with sars-cov-2 with abnormal chest computed tomography (ct) findings who remained reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr)-positive for 24 days. she was quarantined in an isolation hospital.o n 15 february 2020, a 64-year-old asymptomatic woman on board a cruise ship was tested for sars-cov-2 using rt-pcr undertaken with a throat swab sample. her husband was diagnosed with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 and transferred to an isolation ward at a healthcare facility. although she remained asymptomatic without fever on 20 february 2020, she was diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection and was transferred to our hospital for quarantine.the patient had been in her usual health without fever after her husband developed fever approximately 10 days before her current admission. her medical history included hypertension. her regular medications were amlodipine, candesartan, hydrochlorothiazide, and atenolol. on initial examination, her blood pressure, pulse rate, and body temperature were 108/57 mmhg, 57 b.p.m., and 36.6°c, respectively. while she was breathing ambient air, her respiratory rate and oxygen saturation were 18 breaths/min and 98%, respectively. physical examination revealed the absence of cough and vesicular sound without crackles. based on the patient's laboratory test results, her white blood cell count and c-reactive protein level were 7,300 cells/ll and 0.41 mg/dl, respectively (table 1) . chest x-ray showed no abnormal findings. chest ct revealed patchy ground-glass opacities in the peripheral areas under the pleura on the right lower lobe (fig. 1) .the patient was quarantined in a single room with a bathroom. she was not allowed to move outside the room. she did not develop fever during her hospitalized isolation (fig. 2 ). follow-up with chest x-ray and chest ct was not carried out. ten days after the first day of acquiring a positive rt-pcr test result, rt-pcr was undertaken on nasal swabs every few days following the instructions of the quarantine station.the first day of continuous negative rt-pct test results was 9 march 2020. all the following criteria had to be met so that an asymptomatic patient infected with sars-cov-2 can be discharged from a hospital: (i) hospital isolation longer than 12.5 days, (ii) normal temperature lasting longer than 3 days, (iii) absence of respiratory symptoms, (iv) two consecutively negative rt-pcr test results separated by at least 12 h. as the patient met the criteria for the discontinuation of quarantine in japan on 10 march, she was discharged from our hospital on 11 march.t he major finding of the present case indicated that an asymptomatic patient diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection remained rt-pcr-positive for 24 days, and the potential communicable period was 24 days, although she was quarantined in an isolation hospital. this finding suggests that an asymptomatic patient diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection can be an asymptomatic carrier for more than 3 weeks.a previous study has shown that sars-cov-2 infection appears to have been transmitted during the incubation period of a patient who was diagnosed with covid-19. 1 however, it is still unclear whether asymptomatic individuals are potential sources of sars-cov-2 infection causing the current outbreak. leekha et al. revealed that a patient with nonenveloped virus infection who remained pcr-positive was shedding virus as a carrier. 2 this case possibly suggests that asymptomatic patients diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection continuously transmit sars-cov-2 for more than 3 weeks.a previous study has indicated that recovered covid-19 patients had positive rt-pcr test results 5-13 days after the discontinuation of quarantine, although they met the criteria for hospital discharge, including the absence of clinical symptoms and radiological abnormalities with two negative rt-pcr test results. 3 the following are the two possible reasons why recovered covid-19 patients still have positive rt-pcr test results: the patient infects with another type of sars-cov-2 4 as the result of inadequate isolation at home, or false-negative rt-pcr test results are obtained regardless if continuous sars-cov-2 infection 5 is observed. as we strictly isolate our patients infected with sars-cov-2 with or without symptoms under the quarantine act and cabinet order of japan in our hospital, the present case indicated that an asymptomatic patient diagnosed with sars-cov-2 infection could remain rt-pcr-positive for more than 3 weeks.hu et al. 6 reported that 20.8% and 50.0% of cases of asymptomatic patients infected with sars-cov-2 developed symptoms during hospitalization and showed typical ct images with ground-glass opacities in the lung, respectively. in our case report, the patient did not develop fever, cough, or fatigue, and there were no abnormalities on chest x-ray, but she had patchy ground-glass opacities in the peripheral areas under the pleura on the right lower lobe. we defined the communicable period as the interval from the first day of a positive rt-pcr test result to the first day of continuous negative test results. 6 the same study also revealed that the communicable period of sars-cov-2 infection ranged from 1 to 21 days (median, 9.5 days; interquartile range, 3.5-13.0 days) in the whole cases, and the communicable period was 4.0 days (interquartile range, 2.0-15.0) in patients who are asymptomatic with normal chest ct findings. 6 however, to the best of our knowledge, the communicable period in asymptomatic patients with abnormal chest ct findings was not mentioned in any studies. in our case report, the patient was asymptomatic with abnormal chest ct findings, and the communicable period was 24 days. this result suggests that abnormal chest ct findings would prolong the potential communicable period in asymptomatic patients infected with sars-cov-2.although several countries imposed a mandatory 14day period of quarantine on individuals arriving from countries considered high-risk for sars-cov-2 infection, our findings suggest that prolonged period of quarantine might prevent the outbreak of covid-19. however, a previous study has revealed the negative association between covid-19 mortality and health-care resource availability. 7 in general, asymptomatic patients infected with sars-cov-2 are identified only from systematic screening, which includes the assessment of their close contacts with covid-19 patients or covid-19-suspected patients. by undertaking chest ct, the clinician could identify asymptomatic patients with abnormal chest ct fig. 2 . symptoms and maximum body temperatures of a 64-year-old woman infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2, from the day her husband developed fever to the day of hospital discharge, 7 february to 11 march 2020. the patient did not develop fever and was asymptomatic during quarantine on a cruise ship and at yokohama rosai hospital. rt-pcr, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.the wuhan novel coronavirus (ncov) appears to have emerged in humans in the hubei province of china during december 2019 (1) . the virus was definitively identified in the first week of 2020 and as of january 29 had spread to 15 other countries; 6065 confirmed cases, 9239 suspected cases, and 132 deaths have been reported (2) ; however, the total number of infections (confirmed, suspected and unreported) remains unknown.quantification of the reporting rate, i.e. the ratio of confirmed and suspected cases to total infections, is vital for delineation of the prevalence, scope and potential spread of ncov. indeed, the speed and geographic extent of its translocation throughout china and internationally are likely tied to the true prevalence of the pathogen and suggest that there are many more infections (i.e. the reporting rate is low), that contagiousness is not negligible among these undetected infected persons, and that ncov will be difficult to contain. to contextualize the issue of unreported infection, we here present the findings from a recent proactive sampling project carried out in new york city (nyc) that documented rates of asymptomatic infection and clinical care-seeking among individuals shedding seasonal cov (types: hku1, 229e, nl63 and oc43).data are derived from sampling performed between october 2016 and april 2018 as part of the virome project, a proactive sampling of respiratory virus infection rates, associated symptom reports and rates of seeking clinical care. we enrolled 214 healthy individuals from multiple locations in the manhattan borough of nyc. cohort composition is described in galanti et al. (3, 4) and includes: children attending two daycares, along with their siblings and parents; teenagers and teachers from a high school; adults working at two emergency departments (a pediatric and an adult hospital); and adults working at a university medical center. the cohort was obtained using convenience sampling, and all participants were younger than 65 years. while the study period spanned two years from october 2016 to april 2018, some individuals enrolled for a single cold and flu season (october -april) and others for the entire study period. participants (or their guardians, if minors) provided informed consent after reading a detailed description of the study (cumc irb aaaq4358).nasopharyngeal samples were collected by study coordinators once a week irrespective of participant symptoms. samples were screened using the genmark esensor rvp system for 18 different respiratory viruses, including coronavirus 229e, nl63, oc43, and hku1. sample collection and extraction followed the same protocol as in shaman et al. (5) .in addition, participants completed daily self-reports rating nine respiratory illnessrelated symptoms (fever, chills, muscle pain, watery eyes, runny nose, sneezing, sore throat, cough, chest pain) each of which was recorded on a likert scale (0=none, 1=mild, 2=moderate, 3=severe). the daily self-report also documented whether participants had sought medical attention, stayed home or taken cold and flu-related medications (both over-the-counter and prescription) as a consequence of their listed symptoms (see (4) for further survey details). table 1 . definitions of symptomatic infections. all symptom definitions are described in reference to a -3 to +7-day window around the date of the initial positive swab for an infection episode. note, definition 4 is relative to an individual's long-term average total symptom score.definition 1 at least one day with a daily score >3 definition 2 minimum two individual symptoms >0 and at least one symptom >1 definition 3 total symptom score >9 definition 4 total symptom score greater than twice the weekly average for the infected individual definition 5 total symptom score >0 (i.e. any reported symptom)we defined an infection (or viral) episode as a group of consecutive weekly specimens from a given individual that were positive for the same virus (allowing for a one-week gap to account for false negatives and temporary low shedding). medically attended illness, sick days at home and medicine uptake were defined as episodes in which the participants reported seeking care, staying home or taking medicines due to respiratory symptoms. we classified all infection episodes as symptomatic or asymptomatic according to individual symptom scores in the days surrounding the date of the first positive swab of an episode. we used multiple definitions as a standard for symptomatic infection does not exist (table 1) . these symptom definitions are described in reference . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .to a -3 to +7-day window around the date of the initial positive swab for an infection episode. daily score is defined as the sum of the 9 individual symptoms (range: 0-27). total symptom score is the daily symptom score summed over the -3 to +7-day window. table 2 presents the findings for seasonal cov from this proactive sampling effort. 135 cov infection episodes were identified. cov-oc43 infection was most frequent (n=61), and cov-nl63 infection was least frequent (n=15). note that co-infections occurred; hence, the sum of the type infections is greater than the total reported in the final column of table 2 . adults (20+ years old) constituted 64% of the cohort, provided 67% of collected swab specimens, and experienced 50% of all cov infection episodes.based on definitions 1-4, the majority of cov infection episodes were asymptomatic. when stratified by type, differences emerge: cov-nl63 was more than twice as likely to produce symptomatic infection episodes as cov-229e (by definitions 1-4). definition 5, which defines symptomatic infection as the manifestation of any symptom during the 11day window spanning the initial positive swab collection, indicates that a majority of infected persons reported at least one mild cold-related symptom.participants reported taking medicine in response to cold and flu symptoms for 26% (n=35) of cov infection episodes. participants were three times more likely to take medicine in association with cov-nl63 infection (40%) than cov-229e infection (12%). 10% of participants reported staying home from work or school during cov infection episodes, and 4% of participants reported seeking medical care. reporting of seasonal cov prevalence has been limited to date. the us cdc only began releasing cov positivity rates in 2018, and understanding of its epidemiological features is incomplete. here, we present direct measurement of rates of seeking clinical care and show that only 4% (6 of 135) of persons shedding seasonal cov sought care. reporting rates and rates of seeking medical care may differ, as most individuals visiting a clinician for acute respiratory illness are not tested for seasonal cov. however, testing for the 2019 ncov is expected to be more robust than for seasonal cov as there is pressing need to understand and contain this novel pathogen. this high testing rate could result in the reporting rate for ncov equaling the rate of seeking medical care. thus, if rates of seeking medical care for ncov were to align with seasonal cov, the reporting rate for ncov would approach 4%. should the remaining 96% of unreported infections be sufficiently contagious, their high numbers could support rapid spread of ncov.it is important to note that rates of seeking medical care for ncov may not align with the rates found here for seasonal cov: concern over the virus may lead to elevated rates of seeking medical care; our estimates for seasonal cov represent a moderate sample size; and the symptom severity of emergent wuhan ncov may differ from seasonal cov. further, early outbreak instances of death due to ncov occurred predominantly in elderly patients, and often elderly with co-morbidities (6) . the data we present here for seasonal cov are from a cohort with no individuals 65 year or older, so the findings identified here might not have bearing on the elderly.still, several recent studies suggest that reporting rates for ncov may align with the rates found here for seasonal cov. chinazzi et al., (7) used an agent-based modeling approach to estimate the overall ncov incidence (reported and unreported) necessary to support the observed numbers of geographically exported infected individuals as of january 21, 2020. they estimated a 5-16% ncov reporting rate depending on model assumptions. in addition, phylogenetic analysis has identified wuhan ncov as a betacoronavirus, the genus that includes cov-oc43 and cov-hku1, as well as cov-sars and cov-mers (8) . among our cohort participants, 7% (6 of 91) of infection episodes with seasonal betacoronavirus (oc43 and hku1) sought medical care.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .the impact of unrecognized and unattended infections on transmission dynamics is likely a key determinant of whether control of the ncov outbreak is possible. for example, although cases of seroconversion without sign of disease were documented during the sars outbreak, asymptomatic and subclinical rates are believed to have been low. no cases of asymptomatic sars transmission were documented (9) , which may have facilitated the containment of the epidemic.a higher asymptomatic ratio was reported for mers infections, which presented with a broader spectrum of clinical manifestations: 21% of laboratory identified cases were mild or asymptomatic and 48% had severe disease or died (10). the potential for asymptomatic transmission of mers has been reported (11); however, the majority of transmission events happened within hospital or household, suggesting that close proximity may have facilitated transmission. ncov has spread rapidly in a short time, which suggests a substantial number of unreported infections exist. the results presented here provide a unique direct measure of seasonal cov infection, symptom severity, and rates of seeking medical care. these findings provide a baseline reference for contextualizing ncov pandemic potential.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) emerged in wuhan, china, in december 2019 and has spread globally with sustained human-to-human transmission outside china.1,2 to control the spread of covid-19 and isolate patients as early as possible, the chinese government requested that close contacts of individuals with covid-19 must be screened for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection. during the screening process, we found some patients whose test results were positive for sars-cov-2 but who had no symptoms or signs throughout the course of the disease. considering that little is known about the differences of clinical features and prognosis between patients who were asymptomatic vs those who were symptomatic,3,4 this case series aimed to describe the clinical characteristics of patients with sars-cov-2 infection confirmed by reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) from 26 transmission cluster series in wuhan, china, from december 24, 2019, to february 24, 2020.this case series was approved by the institutional ethics board of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university. all consecutive patients with covid-19 confirmed via rt-pcr admitted to zhongnan hospital of wuhan university from december 24, 2019, to february 24, 2020, were enrolled. oral informed consent was obtained from all patients. epidemiological, symptoms, signs, laboratory values, chest computed tomography (ct) scans, treatment measures, and outcomes data during the hospital stay were collected. nasopharyngeal swab samples were collected for extracting sars-cov-2 rna from patients suspected of having sars-cov-2 infection.the indicative patients were recruited from 26 cluster cases and had confirmed history of exposure to the hunan seafood market or had close contact with another patient who had been hospitalized for covid-19, and they were confirmed to have sars-cov-2 infection by rt-pcr from nasopharyngeal swabs. routine chest ct scans and sars-cov-2 testing from nasopharyngeal swab were performed on their close contacts. the close contacts with other exposure histories were excluded. the included patients who were exposed to the same indicative patients with covid-19 were defined as clustered cases, and the date of initial exposure was identified to determine incubation period.data were analyzed using spss statistical software version 19.0 (ibm). categorical variables were described as frequency rates and percentages, and continuous variables were described using mean, median, and interquartile range (iqr) values. χ2 analysis was conducted to examine the categorical variables. means for continuous variables were compared using independent group t tests when the data were normally distributed; otherwise, the mann-whitney u test was used. all p values were 2-tailed, and p < .05 was considered to be significant.this case series includes data for 78 patients from 26 cluster cases of exposure to the hunan seafood market or close contact with other patients with covid-19. all patients were confirmed to have sars-cov-2 infection by rt-pcr from nasopharyngeal swabs. the median (iqr) number of patients per cluster was 3 (2-3) patients, and the range was 2 to 10 patients per cluster.the 78 close contacts confirmed with sars-cov-2 infection were hospitalized in same medical area and provided the same treatments administered by the same health care workers. a total of 33 patients (42.3%) were asymptomatic, while 45 patients (57.7%) were symptomatic. the symptoms and signs, such as fever, fatigue, and dry cough, were monitored every day. detecting sars-cov-2 from nasopharyngeal swab was monitored every 24 to 48 hours. for patients with stable conditions, a second chest ct was conducted 4 to 6 days after the first time, then 6 to 7 days after the second time. chest ct was also conducted at any time a patient’s condition became worse. cd4+t lymphocyte count was tested every 5 to 6 days.data about clinical characteristics of patients with asymptomatic and symptomatic sars-cov-2 infection are presented in the table. patients who were asymptomatic, compared with patients with symptomatic sars-cov-2 infection, were younger (median [iqr] age, 37 [26-45] years vs 56 [34-63] years; p < .001), and had a higher proportion of women (22 [66.7%] women vs 14 [31.%] women; p = .002), lower proportion of liver injuries (1 patients [3.0%] vs 9 patients [20.0%]; p = .03), less consumption of cd4+t lymphocytes (median [iqr] cd4 lymphocyte count during recovery, 719 [538-963] per μl vs 474 [354-811] per μl [to convert to to ×109 per liter, multiply by 0.001]; p = .009), faster lung recovery in ct scans (median [iqr] duration, 9 [6-18] days vs 15 [11-18] days; p = .001), shorter duration of viral shedding from nasopharynx swabs (median [iqr] duration, 8 [3-12] days vs 19 [16-24] days; p = .001), and more stable results of sars-cov-2 testing (4 fluctuated results [12.1%] vs 15 fluctuated results [33.3%]).our finding of less consumption of cd4+t lymphocyte in asymptomatic infections suggests that damage to the immune system in asymptomatic infections was milder compared with symptomatic infections. although patients who were asymptomatic experienced less harm to themselves, they may have been unaware of their disease and therefore not isolated themselves or sought treatment, or they may have been overlooked by health care workers and thus unknowingly transmitted the virus to others. fortunately, patients with asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection have a shorter duration of viral shedding from nasopharyngeal swabs and lower risk of a recurring positive test result of sars-cov-2 from nasopharyngeal swabs, which can provide a reference for improving the prevention and control strategies for patients who are asymptomatic.this study has some limitations. although all patients whose rt-pcr tests were positive for sars-cov-2 had been exposed to same patients, were hospitalized in same medical area, and provided the same treatments administered by the same health care workers, the clinical differences between patients who were asymptomatic vs those who were symptomatic could have been more objectively observed.since patients with asymptomatic covid-19 were relatively concealed, the fact of viral shedding detected via nasopharyngeal swabs must not be ignored. therefore, identifying and isolating patients with asymptomatic covid-19 as early as possible is critical to control the transmission of covid-19. close contacts of patients with covid-19 should be closely monitored to avoid secondary transmission.in india, 173,763 confirmed cases, 7,964 confirmed new cases and 4,971 confirmed deaths due to covid-19 were reported as of may 30, 2020. as the ongoing covid-19 outbreak is quickly spreading throughout india and globe, short-term modeling predictions give time-critical statistics for decisions on containment and mitigation policies. a big problem for short-term prediction is the evaluation of important parameters and how they alter when the first interventions reveal an effect. in the absence of any therapeutics or licensed vaccine, antivirals, isolation of populations diagnosed with covid-19 and quarantine of populations feared exposed to covid-19 were used to control the rapid spread of infection. during this alarming situation, forecasting is of utmost priority for health care planning and to control the sars-cov-2 virus with limited resources. we proposed a mathematical model that monitors the dynamics of six compartments, namely susceptible (s), asymptomatic (a), reported symptomatic (i), unreported symptomatic (u), quarantine (q), and recovered (r) individuals, collectively termed saiuqr, that predicts the course of the epidemic. our saiuqr model discriminates between reported and unreported infected individuals, which is important as the former are typically isolated and hence less likely to spread the infection. a detailed theoretical analysis has been done for our saiuqr model in terms of the basic reproduction number r 0 . all the analytical findings are verified numerically for the estimated model parameters. we have calibrated our saiuqr model with real observed data on the covid-19 outbreak in the four provinces of india. the basic reproduction number for all the provinces is greater than unity, which resulted in a substantial outbreak of covid-19. based on the simulation, our saiuqr model predict that on june 13, 2020, the daily new covid-19 cases will be around 15, 454, 12, 96 , and cumulative number of covid-19 cases will be around 661, 23955, 514, 4487, in jharkhand, gujarat, chandigarh and andhra pradesh, respectively.after a novel strain of covid-19, was detected in wuhan, the city of hubei province, china, in december 2019 [1] , an exponentially increasing number of patients in mainland china were identified with sars-cov-2, immediately the chinese health authorities to initiate radical measures to control the epidemic coronavirus. in spite of these radical measures, a sars-cov-2 coronavirus pandemic ensued in the subsequent months and china became the epicenter. sars-cov-2 viruses are enveloped non-segmented positive-sense rna viruses that belong to the coronaviridae family and the order nidovirales, and are extensively disseminated among humans as well as mammals [2] . the covid-19 is re-sponsible for a range of symptoms together with fever, dry cough, breathing difficulties, fatigue and lung infiltration in severe cases, similar to those created by sars-cov (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus) and mers-cov (middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus) infections [3] . sars-cov-2 has already crossed the earlier history of two coronavirus epidemics sars-cov and mers-cov, posing the substantial threat to the world people health problem as well as economical problem after the second world war [4] . according to the world health organization report, dated 29 may 2020 reported 5,596,550 total cases and 353,373 deaths worldwide [5] .till date, there is no licensed vaccine, drugs and effective therapeutics available for sars-cov-2 or covid-19. due to absence of pharmaceutical interventions, govt. of various countries are adopting different strategies to control the outbreak and the most common one is the nation-wide lockdown. it was started with the local govt. of wuhan by temporarily prevention of all public traffics within the city on january 23, 2020 and soon followed by other cities in hubei province [6] . in the absence of drug or specific antivirals for sars-cov-2 viruses, maintaining social distancing is the only way to mitigate the human-to-human transmission for coronavirus diseases, and thus the other countries also incorporated the strict lockdown, quarantines and curfews.in india, the first coronavirus case was reported in kerala's thrissur district on january 30, 2020 when a student returned back from wuhan, the sprawling capital of china's hubei province [7] . the govt. of india has implemented a complete nationwide lockdown throughout the country on and from march 25, 2020 for 21 days, following one day 'janata curfew' on march 22, 2020 to control the coronavirus or sars-cov-2 pandemic in india [8] . due to massive spread of coronavirus diseases, the govt. of india has extended the lockdown and it is going on phase 4; from may 18, 2020 to may 31, 2020. besides the implementation of nationwide lockdown, the ministry of health and family welfare (mohfw) of india, recommended different individual hygiene measures, for example, frequent hand washing, social distancing, use of mask, avoid gathering and touching eyes, mouth and nose etc. [9] .the govt. also ceaselessly using different media and social network to aware the public regarding coronavirus diseases and its precautions. albeit, the factors such as diverse and huge population, the unavailability of specific therapeutics, drugs or licensed vaccines, inadequate evidences regarding the mechanism of disease transmission make it strenuous to combat against the coronavirus diseases throughout india. to control the transmission of covid-19, lockdown is a magnificent measure but testing is also an important factor to identify the symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals. the symptomatic individuals should be reported by the public health agencies to separate them from the uninfected or asymptomatic individuals for their icu (intensive care unit) treatment. also, from an economic viewpoint, the strict lockdown may be the cause of a substantial financial crisis in near future. in particular, the lockdown in high dense countries can mitigate the disease transmission rate, although entirely control not be obtainable. thus, to survive the economical status of a country, a strict lockdown for a long period is not advisable at all in any situations. hence there should be a acceptable balance between the two different characteristics of governmental strategies: strict lockdown and healthy economical situations. albeit, few questions remains to answer whether this cluster containment policy can be effective in mitigating sars-cov-2 transmission or not ?if not then what can be the possible solutions to mitigate the transmission of sars-cov-2 viruses ? these questions can only be replied by investigating the dynamics and forecasting of a mechanistic compartmental model for sars-cov-2 transmission and comparing the outcomes with real scenarios.a plenty of mathematical models has been investigated to study the transmission dynamics and forecasting of covid-19 outbreak [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] . kucharski and colleagues [10] performed a model-based analysis for sars-cov-2 viruses and calculate the reproduction number r 0 = 2.35, where the authors have taken into account all the positive cases of wuhan, china, till march 05, 2020. wu and colleagues [12] studied a susceptible-exposedinfectious-recovered (seir) model to simulate the epidemic in wuhan city and compute the basic reproduction number r 0 = 2.68 and predict their model based on the data recorded from december 31, 2019 to january 28, 2020. tang and colleagues [11] developed a compartmental model to study the transmission dynamics of covid-19 and calculate the basic reproduction number r 0 = 6.47, which is very high for the infectious diseases. recently, fanelli & piazza [13] analyzed and predicted the characteristics of sars-cov-2 viruses in the three mostly affected countries till march 2020 with an aid of the mathematical modeling. stochastic based regression model also been studied by ribeiro and colleagues [14] to predict the scenarios of the most affected states of brazil. chakraborty & ghosh [15] investigate a hybrid arima-wbf model to predict the various sars-cov-2 affected countries throughout the world. khajanchi and colleagues [18] developed a compartmental model to forecast and control of the outbreak of covid-19 in the four states of india and the overall india. sarkar & khajanchi [16] developed a mathematical model to study the model dynamics and forecast the sars-cov-2 viruses in seventeenth provinces of india and the overall india. a discrete-time sir model introducing dead compartment system studied by anastassopoulou et al. [19] to portray the dynamics of sars-cov-2 outbreak. giordano and colleagues [20] established a new mathematical model for covid-19 pandemic and predict that restrictive social distancing can mitigate the widespread of covid-19 among the human. a couple of seminal papers has been investigated to study the transmission dynamics of covid-19 or sars-cov-2 viruses for different countries, including mexico city, chicago and wuhan, the sprawling capital of central china's hubei province [21] [22] [23] [24] . short-term prediction is too important as it gives time-critical information for decisions on containment and mitigation strategies [18, 25] . a major problem for short-term predictions is the evaluation of important epidemiological parameters and how they alter when first interventions reveal an effect.the main objective of this work is to develop a new mathematical model that describes the transmission dynamics and forecasting of covid-19 or sars-cov-2 pandemic in the four different provinces of india, namely jharkahnd, andhra pradesh, chandigarh, and gujarat. we estimated the model parameters of four different states of india and fitted our compartmental model to the daily confirmed cases and cumulative confirmed cases reported between march 15, 2020 to may 24, 2020. we compute the basic reproduction number r 0 for the four different states based on the estimated parameter values. we also perform the short-term predictions of the four different states of india from may 25, 2020 to june 13, 2020, and it shows the increasing trends of covid-19 pandemic in four different provinces of india.the remaining part of this manuscript has been organized in the following way. in the section 2, we describe the formulation of the compartmental model for covid-19 and its basic assumptions. section 3 describes the theoretical analysis of the model, which incorporates the positivity and boundedness of the system, computation of the basic reproduction number r 0 , existence of the biologically feasible singular points and their local stability analysis. in the same section, we perform the global stability analysis for the infection free equilibrium point e 0 and the existence of transcritical bifurcation at the threshold r 0 = 1. in the section 4, we conduct some model simulations to validate our analytical findings by using the estimated model parameters for jharkhand, the state of india. the parameters are estimated for the real world example on covid-19 for four different states of india and perform a short-term prediction based on the estimated parameter values. a discussion in the section 5 concludes the manuscript.a compartmental mathematical model has been developed to study the transmission dynamics of covid-19 outbreak in india and throughout the world. we adopt a variant that focuses some important epidemiological properties of covid-19 or sars-cov-2 coronavirus diseases. based on the health status, we stratify the total human population into six compartments, namely susceptible or uninfected (s), asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic infected (a), symptomatic reported infected (i), unreported infected (u ), quarantine (q), and recovered (r) individuals, collectively termed saiuqr.at any instant of time, the total population is denoted by n = s +a+i +u +q+r. depending on the six state variables, we aim to develop an autonomous system using first order nonlinear ordinary differential equations.in the model formulation, quarantine refers to the separation of coronavirus infected population from the general population when the individuals are infected but clinical symptoms has not yet developed, whereas isolation refers to the separation of coronavirus infected population when the population already identified the clinical symptoms. our mathematical model introduces some demographic effects by assuming a proportional natural mortality rate δ > 0 in each of the six compartments. in addition, our model incorporates a constant recruitment of susceptible populations into the region at the rate λ s per unit time. this parameter represents new birth, immigration and emigration. the parameter β s represents the probability of disease transmission rate. however the disease transmission from vulnerable to infected individuals (for our model, the class is a) depend on various factors, namely safeguard precautions (use of mask, social distancing, etc.) and hygienic safeguard (use of hand sanitizer) taken by the susceptible individuals as well as infected population. in our model formulation, we incorporate the asymptomatic or pauci-symptomatic infected (undetected) individuals, which is important to better understand the transmission dynamics of covid-19, which also studied by giordano et al. [20] and xiao-lin et al. [21] .in our model formulation, we assumed that the covid-19 virus is spreading when a vulnerable person come into contact with an asymptomatic infected individuals. the uninfected individuals decreases after infection, obtained through interplays among a susceptible population and an infected individuals who may be asymptomatic, reported symptomatic and unreported symptomatic. for these three compartments of infected population, the transmission coefficients are β s α a , β s α i , and β s α u respectively. we consider β s as the disease transmission rate along with the adjustment factors for asymptomatic α a , reported symptomatic α i and unreported symptomatic α u individuals. the interplays among infected populations (asymptomatic, reported symptomatic, and unreported symptomatic) and susceptible individuals can be modeled in the form of total individuals using standard mixing incidence [26] [27] [28] [29] .the quarantined population can either move to the susceptible or infected compartment (reported and unreported), depending on whether they are infected or not [30] , with a portion ρ s . here, γ q is the rate at which the quarantined uninfected contacts were released into the wider community. asymptomatic individuals were exposed to the virus but clinical symptoms of sars-cov-2 viruses has not yet developed. the asymptomatic individuals decreases due to contact with reported and unreported symptomatic individuals at the rate γ a with a portion θ ∈ (0, 1), and become quarantine at the rate ξ a . also, the asymptomatic individuals become recov-ered at the rate η a and has a natural mortality rate δ. a fraction of quarantine individuals become reported infected individuals at the rate γ q with a portion ρ s (where ρ s ∈ (0, 1)).as we know that an individual is whether infected by coronavirus diseases or not can be identified by rt-pcr screening test and a person with negative results with the rt-pcr screening test may yet be coronavirus positive as it may take around 7-21 days to express the coronavirus symptoms [31] . thus, a fraction of coronavirus positive class can be considered as reported symptomatic individuals (θ) and unreported symptomatic individuals (1 − θ). the reported symptomatic individuals separated from the general populations and move to the isolated class or hospitalized class for clinical treatment.also, it can be noticed that once an individual recovered from the sars-cov-2 diseases has a very little chance to become infected again for the same disease [31] . therefore, we assume that none of the recovered individ-uals move to the susceptible or uninfected class again. in our mathematical model formulation, we assume that the reported infected individuals (i) are unable to spread or transmit the viruses as they are kept completely isolated from the susceptible or uninfected individuals. as the reported infected individuals are moved to the hospital or intensive care unit (icu) [32] . for our modeling perspective, we are mainly interested in predictions over a relatively short time window within which the temporary immunity is likely still to be in placed, and the possibility of reinfection would negligibly affect the total number of uninfected populations and so there would be no considerable difference in the evolution of the epidemic curves we consider. social mixing patterns are introduced into our contagion parameters in an average fashion over the entire individuals, irrespective of age. based on these biological assumptions, we develop the following mathematical model using a system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations to study the outbreak of covid-19 or sars-cov-2 coronavirus diseases:the model is supplemented by the following initial values:in our model t ≥ t 0 is the time in days, t 0 represents the starting date of the outbreak for our system (1). the transmission dynamics of the covid-19 is illustrated in the figure 1 . the description of the model parameters are presented in the table i .in this section, we provide the basic properties of the saiuqr model (1), including positivity and boundedness of the solutions, basic reproduction number and the biologically feasible singular points and their stability analysis, subject to the non-negative initial valuestheorem iii.1 the solutions of the saiuqr system (1) with the initial values (2) are defined on r 6 + remain positive for all t > 0.proof iii.1 the proof of this theorem is given in the appendix a.theorem iii.2 the solutions of the saiuqr system (1) with the initial conditions (2) are uniformly bounded in the region ω.proof iii.2 the proof of this theorem is given in the appendix b.in any infectious disease modeling, the basic reproduction number is the key epidemiological parameter for describing the characteristics of the diseases. the basic reproduction number symbolized by r 0 and is defined as "the number of secondary infected individuals caused by a single infected individuals in the entire susceptible individuals" [33] . the dimensionless basic reproduction number r 0 quantifies the expectation of the disease die out or the spreading of the diseases. for, r 0 < 1 describes on an average an infected population spreads less than a new infective during the course of its infection period, and thus the diseases can die out. for,a schematic representation of the mechanistic saiuqr model for the transmission dynamics of covid-19 or sars-cov-2. the interaction among different stages of individuals is shown in the graphical scheme: s, susceptible or uninfected population; a, asymptomatic infected population; i, covid-19 reported symptomatic infected individuals; u, covid-19 unreported symptomatic infected individuals; q, quarantine individuals; and r, covid-19 recovered individuals. biological interpretations of the model parameters are given in the table i. describes each infected individuals spread on an average more than 1 new infection, and the disease can spread throughout the population. various techniques can be used to compute the basic reproduction number r 0 for an epidemic outbreak. in our present study, we use the next generation matrix to evaluate r 0 [33] . in our compartmental model, the following classes are explicitly related to the outbreak of the novel coronavirus diseases: a, i, u , and q. thus, from the saiuqr model system (1), we get the matrices f for the new infection and v for the transition terms are given by, respectivelythe variational matrix for the saiuqr system (1), can be evaluated at an infection-free singular pointthe basic reproduction number r 0 = ρ(f v −1 ), where ρ(f v −1 ) represents the spectral radius for a next gener-ation matrix f v −1 . therefore, from the saiuqr model (1), we get the basic reproduction number r 0 asthe saiuqr model (1) has two biologically feasible equilibrium points, namelythe expression of a * is given byit can be observed the the infection free singular point e 0 (s 0 , a 0 , q 0 , i 0 , u 0 , r 0 ) is always feasible and the endemic equilibrium point e * (s * , a * , q * , i * , u * , r * ) is feasible if the following condition holds:in the present subsection, we investigate the linear stability analysis for the saiuqr model (1) for the two feasible steady states. by using the techniques of linearization, we investigate the local dynamics of the complicated system of the coronavirus compartmental model. generally, we linearize the saiuqr model around each of the feasible steady states and perturb the compartmental model by a very small amount, and observe whether the compartmental model returns to that steady states or converges to any other steady states or attractor. the local stability analysis aids in understanding the qualitative behavior of the complex nonlinear dynamical system. by using the following theorem, we prove the local stability of the infection free singular pointthe proof of this theorem is given in appendix c.theorem iii. 4 the infection free steady state e 0 is globally asymptotic stable for r 0 < 1 in the bounded region ω.proof iii. 4 the proof of this theorem is given in appendix d.theorem iii.5 the saiuqr model system (1) admits a locally asymptotic stable around the endemic equilibrium point e * for r 0 > 1. also, the system (1) experiences forward bifurcation at r 0 = 1.proof iii.5 the proof of this theorem is given in appendix e.in this section, we conduct some numerical illustrations to validate our analytical findings. analytically, we perform the local stability analysis for infection free steady state e 0 and a unique endemic equilibrium point e * . we also perform the transcritical bifurcation at the threshold r 0 = 1 and the global stability analysis for disease-free steady state e 0 . in order to validate the analytical calculations, we used the estimated parameter values for jharkhand, the state of india and the techniques for parameter estimation are described in the subsection iv a.we have calibrated our saiuqr model (1) with the observed daily new covid-19 cases. we have considered three states of india namely jharkahnd, gujarat, andhra pradesh and one city of india namely chandigarh. the daily new covid-19 cases are collected from the first covid-19 case reported and up to may 24, 2020. the daily reported covid-19 data were obtained from covid19 india (https://www.covid19india.org/) [34] . we have estimated six model parameters, namely β s , α a , α i , α u , γ a and γ q , out of fourteen system parameters for the system (1) by using least square method [35] . the values of these parameters and the initial population size plays an important role in the model simulation. the parameters are estimated by assuming the initial population size. the initial population are presented in the table iii . three days moving average filter has been applied to the daily covid-19 cases to smooth the data. the daily reported confirmed covid-19 cases are fitted with the model simulation by using the least square method. the estimated parameter values are listed in the table ii . different set of parameter values locally minimizes the root mean square error (rmse) and we have considered the set of parameter values, which gives the realistic value of the basic reproduction number r 0 . rmse is the measure of the accuracy of the fitting data and the rmse is defined as follows:where n represents the size of the observed data, o(i) is the reported daily confirmed covid-19 cases and m (i) represents the model simulation. the figure 2 shows in this section, we have validated our analytically findings by using numerical simulations for the parameter values in the table i, and the estimated parameter values  in the table ii for our saiuqr model for the coronavirus diseases. the parameter values are estimated for the observed covid-19 data for the three states of india, namely jharkhand, gujarat and andhra pradesh and for the city chandigarh. our analytical findings stated in the theorem iii.3, shows that the disease free equilibrium point e 0 is locally asymptotically stable with r 0 < 1, and the theorem iii.5 stated that a unique endemic equilibrium point e * is locally asymptotically stable for r 0 > 1. the numerical simulations of the saiuqr model system (1) the theorem iii.5 states that the saiuqr model system (1) undergoes a transcritical bifurcation at the threshold r 0 = 1. we have plotted the covid-19 reported symptomatic individuals (i) in the (r 0 , i) plane by gradually increasing the disease transmission rate β s (see the figure 4 ). the model parameter values are α a = 0.264, α i = 0.76, α u = 0.96, γ a = 0.0012, γ q = 0.0015, δ = 0.03, λ s = 1200 and the other parameter values listed in the table i . we vary the disease transmission rate β s from 0.67 to 1.10 and computed the basic reproduction number r 0 and the covid-19 reported symptomatic individuals (i). the numerically computed values are presented in the figure 4 , which clearly shows that the system (1) experiences transcritical bifurcation at the threshold r 0 = 1. the blue curve represents the stable endemic equilibrium point e * , black line represents the stable disease free equilibrium point e 0 and the red line represents the unstable branch of the disease free equilibrium point e 0 . hence, the figure 4 shows that disease free equilibrium point e 0 is stable for the reproduction number r 0 < 1 and an endemic equilibrium point e * is stable for the reproduction number r 0 > 1. from the biological point of view, it can be described that the model system (1) will be free from covid-19 for the reproduction number r 0 < 1 and the coronavirus diseases will spread throughout the people for r 0 > 1. figure 5 (a) represents the reproduction number r 0 decreases as the recovery rate η i of reported infected individuals increases and the reproduction number r 0 becomes less than one for β s = 0.85 and β s = 0.76. this indicates that the disease free equilibrium point e 0 switches the stability of the model system (1) as η i changes. but the reproduction number r 0 remains grater than one for the disease transmission rate β s = 1.10 and β s = 0.95, that is, for large β s unique endemic equilibrium point remains locally asymptotically stable even if η i changes. in terms of covid-19 diseases this interprets that if the rate of recovery for infected individuals (η i ) be increased, which can be done by vaccinees or specific therapeutics, the model system (1) changes its stability to disease free equilibrium e 0 from endemic equilibrium e * but if the transmission of the disease (β s ) is high enough then by vaccines or specific therapeutics, the system (1) can not change its stability from endemic equilibrium to disease free equilibrium. figure 5 (b) represents the reproduction number r 0 increases as γ a (transition rate from asymptomatic in- dividuals to symptomatic individuals) increases but the reproduction number r 0 remains less than one for the disease transmission rate β s = 0.55 and β s = 0.45. for β s = 0.66 and β s = 0.76, the basic reproduction number r 0 becomes grater than one and the saiuqr model system (1) loses the stability of disease free equilibrium point e 0 . thus, to flatten the covid-19 curve in any of the four provinces of india, reduction of the transmission of the covid-19 disease is utmost priority even if the recovery rate increased by medication. biologically it means that to mitigate the covid-19 diseases, the people must have to maintain the social distancing, contact tracing by avoiding the mass gathering.the predictive competency for the saiuqr model system (1) requires valid estimation of the system parameters γ a (rate of transition from asymptomatic to symptomatic infected individuals), γ q (the rate that the quarantine become susceptible), θ (fraction of asymptomatic infectious that become reported symptomatic infectious), ξ a (rate at which asymptomatic individuals become quar-antined). in the figure 6(a) , we plot the reproduction number r 0 as a function of ξ a and γ q for the parameter values in the table i and estimated parameters for the state jharkhand, to encapsulate the significance of these values in the evolution of covid-19 outbreak. from the figure 6(a) , it can be observed that the parameters have a little influence on the outbreak of the coronavirus diseases as the parameters ξ a and γ q has a little contribution for the reproduction number r 0 . in the figure  6 (b), we plot the reproduction number r 0 as a function of θ and γ a for the parameter values in the table i and estimated parameters for the state jharkhand, to encapsulate the significance of these values in the evolution of covid-19 outbreak. the figure 6 (b) shows that the parameters θ and γ a are more influential in increasing the reproduction number r 0 . thus, to control the outbreak of covid-19, we must control the parameters θ and γ a . the correctness of these values rely on the input of medical and biological epidemiologists. thus, the fraction θ of reported symptomatic infected individuals may be substantially increased by public health reporting measures, with greater efforts to recognize all the present cases. our model simulation reveals the effect of an increase in this fraction θ in the value of the reproduction number r 0 , as evident in the figure 6 (b), for the covid-19 epidemic in the four sates of india.mathematical modeling of infectious diseases can provide short-term and long-term prediction of the pandemic [16, 18, 20, 32] . due to absence of any licensed vaccines or specific therapeutics, forecasting is of utmost importance for strategies to control and prevention of the diseases with limited resources. it should be noted that here we can predict the epidemiological traits of sars-cov-2 or covid-19 for short-term only as the governmental strategies can be altered time to time resulting in the corresponding changes in the associated parameters of the proposed saiuqr model. also, it is true that the scientists are working for drugs and/or effective vaccines against covid-19 and the presence of such pharmaceutical interventions will substantially change the outcomes [36] . thus, in this study we performed a short-term prediction for our saiuqr model system (1) using the parameter values in the table i and the estimated parameter values in the table ii . using the observed data up to may 24, 2020, a short-term prediction (for 20 days) has been done for daily new covid-19 cases (first column) and cumulative confirmed cases (second column) are presented in the figure 7 . the black dot-dashed curve represents the short-term prediction of our saiuqr model from may 25, 2020 to june 13, 2020. red shaded region is the standard deviation band of our saiuqr model simulated curve. the standard deviations are computed from the model simulation based on the estimated data. in each of four states, we plot the standard deviation bands at a standard deviation level above and below the model simulation for different days. standard deviation band gives an estimation of the deviation of the actual model data. the trend of the predicted daily covid-19 cases is increasing for all the four provinces of india.prediction of the saiuqr model should be regarded as an estimation of the daily infected population and cumulative confirmed cases of the four states of india. from the saiuqr model simulation, we can predict that the estimated daily new reported covid-19 cases on june 13, 2020 will be approximately 15, 454, 12, and 96 in jharkhand, gujarat, chandigarh, and andhra pradesh, respectively (see the left column of the figure 7 ). our saiuqr model simulation predict that the confirmed cumulative number of cases on june 13, 2020 will be approximately 661, 23955, 514, and 4487 in jharkhand, gujarat, chandigarh, and andhra pradesh, respectively (see the right column of the figure 7) . the sars-cov-2 pandemic in india is a potential menace throughout the country due to its exponential growth. everyday the new cases are reported around 5-6 thousands and more than that from different states and territories of india, which is an alarming situation as with the second most populated country worldwide [34] . due to absence of any licensed vaccine, therapeutics or treatment and with a peculiar epidemiological traits of sars-cov-2, one would depend on the qualitative control of the diseases rather than complete elimination. during this period of an epidemic when person-to-person transmission is confirmed and the reported cases of sars-cov-2 viruses are rising throughout the globe, prediction is of utmost priority for health care planning and to manage the virus with limited resource. furthermore, mathematical modeling can be a powerful tool in designing strategies to manage exponentially spreading coronavirus diseases in absence of any antivirals or diagnostic test.in this study, we proposed and analyzed a new compartmental mathematical model for sars-cov-2 viruses to forecast and control the outbreak. in the model formulation, we incorporate the transmission variability of asymptomatic and unreported symptomatic individuals.we also incorporate the symptomatic infected populations who are reported by the public health services. we assume that reported infected individuals will nolonger associated into the infection as they are isolated and move to the hospitals or intensive care unit (icu). in our model, we incorporate the constant transmission rate in the early exponential growth phase of the sars-cov-2 diseases as identified in [18, 29] . we model the role of the govt. imposed restrictions for the public in india, beginning on march 25, 2020, as a time-dependent decaying transmission rate after march 25, 2020. but, due to less stringent lockdown exponentially increasing the disease transmission rate, we are able to fit with increasing accuracy, our model simulations to the indian reported cases data up to may 24, 2020. table i . stability of the saiuqr system (1) exchange at the threshold r0 = 1.we fit our saiuqr model for the daily confirmed cases and cumulative confirmed cases of the four different provinces of india, namely jharkhand, andhra pradesh, chandigarh, and gujarat with data up to may 24, 2020. the estimated model parameters for different states of india are given in the table ii and the corresponding  initial population size are listed in the table iii . it can be observed that the basic reproduction number for four different provinces of india, namely jharkhand, andhra pradesh, chandigarh, and gujarat are 1.6877, 1.2435, 1.4775, and 1.8830, respectively, which demonstrates the disease transmission rate is quite high that basically indicates the substantial outbreak of the covid-19 diseases. this higher value of reproduction number r 0 captures the outbreak of covid-19 phenomena in india. based on the estimated parameter values our model simulation suggest that the rate of disease transmission need to be controlled, otherwise india will enter in stage-3 of sars-cov-2 disease transmission within in a short period of time.based on the estimated model parameters we have validated our detailed analytical findings. our proposed saiuqr model has two biologically feasible singular points, namely infection free steady state e 0 and a unique endemic steady state e * and they become locally asymptotically stable for r 0 < 1 and r 0 > 1, respectively. analytically, we have shown that the infection free steady state e 0 of the saiuqr model (1) is globally asymptotically stable for r 0 < 1. we also showed that the saiuqr model (1) experiences transcritical bifurcation at the threshold parameter r 0 = 1, which has been shown in the figure 4 . the figure 3 (blue curves) and the figure 3 (red curves) represents the local asymp-totic stability as well as global asymptotic stability of the infection free steady state e 0 for r 0 < 1 and endemic steady state e * for r 0 > 1, respectively.the calibrated model then utilized for short-term predictions in the four different states of india. our saiuqr model performs well in case of all the four provinces of india, namely jharkahnd, chandigarh, gujarat, and andhra pradesh for daily confirmed cases and cumulative confirmed cases. albeit, the increasing (or exponential) pattern of daily new cases and cumulative confirmed cases of sars-cov-2 is well captured by our proposed model for all the four states of india, which has been shown in the figure 2. our model simulation showed a short-term prediction for 20 days (from may 25, 2020 to june 13, 2020) for daily confirmed cases and cumulative confirmed cases of the four provinces of india. the short-term prediction for the four provinces of india will demonstrates the increasing pattern of the daily and cumulative cases in the near future (see the figure 7 ). from the simulation, our model predict that on june 13, 2020 the daily confirmed cases of covid-19 of the four provinces of india, namely jharkhand, gujarat, chandigarh, and andhra pradesh will be 15, 454, 12, and 96, respectively (see the left column of the figure 7) . similarly, from the simulation, our model predict that on june 13, 2020 the cumulative confirmed cases of covid-19 of the four provinces of india, namely jharkhand, gujarat, chandigarh, and andhra pradesh will be 661, 23955, 514, and 4487, respectively (see the right column of the figure 7) .it is worthy to mention that the scientists or clinicians are working for effective vaccine or therapeutics to eradicate and/or control the outbreak of sars-cov-2 diseases and the existence of such pharmaceutical interventions will substantially change the outcomes [36, 37] . thus, in this study, we are mainly focusing on shortterm predictions for the covid-19 pandemic and subsequently there would be a very little chance to alter in corresponding parametric space. but the framework of our present compartmental model provides some significant insights into the dynamics and forecasting of the spread and control of covid-19. moreover, our model simulation suggest that the quarantine, reported and unreported symptomatic individuals as well as government intervention polices like media effect, lockdown and social distancing can play a key role in mitigating the transmission of covid-19. table i .all the data used in this work has been obtained from official sources [34] . all data supporting the findings of this study are in the paper and available from the corresponding author on request.subhas khajanchi and kankan sarkar designed and performed the research as well as wrote the paper. the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. proof. to prove the positivity of the system (1), we show that any solution initiating from the non-negative octant r 6 + remains positive for all t > 0. in order to do this, we have to prove that on each hyperplane bounding the non-negative octant the vector field points into r 6 + .for our system (1), we observe thattherefore, the positivity of the solutions starting in the interior of r 6 + is assured. r 6 + is positively invariant set of the saiuqr model system (1). proof. to prove the boundedness of the saiuqr system (1), we add all the model equations, which gives n = s + a + i + u + q + r. taking the differentiation giveswithout any loss of generality, we can assume that lim sup t→∞ s(t) ≤ λs δ , lim sup t→∞ a(t) ≤ λs δ , lim sup t→∞ i(t) ≤ λs δ , lim sup t→∞ u (t) ≤ λs δ , lim sup t→∞ q(t) ≤ λs δ , and lim sup t→∞ r(t) ≤ λs δ . thus, we have a bounded set ω = (s, a, i, u, q, r) ∈ r 6 + : 0 ≤ s, a, i, u, q, r ≤ λ s δ , which is also a positively invariant set with respect to the saiuqr model (1) . thus, any solution trajectory starting from an interior point of r 6 + ultimately enter into the region ω and remains there for all finite time. this results indicates that none of the individuals grow unboundedly or exponentially for a finite time window.appendix c: proof of theorem iii.3proof. the variational matrix around the infection free steady state e 0 for the saiuqr model system (1) is given bythe above jacobian matrix j e 0 has two repeated eigenvalues which are -δ, while the other four eigenvalues are the roots of the following characteristics equationwhich can be rewritten in the following form: β s α a ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ + θγ a β s α i (ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ)(η i + δ + λ)(1 − θ)γ a β s α u (ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ)(η u + δ + λ)(1 − ρ s )γ q ξ a β s α i (ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ)(η i + δ + λ)(γ q + δ + λ) = 1.denote the above expression as the following: m 1 (λ) = β s α a ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ + θγ a β s α i (ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ)(η i + δ + λ)(1 − θ)γ a β s α u (ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ)(η u + δ + λ)(1 − ρ s )γ q ξ a β s α i (ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ)(η i + δ + λ)(γ q + δ + λ) , = m 11 (λ) + m 22 (λ) + m 33 (λ) + m 44 (λ) (say).substitute λ = x + iy, and we know that re(λ) ≥ 0, then the above expression leads to |m 11 (λ)| ≤ β s α a |ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ| ≤ m 11 (x) ≤ m 11 (0), |m 22 (λ)| ≤ θγ a β s α i |ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ||η i + δ + λ| ≤ m 22 (x)≤ m 22 (0), |m 33 (λ)| ≤ (1 − θ)γ a β s α u |ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ||η u + δ + λ| ≤ m 33 (x) ≤ m 33 (0),(1 − ρ s )γ q ξ a β s α i |ξ a + γ a + η a + δ + λ||η i + δ + λ||γ q + δ + λ| ≤ m 44 (x) ≤ m 44 (0). thus, m 11 (0) + m 22 (0) + m 33 (0) + m 44 (0) = m 1 (0) = r 0 < 1, which gives that m 1 (λ) ≤ 1. therefore for r 0 < 1, all the eigenvalues of the characteristics equation m 1 (λ) = 1 are real or have negative real parts. thus for r 0 < 1, all the eigenvalues are negative and hence the infection free steady state e 0 is locally asymptotically stable. now, if we consider r 0 > 1, that is, m 1 (0) > 1, then lim λ→∞ m 1 (λ) = 0, then there exists λ * 1 > 0 in such a way that m 1 (λ * 1 ) = 1. this indicates that there exists non-negative eigenvalue λ * 1 > 0 for the variational matrix j e 0 . hence, the infection free steady state e 0 is unstable for r 0 > 1. proof. to prove the global asymptotic stability of the infection free steady state e 0 (s 0 , a 0 , q 0 , i 0 , u 0 , r 0 ), we can rewrite the saiuqr model (1) in the following form: where x = (s, r) ∈ r 2 represents (its components) the number of susceptible or uninfected individuals and v = (a, i, u, q) ∈ r 4 represents (its components) the number of infected individuals incorporating asymptomatic, quarantine, and infectious etc. e 0 = (x * , 0) designates the infection free steady state for the saiuqr model system (1) . for the compartmental model (1), f (x, v ) and g(x, v ) are defined as follows:from the above expression of g(x, v ), it is clear that g(x, 0) = 0. the following two conditions (c1) and (c2) must be met to assure the global asymptotic stability: (c1) for dx dt = f (x, 0), x * is globally asymptotically stable, (c2) g(x, v ) = bv − g(x, v ), g(x, v ) ≥ 0 for (x, v ) ∈ ω, where b = d i g(x * , 0) is an m-matrix (the non-diagonal components are non-negative) and in the region ω, the saiuqr model system (1) is biologically feasible. the compartmental model (1) stated in the condition (c1) can be expressed asanalytically solve the above system of equations, we obtain that s(t) = λs δ + exp(−δt)(s(0) − λs δ ), and r(t) = exp(−δt)r(0). considering t → ∞, s(t) = λs δ and r(t) → 0. thus, x * is globally asymptotically stable for dx dt = f (x, 0). thus, the first condition (c1) holds for the system (1). now the matrices b and g(x, v ) for the saiuqr model system (1) can be expressed as b =    −(ξ a + γ a + η a + δ) + α a β s α i β s α u β s 0 θγ a −(η i + δ)it is clear that b is a m-matrix as all its non-diagonal components are non-negative. also, g(x, v ) ≥ 0 in the region ω as s(t) ≤ n (t). also, we showed that x * is a globally asymptotically stable steady state of the system dx dt = f (x, 0). therefore, the infection free steady state e 0 of the saiurq model (1) is globally asymptotically stable in the region ω for r 0 < 1. and b = 6 i,k=1 υ k ω i ∂ 2 f k (0, 0) ∂x i ∂β s .by substituting the values of all the nonzero second-order partial derivatives and the left and right eigenvectors from above analysis at the threshold β s = β c s , we have a = − β s υ 2 λ s δ (ω 2 ω 3 (α a + α i ) + ω 2 ω 4 (α a + α u ) + ω 2 ω 5 α a + ω 2 ω 6 α a + ω 3 ω 4 (α i + α u ) + ω 3 ω 5 α i + ω 3 ω 6 α i + ω 4 ω 6 α u + ω 4 ω 5 α u + 2ω 2 2 α a + 2ω 2 3 α i + 2ω 2 4 α u ), and b = υ 2 λ s δ (ω 2 α a + ω 3 α i + ω 4 α u ).from the above expressions, it can be observed that a < 0 and b > 0, therefore due to the remark 1 of the well-known theorem 4.1 by castillo-chavez & song [38] , and by khajanchi et al. [39] a transcritical bifurcation occurs at the basic reproduction number r 0 = 1 and the interior equilibrium point e * is locally asymptotically stable for r 0 > 1.novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) first reported in wuhan, china, has spread 28 across the world, and has been characterized as a global pandemic. the propagation 29 from asymptomatic polymerase chain reaction (pcr)-positive individuals represents a 30 complicating factor in the efforts to control the covid-19 pandemic. we examined the 31 course of pcr assays and duration of viral shedding in 23 asymptomatic or mild 32 covid-19 patients from the cruise ship who were admitted to our hospital. among 33 these 23 cases, the median duration of viral shedding was 19 days (range, 6-37 days) 34 from initial viral detection. eight cases (35%) had another positive pcr result after 35 testing negative once. although the duration of viral shedding was approximately 3 36 weeks, the infectivity and transmissibility period from asymptomatic and mild 37 covid-19 cases is unclear. further studies are needed to determine how long such 38 asymptomatic and mild covid-19 cases have the infectivity. 39 wuhan, china, has spread across the world, and has been characterized by the world 51health organization as a global pandemic (bedford, et al., 2020) . in february 2020 at 52 yokohama port, japan, an outbreak of covid-19 among passengers and crew of the 53 diamond princess cruise ship occurred, with approximately 700 confirmed cases. all 54 patients, including those with asymptomatic and mild disease, were transferred to 55 japanese medical institutions including our hospital for quarantine and treatment until 56 viral shedding stopped (kakimoto, et al., 2020; zhang, et al., 2020) . the information 57 that can be gleaned from the results of polymerase chain reaction (pcr) assay about the 58 time course of asymptomatic or mild covid-19 is limited (hu, et al., 2020; zhou, et al., 59 2020) . therefore, we reported the course of pcr assays and duration of viral shedding 60 in 23 asymptomatic or mild covid-19 patients from the cruise ship who were admitted 61 to our hospital. 62we performed a retrospective review of these 25 laboratory-confirmed 63 covid-19 cases, whose oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal swab samples were positive 64 for sars-cov-2 by quantitative reverse transcriptase pcr while at the government 65 quarantine facility before admission to our hospital, and who were admitted to our 66 hospital between february 18 and 25, 2020, when 25 cases disembarked. the median 67 days from pcr assay to admission to our hospital were 3 days (range, 1-5 days). all 68 cases received laboratory tests and chest x-ray on admission. pcr status was evaluated 69 twice or more per week at the government quarantine facility, and the resolution of viral 70 shedding is defined as two consecutive negative pcr tests on oropharyngeal or 71 nasopharyngeal swab samples. in cases with re-positive pcr results, the resolution of 72 viral shedding is defined as those after re-positive pcr test. mild illness was defined as 73 non-and mild pneumonia without dyspnea, tachypnea, and hypoxemia (wu, et al., 74 2020) . because 2 cases were transferred to tertiary care hospitals after a few days due to 75 concerns about the severity of their pneumonia from initial chest computed tomography 76 (ct), 23 patients were evaluable for viral shedding. to explore the factors associated 77 with viral shedding, univariate analysis was performed using the mann-whitney u test 78 for continuous variables, or fisher's exact test for categorical variables. the following 79 factors were taken into consideration: age, sex, comorbidities (gandhi, et al., 2020) , 80 body temperature (bt) and peripheral oxygen saturation (spo 2 ) on admission, highest 81 recorded bt and lowest spo 2 during hospitalization, presence of symptoms, laboratory 82 results (white blood cell count, lymphocyte count, lactate dehydrogenase, blood urea 83 nitrogen, serum creatinine, and c-reactive protein), and imaging findings. 84characteristics of the 23 cases are shown in table 1 . among them, 10 cases 85 were japanese, 6 were australian, 2 each were american and indonesian, and one each 86 was canadian, thai, and romanian. cases ranged in age from 29 to 79 years (median 87 age 67 years), and 13 (52%) had comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, 88 or coronary heart disease. fifteen patients were asymptomatic, and 8 had very mild 89 symptoms and improved with symptomatic treatment. chest ct was performed on 2 90 patients with suspected pneumonia findings on chest x-ray at admission to our hospital, 91 and multiple ground-glass opacities (ggos) were found in 2 patients (case 13 and 17) . 92the remaining 21 cases had no imaging findings by chest x-ray. recordings of pcr 93 results for all patients are shown in figure 1 . in one month of follow-up, viral shedding 94 resolved in 21 cases, and the remaining two cases (case 1 and 2) took 37 days to resolve. case 1 is a previously healthy 30-year-old man, who had low-grade fever 96 (37.5°c) on admission without other obvious symptoms. case 2 is a 57-year-old woman, 97 who had history of thyroid cancer, arrhythmia, and pulmonary thromboembolism. she 98 had a mild headache during hospitalization. however, these 2 cases did not have any 99 respiratory symptoms during hospitalization. 100eight cases (35%) (case 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 9 , 10, and 11) had another positive pcr 101 result after testing negative once. the median duration of viral shedding was 19 days 102 (range, 6-37 days) from initial viral detection. three (13%) non-japanese cases (case 10, 103 11, and 19) had two consecutive negative pcr results on oropharyngeal swab samples, 104 but were not able to go back to their country after discharge from hospital, because 105 these cases needed it on nasopharyngeal swab samples according to their national lung opacities on ct (inui, et al., 2020) . in our cases, chest ct was performed only when pneumonia was suspected on chest x-ray. therefore, ggos might be more 120 common findings on chest ct in asymptomatic or mild cases. 121we experienced two cases (case 1 and 2) that took 37 days after initial viral 122 detection to become negative on pcr assay. another study similarly reported that it 123 took more than one month to achieve pcr negativity in asymptomatic patients ( to make any assumption about pandemic pattern for a country ( figure 1 ). however, it seems that this period takes generally 3 or 4 weeks for covid-19 (table 1) .plateau phase: at this phase disease incidence is stable. according to daily country reports it takes 2 or 3 weeks for covid-19 (table1).decreasing phase: today we have only china's data about this phase (figure 2 ), showing that 2 or 3 weeks later disease activity could be detected very low levels.the incubation period of covid-19 was defined 5.2 days (95% ci, 4.1-12.5 days), 5.1 days (95% ci, 4.5 to 5.8 days) and 4 days in three separate study [5, 6] . however, in a familial cluster of 5 patients, this period was reported between 1 and 19 days [7] . these data show that the incubation period of covid-19 was similar to mers and sars and it's a bit longer than influenza [8] . has been reported form all aged patients. severity of infection could be varied from asymptomatic infection to critical disease. clinical severity of covid-19 was defined in 5 groups as asymptomatic, mild, moderate, severe, and critical. diagnostic criteria of these groups were as follows [9, 10] ;1. asymptomatic infection: without any clinical sign of symptoms with positive sarscov-2 pcr test.2. mild: symptoms of acute upper respiratory tract infection, including fever, fatigue, myalgia, cough, sore throat, runny nose, and sneezing without pneumonia.3. moderate: with pneumonia, frequent fever and cough; some may have wheezing, but no obvious hypoxemia such as shortness of breath. 4. severe: rapid progression around 1 week, dyspnea, with central cyanosis, oxygen saturation less than 92%, with other manifestations of hypoxemia. 5. critical: patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) or respiratory failure, shock, multiple organ dysfunction.this clinical classification is also important because it gives some clues about prognosis and mortality of covid-19. most covid-19 cases (81%) were classified as mild or moderate disease in adults, and in children most cases were mild. [9, 11, 12] . in critical cases mortality could be as higher as 50% in adults [9, 11] .asymptomatic infection has a special importance as a source of disease in the community. especially, asymptomatic infants and children may take an important role in human-to-human transmission [13] . dong and colleagues report that over 90% of pediatric patients could be asymptomatic, or could have mild or moderate disease [11] . it seems that asymptomatic infection could be detected at every age, although it was frequent at younger ages [14] . these asymptomatic patients could cause familial clusters [15] . according to tian et al., asymptomatic infection rate was 5%, whereas in diamond princess cruise ship berthed at tokyo bay, japan, it was nearly 18% [16, 17] . among a total of 72,314 china's cases, 889 were classified as asymptomatic (1%) [9] . however, we need more accurate numbers before making some assumption about its public health importance.in spite of the fact that some animals are thought as origins of the virus, a major transmission mode for sars cov-2 is human-to-human transmission like sars cov and mers cov. accepted transmission routes of covid-19 are droplet and contact transmission [18] .nevertheless, explaining or excluding of other possible transmission routes is necessary for controlling disease in the community.current evidence shows that sars cov-2 was detected in air samples for up to 3 h in experimental models [19] . gou et al. found that air samples were positive in many different sites of wards [20] . however, when cheng et al. collected 8 air samples at a distance of 10 cm from the patient's chin with or without wearing a surgical mask, they were not able to detect sars cov-2 [21] . another study, although some environmental samples were positive for sars cov-2, all air samples were negative [22] . in a study from iran, authors reported that all air samples collected 5 m around the patients were negative [23] .there are some limitations in these studies where different patients and methods were included; in which stage of disease these samples were collected, or what kind of procedures were performed. today, we have not known yet whether detected sars cov-2 in air samples are viable or not, or whether detected viral loads are high enough to cause covid-19. it is important to realize here that prior to answering such questions and obtain some strong evidence, taking airborne precautions for aerosol producing process seems to be logical.fecal transmission is another unanswered question about covid-19. presence of patients with diarrhea [6] , finding of fecal samples positive for sars cov by rt-pcr [24, 25] and detection of live virus in stool at least one study [25] , suggest that stool is infectious even though it has not been verified by other studies [24] . detection of sars cov-2 rna in patients' fecal samples with negative respiratory tract samples for a mean of 11 days might be important [26] . even if gastrointestinal involvement or digested sputum was the origin of virus existence in the stool, this fact gives another reason to emphasize good personal hygiene. possibility of fecal transmission remains unanswered until viable virus is detected in stool samples and new data is available to prove oral-fecal transmission, which affect procedures for quarantine, hospitalization and self-isolation practices.intrauterine or transplacental transmission from infected pregnant women to their fetuses is another important point for transmission. according to a study about analyzing of 38 pregnant women with covid-19, there were no signs of intrauterine transmission of sars cov-2 from mothers to their fetuses [27] . studies also emphasized that the course of covid-19 was normal in pregnant women as opposed to those of sars and mers [27, 28] . another study also reviewed that we have no definitive evidence of vertical transmission [29] .people infected with sars cov-2 can be contagious prior to onset of symptoms. in a study, 13% of patients were contagious before onset of symptoms [30] . in a familial cluster, 3 of 8 laboratory-confirmed patients were asymptomatic [31] . presymptomatic transmission would be a challenge to contact tracing [32] . these kind of reports show that asymptomatic carriers emerge as an important target group to be taken into consideration in the control of the disease. viral shedding might be longer than previously thought. in a retrospective multicenter cohort study of 191 adult patients, the median duration of viral shedding was found to be 20 days (iqr 17.0-24.0) and the longest observed duration of viral shedding in survivors was 37 days [33] .a study of postdischarge surveillance of patients after clinical recovery, two patients were found positive [34] .although covid-19 was reported from every aged patient, patients with advanced age seem more susceptible to infection. an early report shows that the most affected age group was middle ages ( table 2) . among children and young adults, infection rates were very low and it changed between 0.8%-4.0%. in addition, asymptomatic infection rate is quite high in this ages.early reports from china show that a reproductive number for covid-19 was 2.2 to 2.7 days [5] . this means that the number of infected person will be doubled every 6-7 day. a reproductive number of the outbreak on the diamond princess cruise ship also supports this preliminary data [35] . however, sanche et al. found that a serial interval was 5.7 days (95% ci, 3.8-8.9 days) [36] . in another study which prefer to use real-time reproduction number (rt) instead of basic reproduction number (r 0 ), yuan et al. showed that their rt values for italy, germany, france and spain were 3.1, 4.43, 6.56, and 3.95, respectively [37] . liu et al. found that average r 0 was 3.8 (1.4-6.49) in their review of 14 studies [38] . this study also showed that even in the same geographic region, different ro values can be calculated by using different methods and assumptions. it seems that we need more data to determine more accurate r 0 value.overall case fatality rate was 6.3 according to who situation report as of april 13, 2020 [39] . nevertheless, a remarkable difference in mortality rates was also noted between countries as given table 3 . it was noted that this rate is extremely higher in country with older-aged populations. in italy, the median age of those died from covid-19 was 78 years, whilst the median age of patients was 62 [40] . in turkey, the current case fatality rate is 2.1% which is a significant issue to bear in mind. mortality associated with covid-19 is a multifactorial process and underlying diseases and health care burden as well as ages could be related to higher mortality [41] .increasing of mortality with advanced age is now a wellknown fact. it is also well known that success in prevention of covid-19 among these age groups directly determines th emortality rate in countries. early chinese reports showed that mortality rate could be 3 times higher in older patients especially those at age over 80 [9] . in an italian study, icu mortality was 26% whereas it was 36% after 65 of ages [42] . demonstration of median days between onset of symptoms to death was shorter in older patients which is another important point [43] .as of april 7, 2020 in italy, 83% of all covid-19 related deaths were reported in an age group over 70 years [44] . in a korean study, although overall mortality rate was 0.9%, mortality rate in those aged 80 and over was 9.3% [45] . similar results were also reported form usa [45] .disease progression can be rapid and the median survival time can be as short as 5 days in advanced aged patients [28] .in a metaanalysis which evaluated 46,248 patients from eight studies, most prevalent comorbidities were hypertension, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular diseases and respiratory diseases. another finding of this study was that these comorbidities were more likely detected in severe patients [47] . another metaanalysis showed that hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus, smoking, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, malignancy, and chronic kidney disease were most frequently detected underlying diseases among hospitalized patients [48] . in a summary report form china cdc, preexisting comorbid condition can increase fatality rate by 10.5% for cardiovascular disease, 7.3% for diabetes, 6.3% for chronic respiratory disease, 6.0% for hypertension, and 5.6% for cancer [9] .according to the italian weekly report on death from covid-19, most frequently detected comorbidities were hypertension, diabetes mellitus, ischemic heart disease, and chronic renal failure as 72%, 31.5%, 27.4%, and 23.5%, respectively. this report showed that patients without any comorbidities accounted for only 2.8% of those died from covid-19 [40] .in a pooled analysis, risk of severe disease and mortality was higher in hypertensive patients nearly 2.5 fold increases especially among advanced aged individuals [49] .every day we learn new data about the current pandemic of covid-19. since the outbreak has not been over yet, the updates should be followed closely to monitor the disease and the risk factors as well as therapy modalities. on december 2019, a novel coronavirus, named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) emerged in wuhan city, hubei province, china, causing a cluster of pneumonia cases (1) . since then, the infection has spread worldwide causing more than a million cases and thousands of deaths (https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/ bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6).to date, we know that individuals of all ages are susceptible to sars-cov-2, and that the elderly and those with underlying comorbidities are more likely to develop complications. however, in spite of the growing amount of data available on the sars-cov-2, a clear understanding of how sars-cov-2 affects children is still missing.the novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology team reported the occurrence of a series of 72,314 cases. the authors describe incident infection in 416 children aged 0-10 (0.57% of all cases) with no reported fatality, and 549 adolescents (0.76%) aged 10 to 19 with one death reported (0.1% of all patients aged 19 years or less) (1). however, no further details were provided on this pediatric population. we do not know about their comorbidities, need for admission or invasive procedures. other case reports (mostly in chinese language) are providing similarly reassuring information on the outcomes of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in children (2, 3) .however, the lancet reported a family cluster of sars-cov-2 infections in which an asymptomatic child developed ground-glass opacities as seen on a ct scan, performed because of parents' pressure (4) . this finding, although generally unnoticed by the experts, highlights an important point: children can be asymptomatic, but they can nonetheless develop lung abnormalities. this data can suggest that several other asymptomatically infected children might have developed lung disease. in that case, concerns regarding their viral load and spreading into the community should arise.recently published studies are providing a better understanding of the sars-cov-2 infection and natural history. zou and colleagues (5) analyzed the nasal and pharyngeal viral load in 17 symptomatic adult patients. higher viral loads were detected soon after the onset of symptoms, with higher viral loads detected in the nose than the throat. importantly, a comparable viral load was detected in asymptomatic patients tested, suggesting the possibility of transmission from asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic patients. similarly, rothe et al. (6) reported the first probable case of sars-cov-2 transmission in europe occurring from an asymptomatic adult during the incubation period. recently, first data regarding viral load in children have been published. cai et al. (7) described the sars-cov-2 infection in 10 children and confirmed a mild presentation and, importantly, documented prolonged virus shedding from both the respiratory tract and the feces during the convalescent stage. also xu et al. documented the fecal spreading of sars-cov-2 in children (8) . importantly, they found that fecal shedding lasted more than the nasopharyngeal one also in asymptomatic children, suggesting that thay can play a role in the spread of the infection, as they do with other respiratory viruses.these observations have several implications, particularly in regard to the daily pediatric practice. to date, sars-cov-2 infection in children is not bearing attention and interest because it seems not clinically relevant. however, as pediatricians we are aware that children are extremely prone to contract and spread viral infections. since the sars-cov-2 test is performed only to symptomatic patients or known contacts, how can we ensure that the small number of documented pediatric infections is not a huge underestimation? moreover, the isolation of common respiratory viruses from children's nasal swabs is very frequent and, in the current circumstances, we could have mistakenly confirmed an exclusive etiological diagnosis without suspecting sars-cov-2 as an additional threat. we know little about potential coinfections of sars-cov-2 and other more common respiratory viruses.another consideration to bear in mind is that children are those that we all hug and kiss the most. children spend much of their free time with the grandparents, which appear to be the subjects affected the most by the sars-cov-2 infection. are we sure that children, although not significantly clinically involved, are not playing a role in the sars-cov-2 diffusion? to date, epidemiological data and studies in these groups are lacking, and worldwide guidelines suggest to test only symptomatic or suspected cases, without mentioning the necessity to test children that, although being asymptomatic, have possibly a hidden burden of infection.this would not be the first time children are neglected during an outbreak of infectious diseases. a similar situation has been happening, for the past decades, with pediatric tuberculosis, defined as "neglected disease" and "human right violation" (9) by major experts: pediatric tuberculosis receives little attention and interest because it is usually paucisymptomatic and paucibacillary in children (therefore, has a milder impact on human population and economies). however, the epidemiology of this disease in the pediatric population plays a key role for a good understanding of the real tuberculosis burden and diffusion within the population. is a similar phenomenon happening with pediatric sars-cov-2 infection?it is possible that testing children would raise the number of confirmed cases dramatically, with catastrophic economic consequences. would world health authorities and national governments commit to a better understanding of the epidemiology of the pediatric sars-cov-2 infection, at the dangerous cost of a rise of detected cases, fear in the general population, national and international restrictions, and heavy economic consequences?in the developed countries where sars-cov-2 is currently spreading, the survival of children with severe morbidities, immune disorders, cancer, or transplant is much higher than other countries (including china) due to high-standards of medical care. we could suspect that the infection of compromised children carried out by peers, potential asymptomatic carriers, could lead to serious consequences. although fatal cases have not yet been reported in the pediatric population, we cannot exclude that the vulnerable children have not been infected yet. to prevent the contagion of children at increased risk, a better understanding of the dynamics of sars-cov-2 among children is necessary.china and italy first, and subsequently many other countries in the world, have currently closed all schools, from primary nurseries to universities. this choice was based on the concern for aggregation and not on scientific evidence of a child-to-child transmission. further information on transmission dynamics are needed, as well as a good understanding of the real burden of sars-cov-2 infection in children, in order to improve our screening practices. children in high-burden areas should be tested and results correlated with their recent medical history as well as with infectious status of close contacts, in order to understand how and how long they shed the virus. moreover, the better knowledge of the pediatric sars-cov-2 infection can clarify the underlying mechanisms that lead children to develop paucysymptomatic disease; this, in turn, can help researchers in findings novel therapeutic strategies against viral infections in general, and covid-19 in particular. recenlty, spanish researchers evaluated a large series of children evaluated in 30 tertiary hospitals during the first 2 weeks of the epidemic in spain (10) . although they found that only 41 of the 4,695 confirmed cases (0.8%) were children younger than 18 years of age, they only tested those evaluated in hospitals. this is an important limitation since most children are expected to be asymptomatic or have mild symptoms (11) , and to know the real burden of pediatric covid-19 and how this influences the sars-cov-2 diffusion, we need to test children in the community, in both high and low sars-cov-2 burden settings and compare results. importantly, children should be tested with both nasopharyngeal and rectal swab, since authors state that pharyngeal and nasal swab sensitivity is as low as 32-63% (12) . more importantly, serological studies are necessary to understand the real burden of pediatric covid-19. we need to know that and stop neglecting and not considering children, this will really help in understanding epidemics in general (not only the current one) and knowledge gained will help to better manage the next one, which will come soon or later.in conclusion, according to the current estimates, about 1% of all confirmed sars-cov-2 cases involve children. this could be an underestimation, as sars-cov-2 is not actively searched in children. there are still many open questions about the epidemiology of sars-cov-2 infection in children.the original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/supplementary materials, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.db conceptualized and designed the study, drafted the initial manuscript, and reviewed and revised the manuscript. db and pv carried out literature review. pv and gz critically reviewed the manuscript for important intellectual content. all authors approved the final manuscript as submitted and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work.background since the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) in december 2019, the coronavirus has spread all over the world at an unprecedented rate. the transmissibility of coronavirus from asymptomatic patients to healthy individuals has received enormous attention. an important study using the covid-19 data from the city ningbo, china, was carried out to estimate and compare the transmission rates of the coronavirus by the symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. however, in the original analysis, the usual chi-squared tests were unduly used for some contingency tables with small cell counts including zero, which may violate the assumptions for the chi-squared test. objective we reanalyze the data from the city ningbo with more appropriate statistical methods to draw more reliable and sound conclusions on the transmission rates of the coronavirus by the symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. methods we exclude the cases associated with the super-spreader and adopt more appropriate statistical methods, including the permutation test and fisher's exact test, to reanalyze the covid-19 data from the city ningbo. results after excluding the cases related to the super-spreader, fisher's exact test yields p-value=.84, which indicates stronger evidence of no difference in the transmission rates compared with the original analysis. the odds ratio of transmission rates of coronavirus between the symptomatic and asymptomatic patients is 1.2 with a 95% confidence interval [0.5, 2.8]. conclusions through a more in-depth and comprehensive statistical analysis of the ningbo data, we conclude that there is no difference in the transmission rates of coronavirus between the symptomatic and asymptomatic patients.comparison of transmissibility of coronavirus between symptomatic and asymptomatic patients: reanalysis of the ningbo covid-19 data.background: since the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease (covid-19) in december 2019, the coronavirus has spread all over the world at an unprecedented rate. the transmissibility of the coronavirus from asymptomatic patients to healthy individuals has received enormous attention. an important study using covid-19 data from the city of ningbo, china, was carried out to estimate and compare the transmission rates of the coronavirus by the symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. however, in the original analysis, the usual chi-square tests were unduly used for some contingency tables with small cell counts including zero, which may violate the assumptions for the chi-square test. objective: we reanalyze the data from the city of ningbo with more appropriate statistical methods to draw more reliable and sound conclusions on the transmission rates of the coronavirus by the symptomatic and asymptomatic patients. methods: we excluded the cases associated with the super-spreader and adopted a more appropriate statistical method, including the permutation test and the fisher exact test, to reanalyze the covid-19 data from the city of ningbo. results: after excluding the cases related to the super-spreader, the fisher exact test yields a p value of .84, which indicates stronger evidence of no difference in the transmission rates compared with the original analysis. the odds ratio of the coronavirus transmission rates between the symptomatic and asymptomatic patients is 1.2 with a 95% confidence interval 0.5-2.8. conclusions: through a more in-depth and comprehensive statistical analysis of the ningbo data, we concluded that there is no difference in the transmission rates of coronavirus between symptomatic and asymptomatic patients.comparison of transmissibility of coronavirus between symptomatic and asymptomatic patients: reanalysis of the ningbo covid-19 datain december 2019, an outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) occurred in wuhan, hubei province, china. 1 has spread rapidly to other provinces of china and now internationally. on january 30, 2020, the world health organization (who) declared covid-19 a public health emergency of international concern (pheic). as of april 7, 1,279,722 cases were confirmed, and 72,616 (5.7%) patients died in 211 countries. in the beginning of the outbreak, covid-19 was considered a zoonotic disease with limited human-to-human transmission. initially, pneumonia cases were linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market. soon after, this emerging coronavirus was found to be highly infectious. the basic reproductive number ranged from 2.2 to 3.58, with a mean serial interval of 7.5 days. 1e3 children are more susceptible than adults to some infectious diseases, which may cause fatal outcomes. for instance, young children, especially infants aged less than 6 months, have higher mortality rates due to seasonal influenza infection than individuals in other age groups. 4 during enterovirus outbreaks, enterovirus 71 and echoviruses lead to death in different age groups of children. 5, 6 streptococcus pneumoniae and haemophilus influenzae type b were associated with high childhood mortality in the era without conjugate vaccines. 7 the clinical spectrum of covid-19 ranges from asymptomatic to critically ill cases. fever and cough are the most common manifestations in symptomatic adults. 8, 9 it seems that sars-cov-2 is less invasive in children than in adults. however, reports about the clinical characteristics of pediatric covid-19 are limited. facing this unknown and emerging pathogen, we aimed to collect current evidence about covid-19 in children.we performed a systematic literature search in pubmed and embase using the following terms: "coronavirus or covid-19 or 2019-ncov or sars-cov-2" and "pediatric or neonate or newborn or infant or children or adolescence" to find reports of pediatric covid-19. since the novel coronavirus was identified in january 2020, the time period was restricted to not include literature published prior to this time point. available full texts and the reference lists of the relevant studies were reviewed. there was no language restriction in our search. since some reports were published in chinese journals, the journals and publications of the chinese medical association related to covid-19 were completely reviewed. google scholar was searched manually for possible missing articles. the last update of the study was on march 15, 2020.two independent reviewers (thc, jlw) screened all titles and abstracts for eligibility. studies were eligible for inclusion if they met the following criteria: 1) patients were younger than 18 years old, and 2) covid-19 was diagnosed by pcr. repeated calculations in other publications or clinical diagnoses of covid-19 cases without laboratory confirmation were excluded. correspondences or letters fulfilling the above criteria were also included.after full-text screening for eligibility and review, two authors (thc, lyc) independently extracted data. disagreements were resolved by consensus. the following items were extracted from each study, if available: author, journal, date of publication, study design, study country, time period, contact or travel history, clinical symptoms, laboratory results, complications, and chest computed tomography (ct) findings. the publication date, author, hospital and case report content were carefully examined to avoid repeated calculation during data pooling. the quality of studies included in meta-analysis was assessed using the newcastleeottawa scale (nos). articles with poor quality (score z 0e3) were excluded.we presented the data with descriptive statistics and pooled the available data for overall demonstration. disease severity was categorized into four types according to officially published guideline in china: 1) mild type: asymptomatic or some upper respiratory tract infection signs; 2) moderate type: the above manifestations with pneumonia in imaging study; 3) severe type: disease progression with danger signs; 4) critical type: shock or organ failure needing intensive care. 10 the pooled data were further compared with those for laboratory-confirmed severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) children reported in previous studies. categorical data were compared with the chi-square test. a p-value less than 0.05 by a two-tailed test was considered statistically significant. when at least 3 studies with available data reported the same characteristic, we used comprehensive meta-analysis version 3 (biostat, englewood, nj) to conduct meta-analysis. we used random effects models to calculate the pooled frequency among each clinical manifestation or outcome. the results are expressed as incidences and 95% cis. i 2 was calculated to examine statistical heterogeneity across the included studies. i 2 > 50% and a p < 0.05 were considered substantial heterogeneity. egger precision weighted linear regression tests and funnel plots were used to test potential publication bias. if publication bias was present, the trim and fill method would be performed and rosenthal's failsafe n would be calculated to evaluate the effect. fig. 1 shows the flow diagram of the study selection process. a total of 190 articles were identified in the initial search. after removing duplicates, 113 were screened by titles and abstracts. obviously irrelevant articles were excluded. the remaining 13 were retrieved for full text assessment. seven records were identified through manual searches of google scholar (n z 1) and the chinese medical journal network (n z 6). after qualitative synthesis, we excluded 11 articles. ten articles were case reports. one study investigating infant cases was excluded because the patient profile was extracted from a national database. considering repeated calculations and missing data, we did not include this study in the pooled data. in our search, we found 9 case series related to pediatric covid-19.in table 1 and table 2 , we summarize the epidemiological and clinical features of pediatric covid-19. the study period ranged from january 2020 to february 2020. the reported population included all age groups, from neonates to adolescents. most of them (75%) had a clear household contact history. no gender difference among these studies. the majority of patients were categorized as having mild to moderate disease severity (98%). more than half (59%, 95% ci 0.41e0.72; i 2 z 44%, p z 0.10) of the patients presented with fever. about 46% (95% ci 0.27e0.66; i 2 z 57%, p z 0.03) of the patients had a cough. only a few (12%, 95% ci 0.06e0.32; i 2 z 45%, p z 0.09) patients had gastrointestinal manifestations. approximately 26% (95% ci 0.13e0.52; i 2 z 63%, p z 0.01) of patients showed no specific symptoms initially. however, the result revealed moderate heterogeneity. regarding laboratory results, lymphopenia (lymphocytes < 1500 â 10 9 /l) was found in 32% (95% ci 0.05e0.83; i 2 z 72%, p z 0.03) of infected children. some children (9%, 95% ci 0.04e0.46; i 2 z 20%, p z 0.28) even developed severe lymphopenia (lymphocytes < 1000 â 10 9 /l). table 3 shows the pooled frequency of initial chest ct findings in 3 pediatric covid-19 case series. patchy consolidation and ground glass opacities were the most common radiographic features, which occurred in 31% (95% ci 0.13e0.55; i 2 z 51%, p z 0.09) and 48% (95% ci in table 4 , we provide the current data about neonates born to mothers with covid-19. most of the pregnant women (78e89%) had fever at some point during hospitalization and received a cesarean section (78e100%). approximately half (44e60%) of the babies were preterm. hence, gestational age affected birth weight. there was no difference between the two cohorts in initial apgar score. no neonatal death was mentioned.in addition, all neonates tested negative for sars-cov-2. liu et al. 11 feng et al. 12 cai et al. 13 xia et al. 14 wang et al. 15 jiang et al. 16 data are shown as numbers (%). a number with positive results/number with available data. in table 5 , we compare laboratory-confirmed sars children in previous studies 20e23 and covid-19 children in our review. household or direct contact represents the major transmission route for both coronavirus diseases. however, sars in children is more severe than covid-19. children infected with sars-cov tended to have more fever (98% vs. 59%, p < 0.001) than those with covid-19. symptomatic infection is also more common with sars than with covid-19 (100% vs. 74%, p < 0.001). overall, covid-19 seems less invasive than sars in pediatric patients. however, the proportion of patients requiring intensive care shows no statistical difference (10% vs. 2%, p z 0.06).this review summarized currently available observational studies about pediatric covid-19, from neonates to adolescents. the number of covid-19 cases has increased worldwide. according to the largest epidemiologic survey, the age distribution of these patients is mainly 30e79 years (87%). 24 the elderly and people with chronic diseases are most susceptible to critical forms of covid-19. there are relatively few cases among children. patients under 19 years old accounted for 2.2% of 44,672 confirmed cases. 24 only one death was recorded. the crude mortality rate is extremely low (0.1%) compared with that in current published data for adults (2.3%e14.6%). 8, 9, 24, 25 the clinical data in pediatric covid-19 have to be reviewed with caution. most of the authors in our review used the "diagnosis and treatment protocol for 2019-ncov. 5th ed" to categorize disease severity. 10 we unified the pooled data according to this classification. based on this rule, the disease severity in children seems to be mild or moderate. mild disease makes the clinical features subtle and transient. hence, the proportion of asymptomatic patients varied among studies. also, one retrospective study was conducted before mid-january. 11 the result might be representative of the early stage of covid-19 outbreak. therefore, more symptomatic or severe cases were reported, the same as adults, 8, 9 which make moderate heterogeneity of the pooled data in clinical features. despite the benign presentation of pediatric covid-19, a 1-year-old boy, who was classified as critical in one report, 26 presented with vomiting and diarrhea for 6 days. there was no obvious cough or respiratory tract symptom initially. his condition deteriorated quickly after admission. shock developed and soon progressed to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), so he received mechanical ventilation. acute kidney injury with hemodialysis also occurred during admission. prompt diagnosis is more challenging in pediatric cases with unusual presentations.compared with other pandemic or epidemic viral illnesses, the small numbers of cases and low mortality rate in pediatric covid-19 are of great interest. compared with the most relevant virus, sars-cov, sars-cov-2 causes less severe disease. human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is proposed to be the key factor. ace2 is the primary entry receptor for both coronaviruses. after replacing four out of five important interface amino acid residues from sars-cov, the affinity of sars-cov-2 for ace2 is weaker. 27 nevertheless, sars-cov-2 still exhibits significant binding affinity to human ace2. the binding strength of sars-cov-2 to ace2 partially explains why it causes less severe disease than sars-cov but remains highly infectious. however, this result did not answer the question of why children are spared from severe covid-19. in previous studies, sars-cov table 4 demographics and outcomes of neonates born to mothers with covid-19.chen et al. 18 zhu et al. covid-19 in children 5induced higher ace2 shedding than human coronavirus nl63. the differential downregulation of ace2 is related to lung injury. 28 in one study about the pathophysiology of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), increasing age led to an imbalance of the pulmonary renin-angiotensin system, which correlates with aggravated inflammation and enhanced lung injury in a rat model. 29 nevertheless, no age-dependent differences in ace and ace2 were seen in a prospective observational cohort study. 30 there is one hypothesis that smoking increases ace2 expression and thus enhances coronavirus entry into pulmonary epithelial cells. 31 undoubtedly, smoking is more prevalent among adults than among children. nonetheless, some controversies exist. 32 another important fact is that children rarely have underlying diseases, such as diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or cardiovascular diseases, as adults do. these underlying diseases may predispose patients to critical conditions during covid-19. however, the definite pathogenesis is unknown. therefore, the severity difference between adults and children with covid-19 needs more investigation.the diagnosis of pediatric covid-19 is a challenge. in china, clinicians should have a suspicion of covid-19 when patients meet one epidemiological history with two clinical manifestations. according to our literature review, the main symptoms in pediatric covid-19 are fever and cough, resembling common viral illness frequently encountered in school or kindergarten. 33 epidemiological features are the main diagnostic clue. children with familial clustering, contact with infected cases, travel or living in areas with persistent local transmission within 14 days prior to disease onset are at risk of being infected with sars-cov-2. since covid-19 has spread to many other countries, the epidemiological history should be modified outside mainland china. in addition, asymptomatic cases are a potential source of infection. although only 1% of the patients had been reported as asymptomatic, 24 26% of infected children were asymptomatic in the pooled data. namely, children may act as silent carriers or spreaders. 34 notably, an asymptomatic infection does not always mean a carrier. chan et al. presented a familial cluster with one family member, a 10-year-old boy, who tested positive for sars-cov-2. without symptoms, he had ground glass lung opacities identified incidentally by ct scan. 35 a similar scenario occurred in another report: chest ct performed in one asymptomatic child revealed patchy density. 16 this finding raised another issue that needs to be further considered. according to our review, the radiographic findings in pediatric covid-19 are similar to those in adults. 36 in china, chest ct has been used as a screening tool for covid-19. the disease severity and clinical suspicion are associated with radiographic findings. however, this diagnostic policy might not be applicable in all countries.household contact and epidemic area travel history are two major transmission routes for sars. sars-cov-2 shows the same characteristics. familial clustering is a strong epidemiological link with covid-19, especially in children. some reports have already demonstrated that asymptomatic infections in children occurred in family clusters. 35, 37, 38 because of the high asymptomatic ratio, pediatric covid-19 cases are usually detected by contact tracing. unfortunately, presymptomatic or asymptomatic transmission of sars-cov-2 has been reported. 38, 39 the transmission of sars-cov-2 via asymptomatic children is reasonable. to date, no clustering or asymptomatic transmission among children has been documented. there are some possible explanations. first, the outbreak of covid-19 occurred during winter vacation for students. moreover, the chinese government imposed lockdowns and travel restrictions in hubei province beginning on january 24, 2020. furthermore, the government announced that the lunar new year holiday would be extended to february 2, 2020 across the country. the new semester in school will also be postponed indefinitely. these events limited the community spread of sars-cov-2 within school-age children. however, contact tracing and case isolation alone may be unlikely to control the sars-cov-2 outbreak in pediatric groups when a new semester starts.there are some important issues not addressed in our review. first, the outbreak of covid-19 occurred 2 months ago, so detailed case descriptions and clinical courses are limited. in addition, some patients are still hospitalized and quarantined. the long-term outcome and sequelae may need further follow-up. second, critical or fatal pediatric covid-19 cases are rare, indicating that the risk factors and protective factors are still unknown. third, there are often multiple viral infections that mimic covid-19 circulating in the same class or the same school. in areas outside china, how to recognize covid-19 early in children and implement infection control is an urgent problem. fourth, the treatment strategy in children may need additional debate and caution. in some pediatric cases in china, lopinavir, ritonavir and inhaled recombinant human interferon alpha have been applied. however, the efficacy and safety have not yet been reported.in conclusion, compared with sars, covid-19 has distinct features in children. there are more asymptomatic and mild cases, which make diagnosis and infection source control more challenging. current diagnosis is based mainly on typical ground glass opacities on chest ct, epidemiological suspicion and contact tracing.the authors have no conflicts of interest relevant to this article.there is substantial disagreement about the level of asymptomatic severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection in a population. the differences are extreme.authors of a world health organization report stated that, "the proportion of truly asymptomatic infections is unclear but appears to be relatively rare and does not appear to be a major driver of transmission." 1 in contrast, reports of new infections found on a single day have led to statements that "the large majority of coronavirus infections do not result in symptoms." 2 the disagreement results, in part, from the interpretation of studies that report a proportion of asymptomatic people with sars-cov-2 detected at a single point. 2 3 these studies include both people who will remain asymptomatic throughout and those, known as pre-symptomatic, 4 who will develop symptoms of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) if followed until at least the end of the incubation period of 14 days. 5 the full spectrum and distribution of covid-19, from completely asymptomatic, to mild and non-specific symptoms, viral pneumonia, respiratory distress syndrome and death are not yet known. 6 without follow up, however, the proportions of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infections cannot be determined.accurate estimates of the proportions of true asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infections are needed urgently because their contribution to overall sars-cov-2 transmission at the population level will determine the appropriate balance of control measures. 6 if the predominant route of transmission is from people who have symptoms, then strategies should focus on testing, followed by isolation of infected individuals and quarantine of their contacts. if, however, most transmission is from people without symptoms, social distancing measures that reduce contact with people who might be infectious, should be prioritised. 6 the objectives of this study were to address three questions: 1. amongst people who become infected with sars-cov-2, what proportion does not experience symptoms at all during their infection? 2. amongst people with sars-cov-2 infection who are asymptomatic when diagnosed, what proportion will develop symptoms later? 3. what . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.20079103 doi: medrxiv preprint proportion of sars-cov-2 transmission is accounted for by people who are either asymptomatic throughout infection, or pre-symptomatic?we conducted a rapid systematic review to provide relevant evidence during this public health emergency of international concern. 7 the protocol for this review is published in the open science framework (https://osf.io/9ewys/). we report our findings according to the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses. 8 we conducted the search on march 25, 2020.we searched the living evidence database at the university of bern institute of social and preventive medicine (ispm) (https://ispmbern.github.io/covid-19/living-review/collectingdata.html), which includes daily updates of searches of four electronic databases: medline-pubmed, embase, biorxiv and medrxiv, for articles with medical subject headings and keywords for sars-cov-2 infection and covid-19. we reviewed results that contained "asymp*" in the title or abstract (https://osf.io/9ewys/). we also examined articles suggested by experts and the reference lists of retrieved mathematical modelling studies and systematic reviews.we included studies of people with sars-cov-2 diagnosed by reverse transcriptase pcr (rt-pcr) that documented follow-up and symptom status at the beginning and end of follow-up. we included contact tracing investigations, case series, cohort studies, case control studies and statistical and mathematical modelling studies. we did not apply any language restrictions to the search. we excluded the following study types: case reports of a single patient, surveillance data, case series where patients were not enrolled consecutively, reports in which the primary data were found in another included publication, and mathematical modelling studies that did not specifically estimate the quantities specified in the review questions.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020 one reviewer selected studies based on our predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria. a second reviewer verified all included and excluded studies. we reported the identification, exclusion and inclusion of studies in a flowchart ( figure s1 ).one reviewer extracted data using a pre-piloted extraction form in an electronic data capture system (redcap, vanderbilt university, usa). a second reviewer verified the extracted data using the query system in redcap. in case of disagreements, a third reviewer was consulted. when disagreements were not resolved by discussion, we contacted study authors for clarification. the extracted variables included, but were not limited to, study design, country and/or region, study setting, population, age, review outcomes and length of follow-up.the primary outcomes for each review question were:1. proportion with asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection who did not experience symptoms at all during follow-up; 2. proportion with sars-cov-2 infections who did not have symptoms at the time of testing but developed symptoms during follow-up.3. estimated proportion (with including uncertainty interval) of sars-cov-2 transmission accounted for by people who are asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic.two authors independently assessed the risk of bias. a third reviewer resolved disagreements when consensus was not achieved. for review questions 1 and 2, we adapted the joanna briggs institute critical appraisal checklist for case series. 9 the adapted tool included items about inclusion criteria, measurement of asymptomatic status, follow-up of course of disease, and availability of numerator and denominator. we added items about the representativeness of source and target populations . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.20079103 doi: medrxiv preprint from a tool for the assessment of risk of bias in prevalence studies. 10 for review question 3, we used a tool for assessing the credibility of mathematical modelling studies. 11we used the metaprop function from the meta package (version 4.11-0) 12 in r (version 3.5.1) to display the study findings for questions 1 and 2 as forest plots. the 95% confidence intervals (ci) are estimated using the clopper-pearson method. 13 to synthesise proportions from comparable studies, in terms of design and population, we used both random and common-effect models. when the between-studies variance was close to zero we present only the results from the common-effect analysis.we screened 89 studies ( figure s1 ). we included six studies that reported family contact tracing investigations in china, [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] two studies of populations evacuated from wuhan and the diamond princess cruise ship, 21 22 one statistical modelling study based on passengers on the diamond princess, 23 and two mathematical modelling studies. 24 25 proportion of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infectionsthe six family contact investigations included 39 people, with one or more individuals who remained asymptomatic throughout follow-up (table 1) . [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] one study contributed three clusters. the study included adolescents and young adults admitted to hospital in chonqing with covid-19. 16 the authors reported nine case investigations it total, of which four were all symptomatic and two included a person who was asymptomatic on admission, but who developed symptoms later. nine asymptomatic cases were identified in total, with follow-up from the last possible day of exposure ranging from 17 to 33 days (table 1) , which exceeds the accepted sars-cov-2 incubation period of 14 days. 5 the ages were reported for six of the asymptomatic cases; two were children, aged 13 months and 10 years. for three of the asymptomatic cases, transmission to other individuals was . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.20079103 doi: medrxiv preprint reported. the common-effect summary of the proportion of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 from contact investigations was 23% (95% ci 12 to 39%) ( figure 1 ). is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. two studies reported on study populations evacuated from a setting where sars-cov-2 transmission was confirmed (table 1, figure 1 ). nishiura et al. reported on 565 japanese nationals evacuated from wuhan. 22 of these, 13 tested positive by rt-pcr for sars-cov-2 and four were asymptomatic. the authors reported that after 30 days of follow up, all four remained asymptomatic. tabata et al. reported on a sample of passengers evacuated from the diamond princess cruise ship who tested positive by rt-pcr for sars-cov-2 and were followed up at a hospital in japan. 21 of 107 sars-cov-2-infected people in the hospital, 104 were followed for a median of 10 days (interquartile range 7 to 10 days). thirty-three remained asymptomatic by the end of the follow-up period (february 26, 2020). the common-effect summary proportion of infected individuals remaining asymptomatic was 32% (95% ci 24 to 41%). the estimates from the two study types were statistically compatible. the common-effect summary of all studies was 29% (95% ci 23 to 37%) ( figure 1 ). is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. 23 of these, 328 were reported to be asymptomatic when tested. the authors estimated the timing of infection, using published data, and adjusted for the proportion of people who would develop symptoms (right censoring). in a bayesian framework, they estimated that, if all were followed up until the end of the incubation period, the true proportion of asymptomatic infections would be 17.9% (95% credibility interval, cr i 15.5 to 20.2%).we included four studies (table 2, figure 2 ). 15 17 21 26 in three studies in china, people who had sars-cov-2 detected by rt-pcr were followed in hospital. in all three studies, authors reported that the asymptomatic cases were detected during contact investigations of patients who had presented with symptoms of covid-19. in two studies, most patients developed symptoms, 15 26 including 43 of 55 patients in shenzhen, which was the only study in which patients were followed up until clearance of sars-cov-2, measured by repeated negative rt-pcr test results. 26 in the third hospitalbased study, in nanjing, five of 24 asymptomatic sars-cov-2 cases developed symptoms within one to three days of admission. 17 another thirteen showed viral clearance, with two or more negative rt-pcr test results. the remainder still had positive rt-pcr test results, but had not developed symptoms. the fourth study reported the outcome of sars-cov-2 infection in passengers of the diamond princess cruise ship who were hospitalised in japan. 21 of 43 who were asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis, 10 developed symptoms during median follow-up of 10 days (iqr 7-10 days). the findings of the four studies were too disparate to pool in a meta-analysis (figure 2 ).. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. we included two transmission dynamic mathematical modelling studies that explicitly addressed this question. 24 tianjin, china and from singapore. the applied statistical models in a bayesian framework to examine generation and serial intervals for linked cases, with an assumption of the incubation period from a published study. a generation period shorter than the incubation period of the infector indicates pre-symptomatic transmission. they found that the proportion of presymptomatic transmission was 48% (95% ci 32 to 67%) for singapore and 62% (95% ci 50 to 76%) for tianjin, china. 24 ferretti et al. developed a compartmental mathematical model, informed by data on linked covid-19 cases in hubei province, china. they separated the transmission parameter into symptomatic, asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic and environmental components. in their baseline scenario, they assumed a fraction of 46% asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infections (citing data from the diamond princess) and reduced infectiousness from asymptomatic cases. they found, in their base case scenario, that pre-symptomatic patients account for 47% (95% credibility interval 11 to 58%) of the total transmission, and asymptomatic transmission 6% (0 to 57%) of the total. they provide a shiny app [ref:link], where different assumptions can be examined. 25this rapid systematic review found that an upper bound for of 29% (95% ci 23 to 37%) for the proportion of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection. a statistical modelling study estimated that 17.9% (95% cri 15.5 to 20.2%) remain asymptomatic. in empirical studies, the estimated proportions of people who are pre-symptomatic but who go on to develop symptoms were too heterogeneous to combine. in modelling studies, 40-60% of all sars-cov-2 infections are the result of transmission from pre-symptomatic individuals, with a smaller contribution from asymptomatic individuals.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.20079103 doi: medrxiv preprinta strength of this review is that we clearly distinguish between sars-cov-2 infections that remain asymptomatic throughout their course from those that become symptomatic, and we separate the proportions of people with infection from their contribution to overall transmission in a population.this rapid systematic review follows a published protocol and uses methods to minimise bias whilst increasing the speed of the review process. 7 as a living systematic review, we will update it regularly using a living evidence database that includes preprints. one main limitation of the review is that the database does not include all sources. the four databases cover the majority of publications and we do not believe that we have missed studies that would change our conclusions.we identified one online summary of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection that listed 21 articles found through searches of five electronic databases. 27 there was no published protocol. the authors did not distinguish between asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infection and present crosssectional studies alongside longitudinal studies and mathematical modelling studies. the review gave a wide range (5 to 80%) of infections that might be asymptomatic. the advantage of our review is that it is a systematic review and, although we included fewer studies, we only report findings from empirical studies that followed participants for at least 14 days from the last exposure and we quantify the proportion of asymptomatic infection in a meta-analysis.the findings from this systematic review do not support the claim that a large majority of sars-cov-2 infections is asymptomatic. 2 our estimate, 29% (95% ci 23 to 37%) is an upper bound of sars-cov-2 infections that remain asymptomatic throughout. we believe that our analysis is likely to have overestimate the true proportion because all the included contact investigations included at least one asymptomatic individual. at this stage of a pandemic of a new infectious disease, there is likely publication bias, with rapid publication of case reports of newsworthy findings, such as person-to person transmission by asymptomatic individuals. the denominator of all contact investigations is not known, but the study by liao et al. also included clusters with no asymptomatic case. 16 the large . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.20079103 doi: medrxiv preprint number of case reports of novel manifestations of disease was also a feature of the zika epidemic.analysis of published studies showed that estimates of the duration of infection decreased over time as less biased studies were published. 28 we anticipate that, as larger, more representative studies are conducted and published, the proportion estimated to be asymptomatic will decrease. the statistical modelling study by mizumoto, which accounted for right censoring, provides an upper uncertainty interval of 20% asymptomatic infections, 23 which might be closer to the true proportion if that assumed incubation period distribution is accurate. the level and duration of transmissibility from individuals with asymptomatic infections is not known, but in this review, three asymptomatic cases were reported to be the source of subsequent sars-cov-2 infections within families. the proportion of people who are pre-symptomatic could not be determined with certainty, presumably because the distribution of dates at which sars-cov-2 was detected differed between studies.nevertheless, transmission from pre-symptomatic individuals has been found to occur one to three days before symptom onset. 29 only mathematical modelling studies can determine the overall contribution to sars-cov-2 transmission of individuals with asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infection at the population level because of the non-linear dynamics of infection transmission. in the studies included in this review, three estimates from two studies found that 40-60% of all sars-cov-2 infections are the result of transmission whilst pre-symptomatic, with a smaller contribution from asymptomatic infections. 24 25 the consistency of the findings is reassuring because the studies used different methods. of note, ganyani et al. used data about the serial interval to derive their estimate and did not use assumptions about the proportion of asymptomatic infections. 24 our finding differs from a modelling study that has been interpreted as showing that up to 90% of sars-cov-2 transmission is asymptomatic. 30 li and colleagues found that 86% of infections were defined as undocumented, 30 but it appears that this proportion is a composite of asymptomatic infections, infections that were symptomatic and diagnosed but unreported, and infections that were mild and undiagnosed.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.25.20079103 doi: medrxiv preprintthis systematic review gives important information that can inform future research and public health decision-making. an intermediate contribution of pre-symptomatic and asymptomatic infections to overall sars-cov-2 transmission 24 25 means that combination prevention, with enhanced hand and respiratory hygiene, testing tracing and isolation strategies and social distancing, will continue to be needed. social distancing measures will need to be sustained at some level because droplet transmission from close contact with people with asymptomatic and presymptomatic infection is occurring. easing of restrictions will, however, only be possible with wide access to testing, contact tracing and rapid isolation of infected individuals. quarantine of close contacts is also essential to prevent onward transmission during asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic periods of those that have become infected. digital, proximity tracking will need to supplement . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. included in question 2 n=4 figure s1 . flow chart of identified, excluded and included records, as of 25 march 2020included in metaanalysis for question 1 n=8included in metaanalysis for question 2 n=4. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. figure s2 . risk of bias in studies of asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic infection . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 29, 2020. protocol and registration 5 indicate if a review protocol exists, if and where it can be accessed (e.g., web address), and, if available, provide registration information including registration number.eligibility criteria 6 specify study characteristics (e.g., picos, length of follow-up) and report characteristics (e.g., years considered, language, publication status) used as criteria for eligibility, giving rationale.information sources 7 describe all information sources (e.g., databases with dates of coverage, contact with study authors to identify additional studies) in the search and date last searched.search 8 present full electronic search strategy for at least one database, including any limits used, such that it could be repeated.study selection 9 state the process for selecting studies (i.e., screening, eligibility, included in systematic review, and, if applicable, included in the meta-analysis).data collection process 10 describe method of data extraction from reports (e.g., piloted forms, independently, in duplicate) and any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators.data items 11 list and define all variables for which data were sought (e.g., picos, funding sources) and any assumptions and simplifications made.risk of bias in individual studies 12 describe methods used for assessing risk of bias of individual studies (including specification of whether this was done at the study or outcome level), and how this information is to be used in any data synthesis.summary measures 13 state the principal summary measures (e.g., risk ratio, difference in means).to the editor, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), caused by a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), has spread rapidly around the world. currently, the identification of this disease is mainly conducted by using nasopharyngeal swabs [1] , but the presence of sars-cov-2 rna in feces of covid-19 patients indicates the possibility of transmission via fecal-oral route [2] [3] [4] .herein, we report the distinctive clinical characteristics of an asymptomatic case in which sars-cov-2 viral nucleotide detection was positive in anal swabs but negative in nasopharyngeal swabs for such a long period (42 days). in this case, an 8-year-old girl (patient 1) did not show any clinical symptoms, abnormal chest ct image findings or a decreased lymphocyte count. moreover, she was identified as asymptomatic case on feb 19 and until now she did not become a confirmed patient with either respiratory or gastrointestinal symptoms. was capable of transmitting the virus to others remains unknown, although her mother never became infected even though she was in contact with confirmed covid-19 and asymptomatic patients.recent evidence demonstrates sars-cov-2 viral rna is detectable in feces during recovery period of covid-19 pneumonia [5, 6] . intriguingly, studies have also illustrated that both adult and children patients of covid-19 persistently tested positive on anal swabs even after nasopharyngeal testing was negative [7, 8] .this case will further provide the new information that, besides confirmed covid-19 patients, the asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infected case can be persistently tested positive in the stool samples but negative in nasopharyngeal swabs for a long time.the number of asymptomatic infections is rapidly increasing all around the world [9] . asymptomatic patients may be unaware of their sars-cov-2 infection status and therefore transmit the virus to others unknowingly if they are not isolated for medical observation. to control the quick and widespreadin this letter we study the temporal evolution of the sars-cov-2 in italy. the time window of the real data is between february 24 and march 25. after we upgrade the data until april 1.we perform the analysis with 4 different model and we think that the best candidate to describe correctly the italian situation is a generalized logistic equation. we use two coupled differential equations that describe the evolution of the severe infected and the deaths. we have done this choice, because in italy the pharyngeal swabs are made only to severe infected and so we have no information about asymptomatic people. an important observation is that the virus spreads between regions with some delay; so we suggest that a different analysis region by region would be more sensible than that on the whole italy. in particular the region lombardia has a behaviour very fast with respect to the other ones. we show the behaviour of the total deaths and the total severe infected for italy and five regions: lombardia, emilia romagna, veneto, piemonte, toscana. finally we do an analysis of the peak and an estimation of how many lifes have been saved with the lockdown. in early december, or reasonably during november, the sars-cov-2, or commonly coronavirus, appear in wuhan, china.coronaviruses are a large family of viruses known to cause diseases ranging from the common cold to more serious diseases such as middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). coronaviruses were identified in the mid-1960s and are known to infect humans and certain animals (including birds and mammals). the primary target cells are the epithelial cells of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract and seven coronaviruses are identified to be able to infect humans. they can cause common colds but also serious lower respiratory tract infections. the virus causing the current coronavirus epidemic has been called "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2" (sars-cov-2). this was announced by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses (ictv) which deals with the designation and naming of viruses (i.e. species, genus, family, etc.). the name is indicated by a group of experts specifically appointed to study the new coronavirus strain. according to this pool of scientists, the new coronavirus is the brother of what caused sars (sars-covs), hence the chosen name of sars-cov-2. the disease caused by the new coronavirus has a name: "covid-19" (where "co" stands for corona, "vi" for virus, "d" for disease and "19" indicates the year in which it occurred). the oms director-general tedros adhanom ghebreyesus announced it on february 11, 2020, during the extraordinary forum dedicated to the virus. the appearance of new pathogenic viruses for humans, previously circulating only in the animal world, is a widely known phenomenon (called spill over) and it is thought that it may also be at the basis of the origin of the new coronavirus (sars-cov-2). the scientific community is currently trying to identify the source of the infection. on december 31, 2019, the municipal health commission of wuhan (china) reported to the oms a cluster of cases of pneumonia of unknown etiology in the city of wuhan, in the chinese province of hubei. on january 9, 2020, the chinese center for disease prevention and control (cdc) reported that a new coronavirus (initially called 2019-ncov and now called sars-cov-2) has been identified as the causative agent and has been rendered publishes the genomic sequence. on january 30, 2020, the world health organization declared that this epidemic represents an international public health emergency. oms on march 11, 2020 declared that covid-19 can be defined as a pandemic. after notification of the epidemic by china, italy immediately recommended postponing unnecessary flights to wuhan and, subsequently, with the spread of the epidemic, to all of china. consequently, the latter has canceled all flights from wuhan. on 30 january, the minister of health ordered the suspension of air traffic with the people's republic of china, including the special administrative regions of hong kong and macao, on 30 january. the measure also applies to taiwan. in consideration of the oms declaration of "international public health emergency", on january 31, 2020 the council of ministers declared a state of emergency as a consequence of the health risk associated with coronavirus infection. this disease does not save italy that has become a protected area with the dpcm signed on the evening of 9 march by the prime minister, giuseppe conte, who has extended the restrictive measures already applied for lombardy and the 14 northern provinces most affected by the coronavirus infection to the whole national territory. the new action comes into force on march 10 and will take effect until april 3. among the main innovations: it limits the movement of people, blocks sporting events, suspends teaching activities in schools and universities throughout the country until april 3. with the new ordinance of 22 march 2020 issued by the minister of health and the minister of the interior, from 22 march people are prohibited from moving or moving with public or private trasportation in a municipality other than that in which they are located, except for proven work needs, of absolute urgency or for health reasons. [1] in this scenario let's try to analyze the time evolution of the sars-cov-2 in italy with growth patterns. many growth models have been very recently applied to study the covid-19 infection [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] . two very famous examples of these models are described by the logistic [10] and the gompertz [11] equations. the logistic law has been applied in population dynamics, in economics, in material science and in many other sectors, while the gompertz one describes tumor growth, kinetics of enzymatic reactions, oxygenation of hemoglobin, intensity of photosynthesis as a function of co2 concentration, drug dose-response curve, dynamics of growth, (e.g., bacteria, normal eukaryotic organisms). the logistic behaviour assumes that growth stops when maximum sustainable population density is reached through the carrying capacity k that depends on the environmental conditions. for example the ordinances of the prime minister g.conte, the people's hygiene habits are encoded in the carrying capacity k. whereas the gompertz equation takes into account the aging of the population through a lower reproductive capacity over time; not knowing yet the characteristics of the virus we thought it could be a correct choice. now we describes the regional and national choices to contain the epidemic and and consequently our strategy. at first in italy, pharyngeal swabs were initially made only at seriously ill people. this choice, extremely correct in safeguarding the hospital structure (at least apparently), is wrong for a study of the disease data. we explain better: if we believe that the case fatality ratio (cfr) is 1% [12] the number of deaths is the only data extremely relevant. from the extrapolation of total number of infected [15] we observe that the number of infected detected is only 10% of the total. this means that in italy about 90% of the sick are not detected. having no information, therefore, on asymptomatic and infected with mild symptoms, we decided to study the population of the severe infected with 2 equations: one for the severe infected and another coupled for the deaths, obviously the latter are related to the former. so we implement a logistic model that take into account a possibility to consider the contribute of asymptomatic people in the evolution of the sars-cov-2 by means of additional constant and an equation of proportionality between infected and deaths. we consider also an interpolating between logistic and gompertz model. we show that the first scenario is more optimistic and faster respect to the second one. finally we observe the data of each region separately, noting that is present a delay in the evolution of the virus between the various regions and that each region has its own trend. in particular, lombardia has the fastest trend and veneto the slowest one. we conclude with the observation that veneto's strategy of performing swabs even to asymptomatic potential seems to have successful, as can be seen from the estimate of the constant term of the logistic model.a possible scenario of the evolution of the evolution of sars-cov-2 virus in italy is described by the logistic differential equation. the model is represented by the following equationwhere i(t) is the number of infected and the time t is the integration variable. the constant r 0 is the growth rate of this particular population (the sars-cov-2) and k is the carrying capacity. the growth rate r 0 is typical of the population because it is linked to the reproductive mechanism of the virus while the carrying capacity k depends on the environmental conditions. for example the government action of the prime minister g.conte (locked down(ld)), the people's hygiene habits are encoded in the carrying capacity k. however we change this equation adding a constant term athat represents the contribution of asymptomatic people. we explain our idea for the italian situation. studying [12] we assume that the cfr is 1%. consider, for example, the situation of the march 19 in italy• 3405 deaths,• 41035 infected (severe cases, which is presented the necessity to verify the positivity to avoid the collapse of the healthcare facility),• 340500 estimated data of deaths + severe, symptomatic and asymtomatic cases.this means that we have a bath of 300000 infected that can produce severe cases. we consider for simplicity that this growth rate is constant. the exact solution for this equation is well-knownand the limit for t− > ∞represents the maximum possible number for this population.after the march 23 we think it will be necessary recalibrate a with the data of the civil protection. why? because 14 days after the ld the incubation period is over and we suppose that this action destroys possible places for the propagation of the virus. finally we havewhere a ld < a has the meaning that the ld restricts the possibility of contagion through asymptomatic in individual houses or just on the job places. after 11 days the possibility to have symptoms are 2, 5% [13] then also march 20 is a good candidate to impose with the data a ld < a. we can also imagine the possibility that the ld would be so good that a ld < 0. we remark that the exact date of the decrease in the infected is so difficult because the results of the test is not always referred to the same day but we can have a delay for the incredible number of pharyngeal swabs. in conclusion we think that a day between march 20 and march 23 is a good candidate to the drop in infections.[16] now we consider the second population of this model, the deaths. we couple the infected i with the deaths d in the following equation:after a simple integration we obtainwhere t 1 is the first integration extreme, reasonably the february 24. so we fix to have the same growth for the severe cases and the deaths; t d represents the interval between the appearance of symptoms and the deaths. from [14] we estimate t d = 13 days, but we observe from numerical aspects that t d = 4. a brief comment: this reflects the italian choice to do swabs only to severe cases, and not at the very beginning of the disease.the second scenario of the evolution of sars-cov-2 virus in italy is described by the gompertz differential equation. the model is represented by the following equationwhere i(t) is the number of infected and the time t is the integration variable. the constant r 0 is the growth rate of the virus sars-cov-2 and k is the carrying capacity. this model takes into account the aging of the population through a lower reproductive capacity over time, in other words we consider the virus less contagious over time.the solution of the previous equation give us the gompertz lawas in the logistic study we compute the limit or t− > ∞ and we obtainthis represents the asymptotic term of the population, defined by the resources available in the environment, in some sense also in this model we can encoded the human external action.we choose to implement also in this model a constant term that we think that describes the role of the asymptomatic people. so we study numerically this generalized gompertz equationfrom the study of the data, as we will see later in this letter, it's clear that the logistic scenario is very optimistic respect to the natural disaster described by the gompertz model. our idea is to create a model with a new parameter that enables to interpolate between the two regimes. so we take into account the following differential equatioṅwhere r 0 , k l are respectively the growth rate and the carrying capacity of the logistic model, and r 0 , k g for the gompertz one. obviously the time t is always the integration variable. the parameter q has range between 0 and 1, and obviously for q=0 we obtain the gompertz behaviour and for q=1 the logistic one.from the numerical simulations, performing 200 stochastic runs of the gillespie direct method algorithm applied to the logistic equation, we obtain the following parameters for the italy situation described by fig.1 :and k 1 = 0.14 and t d = 4.the errors are estimated at 5 σ, or about 5%.with the interpolating model at 21 march in fig. 2 we observe how the situation could become particularly dramatic, especially as regards the duration of the epidemic (the curve becomes flat in late may). however, it becomes comforting with the data of march 25; the two graphs overlap and from the numerical simulations we find q = 1. this means that environmental factors, or ld, prevail over virus growth factors. 15 days after the ld we therefore started to see concrete effects, and this is compatible with the incubation times of the virus. it therefore seems obvious to study the evolution of the virus with a logistic model when a government applies ld. in conclusion, we expect around 111,000 diagnosed patients and around 16,000 deaths. this, considering a cft of 1.2%, would lead to a total of about 1334,000 infected. in fig. 3 we see that the peak is near 21-22 march and the end of the epidemic at the early may. in this section we update the italy situation according to the calibration performed using the real data of civil protection at 27/03/2020. in fig. 4 we report the previsions of infected and deaths: with the assimilation of two new data for the calibration of the model, the total number of infected goes to about 124800 and the deaths to about 17800. observing fig. 5 , we can note how the curve of daily total infected changes from day to day according to the acquisition of a new data, but the right tails of the considered curves are similar. this suggests that the end of contagion is confirmed, according to our study, at the end of april or early may. finally, in fig. 6 we show the correlation, according to the delay, between the temporal series of total infected and deaths. the plot represents the real data of deaths and the real ones of the total infected shifted of 4 days and rescaled according to the minimum difference between them, i.e., we search the best correlation between the deaths data and the infected shifted forward according to eq.7 (the deaths are delayed compared to infected). by means of this analysis we found the correct delay and we calibrate the parameter k 1 of eq.7 that represents the rate between the derivatives of infected and deaths (the value of k 1 , update at 27/03/2020, is 0.1429). 6 : analysis of delay between infected and dead: for italy delay is 4 days; the plot represent the real data of dead (blue circles) and the real data of total infected (red diamonds) shifted of 4 days and rescaled according to the minimum difference.we consider the following generalized logistic equationwhere α is an experimentally parameter to fit better the initial power law climb. we show the trend of the severe infected in fig.7, fig.8 and in fig.9 respectively with the α-model, the logistic calibrated with data at 29 march and with the α-model calibrated at 1 april. we observe as fitting better the initial power law the estimated number of severe infected and deaths increases of 2%, so we choose to use the α-model to estimated the total number of severe infected and deaths. we obtain i(end) = 138500, d(end) = 19900, a brief comment, as we expect the growth coefficient r 0 is falling and the carrying capacity is obviously increased simply because the number of infected has grown. it is interesting that the contribution a of asymptomatics is also increased. we can explain this by thinking that asymptomatics remain the most important sources of contagion in the single houses of italian people during the ld. we observe as in a week after the peak the estimated number of severe infected and deaths are increased of 20%, but in the last 4 days the trend is in accordance with the data, both numerically and in forecasting the end of the epidemic, in particular the end date is stable from march 27. for this stability we decide to estimate the errors at 2,5 σ, i.e. 2, 5%. a possible marker of the presence of the peak could be the following quantity:where i(t i ) is the total number of infected at the day t i and s(t i ) is the total number of swabs at the same day. as we see in fig. 10 p marker has a peak at 24 march, which is basically in agreement with our prediction. the graph of fig. 10 has been reproduced with a moving average. to complete the peak picture we show the diagrams of the severe infected and the deaths for single day (fig.11 e fig.12) , that are in agreement with the delay time t d of 4-5 days stimated numerically. considering the uncertainty in performing swabs, the possible delays in processing swabs and the end of the incubation time (10-14 days) the picture of the peak in the temporal window 21-24 march seems to be reasonable.as we see in fig. 13 the two scenarios are very different. we compare the generalized logistic curve at 1 april ( fig. 8) with the gompertz one calibrated with the data at 21 march ( i.e. with the data before the effect of the • 831,000 severe infected,• 119,000 deaths,• 11,900,000 total infected,• the end of epidemic at early september.this means that with ld we probably saved 100,000 human lifes!let's start with the analysis of the single regions. if we show the data of the civil protection in fig.14 it's evident as any region has a velocity of propagation of the virus different from each other. in particular, lombardia is very fast and veneto is much slow at the beginning of the spread of the disease (we observed how in each region the number of days in which the number of infections rises by an order of magnitude ranges from 10 days in lombardia to 16 in veneto.). looking at the data and from the previous simple observation, it is spontaneous to think that an analysis of the individual regions is more sensible than a global analysis of italy. this idea seems correct for two reasons: the virus arrives in the various regions at different times and each region has its different environmental and working characteristics, which mainly involves a different population density. after these considerations we therefore propose an analysis for the 6 regions mainly affected by the virus on 25 march.unfortunately, the forecast of lombardia shows us that 59% of future deaths are due to this region. the parameter a is the highest of all regions and this seems to confirm the interpretation that a is the contribution of asymptomatics. from the numerical simulations we obtain the following parameters and k 1 = 0.21 and t d = 5.(21)the region emilia-romagna will probably be the second most affected region in italy. the geographical proximity to lombardy and a large industrial activity could be the main causes. from the numerical simulations we obtain the and k 1 = 0.12 and t d = 2.(23)for veneto we make the opposite consideration compared to lombardia: the coefficient a is the lowest among the regions that performed the largest number of swabs.this data seems to be in agreement with the fact that veneto has carried out a large number of swabs also with and k 1 = 0.06 and t d = 5.yet another demonstration of our idea is contained in the k 1 value of the veneto region, which is the lowest ever. and k 1 = 0.11 and t d = 7.a brief comment about the numbers of these regions: the contagion in these regions certainly started later than the other 3. then it could be that in the initial stages of the contagion the coefficient r is greater (as it was in our previous simulations for italy) and then slowly going down, as you can see from fig. 14 piemonte and toscana are quite fast. we justify the largest r 0 parameter for piemonte and toscana compared to lombardia. we will do a sensitivity analysis of the parameters later. these numbers are very significative, it is the signal that lombardia is the carrier region of the spread of the virus in italy.finally as we see in figs. 25-29 it is evident how the spread of the infection occurred at different times between the various regions, as the peaks are at different times. in particular, observing the tails of the curve, toscana seems to be the region that will last come to zero infections, at 4-5 may. in summary, we studied the evolution of sars-cov-2 in italy with civil protection data in the time window from 24 february to 25 march with the logistic model. we upgrade the curves of severe infected and deaths until 1 april with a generalized logistic model, that works very well at the early of the contagion. we provide around 138,5000 diagnosed patients and around 19,900 deaths on the whole italian territory. this, considering a cft of 1.2%, would lead to a total of about 1,658,000 infected at the end of coronavirus epidemic. we observe how the peak is more or less in correspondence of 21-24 march and the end towards the last days of april and early may as we see in fig. 9 . we stress with the idea that a possible marker of the presence of the peak could be the quantity:this a quantity that has no fluctuations after passing its maximum value: for our opinion it is a great signal of stability. another important result is the estimate of the delay time t d between the peak of the severe infected and the peak of the deaths which seems to be truly in agreement with the data of the civil protection. it is also interesting the comparison between the coefficient at 25 march and 1 april:• r 0 = 0.200, k = 110950 and a = 49, at 25 march,• r 0 = 0.173, k = 138400 and a = 79, at 1 april.as it is obvious, the coeffecient r 0 is falling during the ld and the the coeffecient k is rising. we stress that it is very interesting that the contribution a of asymptomatics is also increased. a possible interpretation is that asymptomatics remain the most important sources of contagion in the single houses of italian people during the ld. finally we studied the evolution of the virus in the most affected regions. a delay is present in the appearance of the virus between the individual regions, so it seems more sensible to study them individually. we have noticed how veneto's strategy in making swabs to as many people as possible has proved successful in containing the evolution of the virus. in the upgrading of the single regions with the data at 1 april, we observe explicitly the peak of the daily severe infected and we show the effective time delay of the comparison of the sars-cov-2 in every regions. finally tuscany will be the last region with zero infections, at 4-5 may.the last consideration about the importance of the ld: with a simulation with a gompertz model, i.e. a model that predicts that the virus stops only because its infectivity propagation goes to zero, we estimate 119,000 deaths. with ld we have probably saved 100,000 human lifes! obviously this project is on-going being the possibility that the data of the next few days may change the scenario, hopefully positive, maybe in a further 6-7 days following the government's even more restrictive measures on 22march.3 he had radiological ground‐glass lung opacities, and he was rt‐pcr positive for genes encoding the internal rna‐dependent rna polymerase and surface spike protein of this novel coronavirus, which were confirmed by sanger sequencing [ ]vigilant control measures are warranted at this stage of the covid‐19 epidemic to avoid a resurgence in cases author contribution xingxia yu: conceptualization (equal);data curation (equal);formal analysis (equal);investigation (equal);methodology (equal);project administration (equal);resources (equal);software (equal);supervision (equal);validation (equal);visualization (equal);writing‐original draft (equal);writing‐review & editing (equal)covid‐19 transmission through asymptomatic carriers is a challenge to containmentto the editor, since the first report on the outbreak of a novel coronavirus dis- "no masks, no going outside" has been adopted by the public. this can help to cut off the transmission routes of covid-19. increases in capacity for laboratory testing, allowing treatment and isolation of covid-19 patients also helps to reduce onwards transmission. in the period of initial success for covid-19 control and prevention, one bottleneck has been screening out asymptomatic carriers for reducing new infections. as frontline doctors, we believe that there have been asymptomatic carriers of covid-19 who can infect their close contacts.although asymptomatic patients with sars were uncommon, they were documented in a retrospective study in the minor 2004 sars outbreak after reopening of the wildlife market in guangzhou. 2 similarly, during the epidemic of covid-19 in wuhan, one asymptomatic child (aged 10 years) who had a history of travel to wuhan from shenzhen was described in the report about a family cluster of covid-19. 3 he had radiological ground-glass lung opacities, and he was rt-pcr positive for genes encoding the internal rna-dependent rna polymerase and surface spike protein of this novel coronavirus, which were confirmed by sanger sequencing. the child was virologically confirmed to have an asymptomatic infection.in addition, another family of three who travelled from wuhan to guangzhou was reported to be infected with covid-19. 4 the father had clinical symptoms, a decreased lymphocyte count, abnormal chest ct images, and a positive result on qrt-pcr. it's interesting that the mother and the son were both asymptomatic, with normal lymphocyte counts and chest ct images but positive qrt-pcr for covid-19 infection.in both cases, asymptomatic carriers were diagnosed by screening after other family members developed symptoms. we presume there would be many other asymptomatic carriers who were never tested. even if those carriers were in the hospital, perhaps for another reason, would the doctor think of doing a viral nucleic acid test for covid-19 in time? if it is not possible to screen these asymptomatic carriers from truly healthy populations, they will be a source of covid-19 infection back into the community, which will also pose a huge challenge for covid-19 prevention and control.on february 25, the case of covid-19 transmission occurring in a prison in rencheng district, jining city, shandong province has sounded an alarm for us. on february 9, a man was released from prison and returned home. but he was informed to isolate himself because a prison officer was confirmed to have covid-19 infection on february 14. in order to avoid isolation and observation, the man absconded from his home. later, it was confirmed that this man was an asymptomatic carrier, and his brother who had close contact with him became infected with covid-19. this case is an example of asymptomatic transmission. one study has reported that the viral load that was detected in the asymptomatic patients was similar to that in the symptomatic patients, which also theoretically suggests the potential transmission of asymptomatic patients. 5 in conclusion, we considered that asymptomatic covid-19 infection is possible, and person-to-person transmission can occur from asymptomatic covid-19 carriers to the community. therefore, vigilant control measures are warranted at this stage of the covid-19 epidemic to avoid a resurgence in cases.we declare no competing interests.rongrong yang 2 1to the editor, since the first report on the outbreak of a novel coronavirus dis- "no masks, no going outside" has been adopted by the public. this can help to cut off the transmission routes of covid-19. increases in capacity for laboratory testing, allowing treatment and isolation of covid-19 patients also helps to reduce onwards transmission. in the period of initial success for covid-19 control and prevention, one bottleneck has been screening out asymptomatic carriers for reducing new infections. as frontline doctors, we believe that there have been asymptomatic carriers of covid-19 who can infect their close contacts.although asymptomatic patients with sars were uncommon, they were documented in a retrospective study in the minor 2004 sars outbreak after reopening of the wildlife market in guangzhou. 2 similarly, during the epidemic of covid-19 in wuhan, one asymptomatic child (aged 10 years) who had a history of travel to wuhan from shenzhen was described in the report about a family cluster of covid-19. 3 he had radiological ground-glass lung opacities, and he was rt-pcr positive for genes encoding the internal rna-dependent rna polymerase and surface spike protein of this novel coronavirus, which were confirmed by sanger sequencing. the child was virologically confirmed to have an asymptomatic infection.in addition, another family of three who travelled from wuhan to guangzhou was reported to be infected with covid-19. 4 the father had clinical symptoms, a decreased lymphocyte count, abnormal chest ct images, and a positive result on qrt-pcr. it's interesting that the mother and the son were both asymptomatic, with normal lymphocyte counts and chest ct images but positive qrt-pcr for covid-19 infection.in both cases, asymptomatic carriers were diagnosed by screening after other family members developed symptoms. we presume there would be many other asymptomatic carriers who were never tested. even if those carriers were in the hospital, perhaps for another reason, would the doctor think of doing a viral nucleic acid test for covid-19 in time? if it is not possible to screen these asymptomatic carriers from truly healthy populations, they will be a source of covid-19 infection back into the community, which will also pose a huge challenge for covid-19 prevention and control.on february 25, the case of covid-19 transmission occurring in a prison in rencheng district, jining city, shandong province has sounded an alarm for us. on february 9, a man was released from prison and returned home. but he was informed to isolate himself because a prison officer was confirmed to have covid-19 infection on february 14. in order to avoid isolation and observation, the man absconded from his home. later, it was confirmed that this man was an asymptomatic carrier, and his brother who had close contact with him became infected with covid-19. this case is an example of asymptomatic transmission. one study has reported that the viral load that was detected in the asymptomatic patients was similar to that in the symptomatic patients, which also theoretically suggests the potential transmission of asymptomatic patients. 5 in conclusion, we considered that asymptomatic covid-19 infection is possible, and person-to-person transmission can occur from asymptomatic covid-19 carriers to the community. therefore, vigilant control measures are warranted at this stage of the covid-19 epidemic to avoid a resurgence in cases.we declare no competing interests.rongrong yang 2 1the outbreak of pandemic coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has led to more than 4 million total infections and 285 thousand deaths worldwide [1] , and serious efforts are needed for its containment. the coronavirus sars-cov-2 has affected not just the public health but made a drastic impact on the economy of the world as well due to the lockdown situations in many countries.pandemics have hit humanity many times in the past as well, and mathematical models are already available for infectious diseases. modeling and simulation can help to predict the extent of the contagious disease and can give useful inputs on correction measures for its containment. in order to devise the lockdown strategy, it is important that the prediction of the disease spread is available to the decision-makers. covid-19 is different from the previously known sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) infection, such as the existence of purely asymptomatic cases [2] and the spread of the infection from them as well as from the exposed ones in the incubation period [3] . our proposed mathematical model, sipherd incorporates the above facts for the covid-19 epidemic.many epidemiological models exist in the literature, and the basic sir model [4] is the widely used one, which needs to be modified to incorporate the complexities involved in coronavirus spread and control. an approximate mathematical model of the covid-19 is initially reported in the literature [5] based on the between-countries disease spread (be-codis), which is a spatial epidemiological model for the study of the spread of human diseases between and within the countries. * ashutosh.mahajan@vit.ac.in an improved mathematical model for the spread of covid-19 is proposed in [6] , by taking into account the infected and undetected cases. but this study and forecast is particularly based only on china.an extended sir model is proposed in [7] , in which the entire people in the country are divided into eight compartments. though it is an improved version of the sir model, the study and simulation results are done only for italy, and the model does not take into account purely asymptomatic cases and the role of tests done per day. another compartmental epidemic model seir [8] forecast for few countries and the impact of the quarantine on the covid-19 is investigated. a better adaptive and improved version of the sir model is illustrated in [9] . in this method, the time dependency of some parameters used for the analysis makes it more robust than the conventional sir method. some other curve fitting based methods are also available in the literature for the forecast of covid-19 in [10] , [11] and [12] . although these methods can track the available data correctly, they are not developed based on the physical insights that affect the rate of spreading of the disease and also it is extremely sensitive to the initial conditions.in this paper, we formulate the mathematical model sipherd for the covid-19 epidemic and apply it for forecasting the number of active cases, confirmed cases, daily new cases, and deaths for india and usa, depending on the lockdown strategy and the number of tests performed per day.we model the evolution of the covid-19 disease by dividing the population into different categories as listed below. as seen in fig. 1, the rates of transfer from one category to another can are the model parameters and a set of differential equations for the entity in each category can be formed. we write the model equations that are independent of the population of the country by considering the fraction of the people in each category.• s -fraction of the total population that is healthy and has never caught the infection• e -fraction of the total population that is exposed to infection, transmit the infection and turn into either symptomatic or purely asymptomatic, and not detected• i -fraction of the total population infected by the virus that shows symptoms and undetected• p -fraction of the total population infected by the virus that doesn't show symptoms even after the incubation period and undetected. these are the purely asymptomatic cases• h -fraction of the total population that are found positive in the test and either hospitalized or quarantined• r -fraction of the total population that has recovered from the infection • d -fraction of the total population that are extinct due to the infection.the sipherd model equations are a set of coupled ordinary differential equations (1 to 7) for the defined entities (s,i,p,h,e,r,d), where initial conditions e(0), p(0) and i(0) are not exactly known. the various rates listed in table i are the parameters of the problem which are also not known, and only possible range is available. some of the parameters such as rates of infection (α, β, γ) change with time in steps, depending on the conditions such as lockdown.where, t r and t d are the delay associated with the recovery and death respectively with respect to active cases h. we have taken into account this delay because the active cases are reported after the testing and admission to healthcare or quarantine center and the number of recovery and death of the admitted will not immediately follow the active or h category number. all fractions add up to unity that can also be seen from summing the above equations. the probability of getting the infection is assumed uniform among the susceptible people, although the disease spreads localised in hot-spots.the asymptomatic proportion of the infected persons onboard the diamond princess cruise ship is estimated in [2] . among the 634 tested positive onboard, 328 were found asymptomatic i.e., more than 50 percent of the confirmed cases were not showing any specific symptoms of covid-19. this factor is incorporated in the model by considering the purely asymptomatic category. the ratio of purely asymptomatic (p) to total asymptomatic (e+p) cases is reported to be 0.35 and the ratio of purely asymptomatic to the total infected (e+p+i) is 0.179 [2] . these reported numbers are used to fix the proportion between ξ p and ξ i as 0.36 and the proportion of initial conditions e(0), i(0) and p (0) as well. in other words, out of 100 exposed cases, after the incubation period, 36 will turn to be purely asymptomatic, and 74 will have symptoms.coronavirus-ncov2 has shown particular characteristics that the asymptomatic patients do transmit the disease. the infection can be transmitted from the person who is not showing illness during the incubation period [3] . this can be included in the model by considering e category people and their transmission as well. hospitalized and quarantined cases can also transmit the disease, and this small rate is taken as parameter δ.the detection of the asymptomatic and symptomatic cases can be taken dependent on the number of tests done per day (t p d ). for the symptomatic cases, the detection is more probable as the infected person can approach for the tests and more likely to be tested. the detection of symptomatic is taken in two parts, one a constant and another part proportional to the tests done per day. this can be written in terms of parameters as,where, µ 0 , ν 0 , and ν 1 are positive constants. recovery of asymptomatic cases is taken faster than the symptomatic cases. the total confirmed cases are the addition of the active cases, extinct cases, and a part of the recovered that were detected. this can be written asthe set of coupled ordinary differential equations for the model can be readily solved numerically for a given set of parameters and initial values. the non-trivial part is the accurate determination of the parameters that will mimic the situation on the ground. the mathematical problem is to take into account the four actual data sets of the total number of confirmed cases, active cases on a particular day, cumulative deaths and tests done per day, and find the set of parameters that will provide the best possible match between the data and model. the extraction of the parameters is also to be automated so that the model can be run on data for various countries. a cost function is written in terms of errors between the actual and solver data sets. the minimizer of the cost can be found to obtain the optimized set of parameters that best fit with the data available till date. the model and the optimization scheme is implemented in matlab. we collected the number of total positive or confirmed cases, present active cases and deaths from [1], [13] , and the number of tests per day from [14] , which is plotted in fig. 2. the day on which lockdown is imposed in a country is also taken into account as changes in the slopes of the data are observed according to it. the rate of transmission of infection from the asymptomatic carrier (α, γ) for a country is taken higher than the symptomatic ones (β) as the asymptomatic carrier may not be aware of his/her infection, and susceptible may not be keeping distance as no symptoms are seen. the mortality rate (τ ) is taken different for different countries as it depends on the immunity and how effectively the critical patients are taken care of by the hospitals.the home recovery rates of asymptomatic (η) and symptomatic (ω), rate of transmission of infection from hospitalized and quarantined (δ), and rate of selfreporting of the symptomatic people (ν 0 ) are taken uniform for all countries. the transfer rate ξ i is the inverse of the incubation period, whose mean is reported 5.2 days [15] . the parameters determined by our model are listed in table ii for the countries we studied.we apply the sipherd model to south korea and germany for exhibiting the predictive capability of our model as the disease has almost reached the end stages in these countries. we used the data for the first 23 and 40 days, respectively, for these counties i.e., till march 9 th and march 30 th and compared the future evolution generated by the model to the actual data as shown in the grey region in fig. 3 for south korea and in fig.4 for germany. model predicted higher deaths for south korea as the mortality rate 2.2e-3 was higher before march  fig. 3 . model prediction using the south korea data up-to march 9 and comparison with the actual data for the confirmed, active cases and total deaths. 9 that improved later to fitted value 0.9e-3.march 30 and comparison with the actual data for the confirmed, active cases and total deaths.for the available data till date, we run the model to extract parameters, and then with the extracted parameters, the model is run for 180 days starting from march 2 nd . if the lockdown conditions are relaxed on may 17 th , the rate of transmission of infection is going to increase. in the relaxed lockdown, the α and β values are assumed to jump by 20%. the prediction for both cases, with a 4k increase in tests per day and saturation at 200k tests, is compared in fig. 5 and in fig. 6 , we plot the prediction band for the daily new cases considering two percent error in the estimation of rate of transmission of infection. we compare the effect of testing on the prediction the recovery rate of the h category is found to be slow compared to south korea or germany, which may be attributed to either incorrect reporting of the active cases or the testing of serious cases only and longer recovery time in hospitals compared to quarantined with mild symptoms. the prediction for the next 240 days, that is till the end of the year 2020, is plotted in fig. 8 for 10k test per day and saturated at 1 million tests per day. the recovery rate σ is taken improved by 25 % after may 4 th and mortality rate is taken improved in steps from initial 6e-3 to 4e-3 to 2.5e-3 after april 9 th and april 19 th . the time evolution of the totally unknown and un- fig. 9. the evolution of the undetected number of infected in exposed (e), symptomatic (i) and purely asymptomatic (p) category for usa.sipherd model is developed by considering purely asymptomatic category of covid-19 infected cases in addition to the symptomatic, and the disease spread by the exposed. the effect of lockdown on the rates of transmission of infection and the influence of tests per day on detection rates has been incorporated in the model. the sipherd model is put for trial for the data of south korea and germany, and with a limited number of days data, the model is found to correctly predict the known evolution. the prediction for india suggests that even increasing the rate of infection transmission by 20% due to relaxation of lockdown leads to around 50k increase in the total number of cases and 3k increase in total deaths. the prediction for the usa shows that in the absence of vaccine the infection can last long till the end of this year and number of deaths could be around 250k if lockdown and social distancing conditions remain the same.coronaviruses (covs) are enveloped, nonsegmented positive strand rna viruses of the family coronaviridae and cause a wide spectrum of illness including respiratory and gastrointestinal disease in a variety of mammalian species including humans [1] . covs are divided into 4 genera and are capable on occasion of interspecies transmission, as postulated for the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus that emerged briefly in 2003 and a very recently identified lethal novel coronavirus (mers-cov) in the middle east [2, 3] . since the 1960s, cov strains 229e and oc43, classified as alpha-and betacoronaviruses, respectively, have been recognized as frequent causes of the "common cold" [4] . in the past decade, cov nl63 (an alphacoronavirus) and hku1 (a betacoronavirus) were discovered as causes of respiratory illnesses and together with 229e and oc43 continue to circulate widely in humans during the winter months in temperate climates [5] [6] [7] . in addition to upper respiratory tract illness, these latter 4 strains are also associated with bronchitis, acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (aecopd), and pneumonia in all age groups [8] [9] [10] [11] . infection rates range widely from 2% to 20% with marked variation in the predominant circulating strain. coronaviruses are rarely isolated in routine tissue culture and without molecular diagnostic tests the majority of infections go unrecognized. most descriptions of the epidemiology and clinical impact of cov are in infants and young children, with only a few small long-term studies in adults, and none that evaluated illness in outpatient and hospitalized populations simultaneously. with the exception of sars and cov-emc, there is little information regarding the relative virulence among coronavirus strains.in this report we describe and compare the incidence, clinical characteristics, and outcome of infection with cov strains 229e and oc43 in 4 large adult cohorts with a variety of underlying medical conditions over 4 consecutive winter seasons. in addition, we contrast the relative clinical impact of these cov strains to influenza a, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), and human metapneumovirus (hmpv).the 4 adult populations included in this study have previously been described in detail [12, 13] . coronavirus infections were identified using archived serum and nasal respiratory secretions previously collected during respiratory illness surveillance encompassing 4 consecutive winters (15 november-15 april) of 1999-2003 in rochester, new york. three prospective cohorts (healthy persons ≥65 years of age, young adults 19-40 years of age, and high-risk adults with underlying chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [copd] or congestive heart failure) were enrolled in the late summer/early fall of each year and participated for a maximum of 2 winters. approximately half of the subjects in the prospective cohorts were replaced each year using a rolling enrollment strategy. upon enrollment, demographics, medical history, and directed respiratory examination were recorded and a serum specimen was obtained. prospective subjects were asked to notify study staff of acute respiratory symptoms (cough, sore throat, increased or new sputum, dyspnea, wheezing with or without fever), at which time the signs and symptoms of illness were recorded and nose and throat swabs and acute serum specimen were collected. four to 6 weeks later, a follow-up assessment was performed and convalescent serum samples were collected. at the conclusion of each season, subjects were queried about any other respiratory illnesses during the season, and a serum sample was obtained.simultaneously, a hospital cohort was recruited from among persons admitted to rochester general hospital with acute respiratory symptoms. patients with acute coronary syndromes, documented pulmonary embolism, or aspiration pneumonia were excluded [12] . acute illness and follow-up evaluations were similar to the prospective cohorts. the university of rochester and rochester general hospital institutional review boards approved the study, and all participants or guardians provided written informed consent.serum samples and nose and throat swab specimens were stored at −80°c for 3-6 years before testing for cov. nose and throat swabs were analyzed for human coronavirus 229e and oc43 rna in single runs using real-time multiplex reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) with primers and probes targeting the polymerase gene. rna was extracted into 12 µl of water from 250 µl of stored respiratory specimens. for reverse transcription, 5.25 µl of rna was incubated at 42°c for 30 minutes with 10 u of avian myeloblastosis virus reverse transcriptase, 10 u of rnasin, 200 µm dntps, and primers specific for strain oc43 (5′aatacctttcttgg ctcgagtaat) and strain 229e (5′aatacctttctttgct ctagtaat) at a concentration of 200 nm each. the amplification mixture contained 5 µl of complementary dna, 5 mm mgcl 2 , 400 µm dntp (dutp replacing dttp), 5 u of taq polymerase, and 1 u of uracil-dna glycosylase, 200 nm of oc43 forward primer, 229e forward primer, a common reverse primer (5′gtggattctgctcaag), and strainspecific probes (sigma-genosys); oc43 (5′fam-tacagaat gcgctgtttctgcagtctgtgaat-bhq1); 229e (5′-tr-acaggcatgagcagtatctgatgtctgtgcga-bhq2). amplification was performed on a bio-rad icycler for 42 cycles of 95°c for 5 seconds, 42°c for 40 seconds, and 68°c for 10 seconds. the cycle threshold was defined when the relative fluorescent units (rfus) exceeded 15% of the highest rfu value for the positive control. strain-specific specificity of the assay was confirmed using cov 229e and oc43 obtained from the american type culture collection (atcc; vr 740 and vr 759, respectively).serologic testing for cov 229e and oc43 was performed by enzyme immunoassay using serum samples spanning each winter season (fall through spring) separately. cov 229e from atcc was propagated in mrc-5 cells (viromed laboratories) until cytopathic effect was extensive. cells were scraped into the medium and sonicated followed by low-speed clarification. the supernatant fluid was pelleted in a beckman sw27 rotor at 20 000 rpm for 90 minutes, resuspended in tne buffer (50 mm tris/140 mm nacl/10 mm edta, ph 7.5), and sonicated, and the virus was purified on a 20%/60% discontinuous sucrose gradient (32 000 rpm in a sw41 rotor for 100 minutes). the virus band was diluted to 3.5 ml in tne buffer and stored at −80°c until use. oc43 (atcc vr 759) was grown in hrt-18g cells (obtained from atcc, crl-11663) until cytopathic effect was extensive, at which time cells were scraped into the supernatant and clarified [14] . the pellet was resuspended into phosphate-buffered saline/0.5% np40, placed on ice, sonicated 4 times for 15 seconds, and then clarified. the supernatant was stored at −80°c until use. cov antigens coated onto enzyme immunoassay plates and control plates were coated with uninfected cell preparations. serial 2-fold dilutions of sera were incubated in antigen-coated plates and developed by addition of alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat antihuman immunoglobulin g (igg) followed by substrate. the usual convention of a ≥4-fold rise in serum igg specific for the cov antigens was considered evidence of infection.infection with other viruses were also identified by culture, rt-pcr, or serology (influenza a and b, rsv, hmpv) or culture alone ( parainfluenza virus) in the same samples as previously described [12, 13] .symptomatic cov infection was defined as an illness with upper or lower respiratory symptoms associated with a positive rt-pcr at the time of symptoms and/or a ≥4-fold rise in cov-specific igg between acute and convalescent serum samples. incompletely evaluated cov illnesses were those for which participants failed to report symptoms during the winter surveillance, or were out of town at the time of the illness, but were reported to study staff at the final spring interview and demonstrated a significant increase in cov-specific serum igg. asymptomatic infection was defined as a ≥4-fold increase in cov-specific serum igg bracketing a period when no respiratory symptoms were reported.differences between groups were analyzed using the χ 2 test of independence for dichotomous variables and unpaired, 2-tailed t tests for continuous variables. p values were corrected for multiple comparisons using the bonferroni correction method.the prospective cohorts included 611 healthy elderly adults, 537 high-risk adults with underlying cardiopulmonary disease, and 291 healthy young adults, and the hospital cohort numbered 1388 (table 1 ). these cohorts have previously been described in detail [12, 13] . the young adult cohort was approximately 40 years younger on average than the other cohorts, and had a substantially greater frequency of living with or exposure to children. compared to the healthy elderly cohort, the high-risk and hospital cohorts had a relatively high prevalence of cardiac and pulmonary disease and greater impairment in the instruments of activities of daily living (iadl) scores. during the 4 winters, 398 coronavirus infections in 394 subjects were identified (4 subjects had a dual oc43/229e infection). in all years, oc43 was more common than 229e early in the surveillance period, and in years 2 and 4, 229e peaked later ( figure 1 ).a total of 302 cov infections occurred in the prospective cohorts, with slightly more oc43 than 229e infections (table 2) . overall, there were 113 cov infections in the healthy elderly cohort (54 229e, 59 oc43), 112 in the high-risk group (57 229e, 55 oc43), and 77 in the young cohort (36 229e, 41 oc43). the percentage of subjects infected with coronaviruses varied considerably from year to year, with infection rates for 229e ranging from 0.5% to 15.0% and oc43 from 2.3% to 11.4%. overall, infection rates were greatest during the winter of year 2 (2000-2001), when 23%-26% of subjects in each of the prospective cohorts were infected with 1 of the 2 strains.of note, asymptomatic infection in the prospective cohorts (defined as a serologic response without a reported illness) was relatively common, and was significantly greater for 229e than for oc43 infections (36.7% vs 18.1%; p = .0003) when the 3 cohorts are considered together. mixed viral infections were also significantly more frequent with symptomatic 229e (16.1%) than oc43 infection (6.3%, p = .03). for 229e-infected persons, coinfecting viruses were hmpv (6), rsv (5), influenza a and b (1 each), and oc43 (1). for oc43-infected persons, coinfecting viruses were rsv (3), hmpv (2), influenza a and b (1 each), and 229e (1).to compare clinical characteristics and outcomes associated with 229e and oc43 infections in the prospective cohorts, we analyzed fully evaluated symptomatic illnesses not associated with other viruses (table 3) . upper respiratory symptoms were relatively common in all 3 cohorts, and nasal congestion and rhinorrhea were nearly universal regardless of infecting strain. other upper respiratory symptoms were less common, with 30%-63% of subjects complaining of sore throat and 25%-44% complaining of hoarseness. cough was more common in oc43 infections when all 3 cohorts were considered together, although lower respiratory signs and symptoms were similar for both strains.the outcome of coronavirus illness in these same subjects is shown in table 4 . for each cohort, there was a trend toward longer duration of illness with oc43 infection. in aggregate, oc43-infected subjects used significantly more cough suppressants and bronchodilators. in addition, there was a trend toward more health service use, such as physician or emergency room visits in the healthy elderly and high-risk groups during oc43 infection.the hospital cohort included 1388 subjects admitted for 1471 illnesses (table 1 ). subjects were similar in age to the healthy elderly group and slightly older than the high-risk group. rates of underlying cardiopulmonary disease and tobacco use were also similar to the high-risk group, whereas home oxygen use was significantly greater in the hospital cohort (24% vs 18%, p = .003). during the 4 winters, 96 coronavirus infections were identified in the 1388 subjects in the hospital cohort. of these, 34 (2.4%) were 229e and 62 (4.5%) oc43, with 2 subjects having both 229e and oc43 identified ( table 2 ). similar to the prospective cohorts, the highest incidence of coronavirus infections occurred in year 2 (11.8%) and ranged from 3.3% to 7.5% in other years.because all subjects had respiratory symptoms, none were classified as asymptomatic. however, overall, 25% of cov infections in the hospital cohort were associated with a second virus. as in the prospective cohorts, a significantly greater percentage of dual virus infection was noted in 229e-infected subjects than in oc43-infected subjects (16/34 [47%] vs 7/62 [11%]; p = .0002). for the 229e-infected persons, the coinfecting viruses were rsv (7), hmpv (9), oc43 (2), and influenza a and b (1 each). for the oc43-infected persons, the viruses were rsv (2), 229e (2), hmpv (1), parainfluenza virus (1), and influenza a (1). admission diagnoses were similar for 229e and oc43, with pneumonia (32% and 35%, respectively) and aecopd (36% and 41%, respectively) most common. the clinical presentation of the 2 strains in the hospital cohort was similar, although there was a trend toward longer hospital stay, and greater need for intensive care unit care and ventilatory support in oc43-infected subjects ( table 5 ). the only significant difference between strains was that oc43-infected subjects were more likely to have pulmonary infiltrates noted on chest radiographs.for both strains, the combination of serology and rt-pcr greatly enhanced the diagnosis of infection. results from symptomatic subjects in whom both tests were available indicate that a significantly greater proportion of oc43-infected subjects were rt-pcr positive (109/158 [69%]) than 229e-infected subjects (52/108 [48%], p = .001). for both strains, approximately 30% were positive by both rt-pcr and serology.we had previously reported the incidence and clinical outcomes of several other viruses in these same cohorts, thus providing an opportunity to compare 229e and oc43 to influenza a, rsv, and hmpv [12, 13] . figure 2a and 2b shows the virusspecific medical care utilization for the 2 older prospective cohorts in subjects with symptomatic illness not associated with dual virus infection. influenza a infection, followed by hmpv and rsv, had the greatest impact and 229e the least. it should be noted that the majority of influenza a illnesses occurred when h3n2 strains were the dominant circulating viruses. we next compared the incidence of each virus in the prospective cohorts to the incidence in the hospital cohort. this should provide a reasonable gauge of the relative virulence of each virus, with a low ratio indicating that fewer outpatient infections are required to produce similar numbers of hospitalizations compared to a virus with a high ratio. for this analysis, asymptomatic infections and dual virus infections are included in the prospective cohorts. figure 2c shows that influenza a has the lowest ratio (0.30), followed in ascending order by rsv (0.85), hmpv (0.95), oc43 (2.1), and 229e (6.2).noninfluenza respiratory viruses are increasingly recognized as significant pathogens in adult populations, especially in elderly adults. however, unlike influenza, the impact and importance of other respiratory viruses are less well documented in this age group. although coronaviruses have been identified in elderly adults and high-risk populations such as those with copd, cystic fibrosis, or immune deficiencies, only a few studies have included extended periods or directly compared results to other viruses [10, 11, [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . our data indicate that depending upon the year, 3%-26% of prospectively enrolled outpatients were infected with oc43 and 229e cov strains. more importantly, among the hospital cohort the incidence of coronavirus infection varied from 3.3% to 11.8%, with an average of 6.8% per year. these findings are consistent with reports from other investigators. in a 1-year analysis of 2215 patients with copd enrolled in an influenza vaccine efficacy study, gorse et al identified coronaviruses in 14% of acute influenza-like illnesses (defined as ≥3 respiratory symptoms or fever plus 2 respiratory symptoms), a rate similar to that of influenza [10] . in that study, oc43 was approximately 3 times more common than 229e; however, asymptomatic infection was not sought and thus the true number of infections was likely greater. in our study, we used less stringent criteria for evaluation and thus we likely detected a broader spectrum of illness. in contrast to our study, gorse et al found that coronavirus and influenza infections were equally associated with the need for hospitalization, although only influenza was temporally linked to impairment of pulmonary function. in a community-based study from the netherlands, graat et al detected coronaviruses by rt-pcr in [11, 15] . in an analysis of a large number of outpatient respiratory illnesses in the united kingdom, gaunt identified cov in approximately 1.1% of older adults over 3 years [8] . in that study, lower respiratory tract illness was noted in 43% of oc43 infections, but in no 229e infections. our data also suggest that oc43 has greater clinical impact than 229e in adults. oc43 infection was significantly less likely to be asymptomatic or associated with mixed viral infection, the latter a common finding also noted by other investigators. we defined asymptomatic infection by a positive serologic rise during an asymptomatic interval rather than by a positive pcr in asymptomatic persons. the latter may represent "colonization" whereas the former likely represents true infection. the true frequency of coinfections is likely to be considerably greater, as we did not assess subjects for rhinovirus and we only performed culture for parainfluenza viruses. the most frequent coinfecting viruses, rsv and hmpv, have previously been shown by us and others to account for significant morbidity in elderly adults [12, 13, [21] [22] [23] . thus, the observed illness in coinfected subjects may primarily be attributable to the coinfecting virus, a suggestion made by prill et al in a study of cov infection in infants [24] . perhaps most significant is the lower ratio of outpatient infections to inpatient infections for oc43 compared to 229e, suggesting a virulence difference between strains. our results imply that in elderly adults with a high incidence of underlying cardiopulmonary disease, it would require approximately 3-fold more outpatient 229e infections than oc43 infections to result in an equivalent number of hospitalizations. although another group of investigators also simultaneously measured the incidence of infection in outpatient and hospitalized adults in the same community with a similar trend, they did not differentiate the coronavirus or influenza strains in the outpatient groups [11, 15] .in a similar fashion, we were also able to compare the relative impact of both coronaviruses to that of other previously characterized respiratory viruses in these same cohorts. not surprisingly, the results indicate that the clinical impact is greatest for influenza a followed by rsv, hmpv, oc43, and 229e in order of decreasing importance. although the relative impact of coronavirus infection appears to be less than the other viruses, the overall burden, particularly for oc43, is not insignificant. less virulent organisms, such as rhinoviruses, have also been shown to have significant overall disease burden in the elderly due to their relatively high prevalence [25] . using our coronavirus data in relation to influenza a during the 4-year period of surveillance and eliminating viral coinfections, the hospital burden of these 2 coronaviruses combined was approximately 47% of the influenza a.our study has several important limitations. the first is that we did not test for nl63 and hku1 infections, and thus are unable to provide a complete picture of the clinical impact of coronavirus infection in adults. in some studies, nl63 or hku1 has been more frequently identified than oc43 and 229e, although the majority reported oc43 to be the most common coronavirus strain identified [8, 9, 17-19, 24, 26] . it is possible that some of our subjects diagnosed with oc43 or 229e by serology alone could include hku1 or nl63 infections due to antigenic cross-reactivity within coronavirus groups [27] . in addition, we also did not include an asymptomatic control group for the hospital cohort to assess illness causality, as done in one pediatric study [24] . futhermore, viral coinfections were likely underestimated, and thus the attributable impact of cov infection may be overestimated. finally, our study was limited to winter seasons, and although coronaviruses tend to be most active in the winter, we likely missed some cov infections, especially in year 2 when oc43 was highly active at the start of our surveillance period. because we performed serology for each winter season separately, we would not have detected summer illnesses.in conclusion, the overall incidence and impact of combined coronavirus 229e and oc43 infections in diverse adult populations over 4 consecutive winters is relatively high and the overall medical burden of disease is substantial.the 2019 outbreak of coronavirus in wuhan (hubei province of china) has been since attributed to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] . termed coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) by the world health organization (who), it has spawned a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) [7] . at present, there are > 100 affected countries and districts [8] . sars-cov-2 is the seventh member of the enveloped rna human coronavirus (hcov) family, which also includes hcov-229e, −oc43, -nl63, -hku1, sars-cov, and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [9] . earlier data have shown that adult patients with covid-19 present with fever, dry cough, dyspnea, fatigue, and lymphopenia. serious pneumonia may also ensue, more often in elderly adult men and those with chronic comorbidities, posing greater risk of severe acute respiratory syndrome and even death [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] .although all humans are susceptible to sars-cov-2, it does appear that covid-19 occurs less and is less severe in children than in adults [10, 11] . reports of pediatric vulnerability are increasing nonetheless [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] , without comprehensive analysis or conclusive proof. to address this issue, we went through clinical data of our patients. our findings attest to some distinctive differences, which may help in managing children hereafter.objective: to assess clinical profiles of children infected with the 2019 novel coronavirus, sars-cov-2 (covid-19).clinical data were collected from 16 children (1 months-14 years) diagnosed with covid-19 at central hospital of xiangyang city, hubei province of china between january 31, 2020 and march 17, 2020. informed consent was obtained for experimentation with human subjects. all subjects met diagnostic guidelines established in china, as stipulated in "diagnosis and treatment recommendation for pediatric coronavirus disease-19″ (2nd edition) [17] . any of the epidemiologic conditions set forth and at least two related clinical provisions were required to define a suspected case. the epidemiologic criteria were as follows: (1) travel or residence in wuhan area or other areas showing continuous local spread within 2 weeks of onset; (2) exposure within prior 2 weeks to fever or respiratory symptoms from wuhan area or other areas where local spread was ongoing; (3) close contact with confirmed or suspected cases of covid-19 within 2 weeks of onset; (4) disease clusters, comprised of patients (other than the child in question) with fever or respiratory symptoms suggesting or identified as covid-19; and (5) newborns of mothers with suspected or confirmed covid-19. qualifying clinical manifestations were as follows: (1) fever, fatigue, dry cough, or some with no fever (2) abnormal chest imaging (x-ray or computed tomography [ct]); (3) normal or low total leukocytes counts or lymphopenia in the early phase of disease.suspected cases were ultimately confirmed by one of the following diagnostic outcomes, using pharyngeal swabs, sputum, feces, or blood samples: (1) sars-cov-2 nucleic acid detected by real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction (pcr); (2) genetic sequencing of virus highly homologous to sars-cov-2; or (3) culture and isolation of sars-cov-2 particles.we gauged the severity of covid-19 by clinical features, laboratory testing, and chest x-ray imaging. symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection only, such as stuffy nose, sore throat, and fever, constituted mild disease. some children were asymptomatic, only identified by sars-cov-2 nucleic acid positivity, using pharyngeal swabs and were classified as mild cases. in ordinary disease, fever, cough, fatigue, headache, or myalgia were evident, and there were signs of pneumonia on imaging, but no extreme illness or complications developed. severe disease is progressive, marked by one of the following: labored breathing (70 times/min in infants or ≥50 times/min in children > 1 year old), hypoxic manifestations, disturbed consciousness, mental malaise, lethargy, coma, convulsions, food resistance or feeding difficulties, and even signs of dehydration, coagulation dysfunction, myocardial damage, gastrointestinal dysfunction, sizeable liver enzyme elevations, and rhabdomyolysis syndrome. ards, sepsis, and icu care are referring specifically to the critical disease presentation in covid-19.for the sars-cov-2 nucleic acid test (nat), real-time quantitative pcr (rt-qpcr) was used, based on pharyngeal swab and performed 1 day before or on the day of ct studies. routine laboratory testing of blood count, c-reactive protein (crp), liver function, and more were also completed 1-2 days prior to or on the day of ct imaging. we reexamined chest ct after body temperatures stable for > 3 days, and coughs appreciably controlled. during hospitalization, nat was reexamined every other day until it showed negative.ten of the 16 patients studied (62.5 %) were male and six (37.5 %) were female, ranging in age from 11.5 months to 14 years (median age, 8.5 years). none of them had underlying disease, and all were from the geospatial hotspot of xiangyang city (second to wuhan city) in hubei province. twelve patients (75 %) showed disease family clustering, having two or more confirmed infected family members. among the remaining four cases, one patient had a history travel to wuhan, and two were in contact with people returning from wuhan. mild disease accounted for five cases (31.3 %), and ordinary disease for 11 (68.8 %).after contact with family members known to be infectious, a median of 15.5 days (range, 10-26 days) elapsed before eight asymptomatic children (50 %) developed nat positivity. four of them (4/16, 25 %) were classified as ordinary diseases because of chest ct showing signs of pneumonia and the other four asymptomatic children (4/16, 25 %) were classified as mild diseases with normal chest ct. clinical manifestations of the other eight patients (50 %) were distributed as follows: fever only (2/16, 12.5 %), fever + cough (3/16, 18.8 %), and cough only (3/16, 18.8 %). the maximum temperature recorded was 38.6°c, and the febrile course lasted 1-4 days. there were seven patients (44 %) with verifiable pneumonia by chest ct. none of the children experienced dyspnea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, or fatigue.blood tests were done on admission or the very next day (within 1-2 days of disease onset). leukocyte counts were normal in 14 children (88 %), but 2 patients (12.5 %) had leukopenia and 1 (6.3 %) was lymphopenic. crp levels were largely normal, only one patient (6.2 %) with an elevation, but three patients (18.8 %) had increased lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) levels. otherwise, liver and kidney analytes, myocardial isoenzymes, coagulation indices, electrolytes, blood glucose, and levels of procalcitonin were all within normal ranges for every child. a summary of clinical data is provided in table 1 .chest ct images were normal in five patients (31.3 %). abnormalities identified in the other 11 (68.8 %) involved one lobe (8/ 16, 50%) or two (3/16, 18.8 %), appearing as nodular (5/16, 31.3 %) or small/patchy (6 cases, 37.5 %) changes. one patient (6.3 %) displayed consolidation, two (12.5 %) had visible air bronchograms, and two (12.5 %) exhibited lesions distributed along bronchovascular bundles, similar to bronchopneumonia. ground-glass opacities (ggos) were present in seven patients (43.8 %), without paving-stone pattern; halo signs appeared in four patients (25 %); and lymphadenopathy was encountered in one patient (6.2 %) (typical cases with figs. 1-5).after 9 days of contact with their mother, herself a confirmed case of covd-19, two siblings (brother and sister) both developed fever and cough in conjunction with small nodular lesions of lung unilaterally, near lateral margins of the lower lobes. each was regularly shaped, showing a halo sign (figure1 figs. 1 and 2a) . the inflammatory process resolved after 12 days of treatment ( figure1 figs. 1 and 2b ).there were two asymptomatic patients diagnosed as pneumonia with chest ct abnormalities. nodular lesion, ggos at llrl and llrl respectively ( figure3 figs. 3 and 4) .another patient admitted with fever and cough had no known family members with covid-19. chest ct changes are shown in the course of treatment (fig. 5a-c) . multiple hazy ground-glass opacities (ggos) initially observed in middle and lower lobes of right lung were less prominent after 1 week of therapy (middle). after 2 weeks, middleand lower-lobe ggos were diminished or gone (right).all children received some type of antiviral treatment as follows: traditional chinese medicine (tcm) (13/16, 81.3 %), including three recipients of tcm plus lopinavir-ritonavir (orally, twice daily for 1 week); solitary tcm treatment (1/16, 12.5 %); lopinavir-ritonavir only (1/16, 12.5 %); and multidrug regimens of azithromycin (oral/intravenous infusion, once daily for 3-5 days), oseltamivir (orally, twice daily for 5 days), arbidol (orally, twice daily for 5 days), cefamandole (intravenous infusion, twice daily for 7-12 days) (12/16, 75 %) ( table 2) .five patients (31.3 %) were admitted with normal chest cts, including four (25 %) asymptomatic and 1 (6.3 %) with fever and cough. in the other 11 patients (68.8 %), chest cts confirmed ongoing resolution of pulmonary inflammation within 4-7 days after treatment. full resolution was achieved 10-14 days after treatment in six patients (37.5 %),the median time to first nat-negative conversion was 5.5 days table 1 general charactersitics of sixteen pediatric patients with covid-19.clinical data (case no.) (table 3) . despite the delayed nat conversion, chest ct abnormalities and clinical symptoms did not worsen, implying that covid-19 in children is a mild disease with a good prognosis.once unleashed in december 2019, covid-19 due to sars-cov-2 spread with ferocity across china and around the world [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . pathogen detection improved as the outbreak took hold, so reports of pediatric infections began to mount [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . herein, we have analysed 16 patients of xiangyang city with laboratory confirmed covid-19, 12 of whom had immediate family members (sometimes two or more) harbouring the same illness. it is suggested that the extent of epidemics in children reflects the dynamics of family units. although avoidance of public places and social gatherings under our national prevention and control policies effectively reduced overall morbidity, children clearly rely on parental care. close contact within the family is thus the likely mode of sars-cov-2 infection in children of xiangyang city, similar to sars and mers [18, 19] . we are subsequently reminded that prevention and control of pediatric infections is indeed a family effort. respiratory isolation, hand hygiene, and surface disinfection are all simple yet important preventive measures. aside from the current lack of medical masks suitable for children, it is quite unrealistic for infants or toddlers to don masks, and many older children are incapable of selfdiscipline entailed in viral combat. while tending to their own obligations, parents must then do the same for their children, insisting on respiratory protection and hand hygiene.half of the children we studied had no clinical manifestations. they were detected by nat as contacts of confirmed family members. the median incubation time (15.5 days) was also lengthy, enabling a prolonged period of concealment, and four patients had demonstrable ct abnormalities. such departure from customary adult presentations compounds other diagnostic obstacle. we have not known clearly the pathogenic features of sars-cov-2, so by using chest ct, we can effectively identify patients with pneumonia, determine severity of lung lesions and isolate the source of infection [15] . whereas in our study, eight asymptomatic patients with or without chest ct abnormalities didn't show any sign of deterioration during the course and their outcomes were good. hence, we should keep an eye on illness and think twice about ct scans when necessary. regular use of nat may be a workable approach to detecting asymptomatic carriers in family units.similar chest ct appearance of two siblings from one family..asymptomatic patients diagnosed as pneumonia with chest ct abnormalities.. the rest of the children (50%) examined presented with fever and cough, much like first symptoms of adult infection [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] . however, fever in children was of shorter duration and not as high (maximum, < 38.6°c). none of them had early respiratory tract symptoms, and no dyspnea or extrapulmonary issues emerged in the course of disease. we thus concluded that covid-19 in children is an asymptomatic or mild clinical illness.in adults with covid-19, up to 83.2 % are lymphopenic [1, 3, 4] , 33.7 % are leukopenic [1] , and 86 % [1] have elevations of crp, alanine aminotransferase (alt), aspartate aminotransferase (ast), ldh, procalcitonin, and d-dimer to some extent, especially those with severe disease (primarily ldh and d-dimer) [1] [2] [3] [4] . total leukocyte counts were almost normal in the children we studied, although two were leukopenic and one was lymphopenic. crp was elevated in one instance (< 40 mg/dl), and three patients had ldh elevations. other laboratory results were all normal. these were minor deviations, compared with those occurring in adults. lymphopenia reflects consumption of lymphocyte by sars-cov-2 and signals severe disease [1, 3, 4] , which is rare in children. ultimately, laboratory testing in children with covid-19 yields nonspecific results of little consequence, offering no strong diagnostic support. it may serve to exclude other pathology. active monitoring is also helpful in determining the severity and progress of ongoing infections.early chest ct findings of children with covid-19 have some similarities to those of adults but differ in ways [1] [2] [3] [4] 20] . lesions in children commonly occupy lung periphery, sitting close to the pleura. in adults, lesions are likewise shown pleural distributions, positioned at interlobar fissures. however, those in children seem to align with bronchovascular bundles, simulating changes of bronchopneumonia; and although ggos and consolidation are shared features, single lung involvement by few nodular or small/patchy changes are characteristic of children. furthermore, the ggo halos are diminutive, consolidation is limited, and air bronchograms are unusual. adult patients, in contrast, have bilateral broad-ranging lung changes, mainly large patches with paving-stone pattern and halo or reverse-halo signs. these phenomena suggest a more robust inflammatory response in adults, more so than in children. extrapulmonary manifestations, such as nodal enlargement and pleural effusions that appear in adults are actually rare or absent in children. finally, the pulmonary lesions in the pediatric patients tend to resolve after treatment, without sequelae, and not reappear; whereas, fibrous cords and secondary diseases may develop in adults. by comparison then, children with covid-19 have atypical clinical symptoms, showing nonspecific and inconsequential ct changes of lung.as in patients with sars and mers, severe illness is proportionately low in children with covid-19, and deaths are rare [18.19] . both sars-cov [21] and sars-cov-2 gain entry to airway cells via angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptors [22, 23] , triggering massive inflammatory cytokine release and causing tissue necrosis. the resultant immune imbalance may be catastrophic, culminating in systemic inflammatory response syndrome (sirs) or ards. it is still unclear whether the maturity, functionality, or affinity of ace2 receptors is lower in children than in adults, or whether other mechanisms (eg, accessory receptors) are operant, explaining the many discrepancies in pediatric and adult disease expression. the need for more research is urgent.all patients in our study received symptomatic antipyretic treatment, but only four were given lopinavir-ritonavir. in retrospect, data on these four children was not distinctive with respect to scope of disease, age, or severely affected family members. our early inexperience in treating of children during the outbreak prompted some questionable decisions, based on adult guidelines [24] . we now recognize the innocuous course that most children without underlying ailments will follow, so antivirals are not warranted. however, the principles of traditional chinese medicine are worthy of further study, although recommended by guidelines and experience [17, 24, 25] . the disease is self-limited, calling for greater focus on supportive treatment, especially a variety of foods that maintain the physical psychologic, and emotional well-being of growing children [26] [27] [28] .in summary, covid-19 in children of xiangyang city is generally family acquired and often not serious, with a good prognosis. asymptomatic children can be diagnosed as pneumonia because of chest ct abnormalities. atypical symptomology and nonspecific laboratory findings tend to muddy the diagnosis, especially if the sole manifestations are chest ct changes. a patient profile incorporating aspects of epidemiologic exposure, nat, and lung ct funding provides a basis for diagnosis. we must be attentive to the many children who are asymptomatic carriers to prevent and control this pandemic. no potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.a modern cruise ship is like a travelling city, with a common food and water supply, shared sanitation and airconditioning systems, and a large population confined together. 1 the individuals are often from a middle-toupper social class, with different cultures, immunisation backgrounds, and health statuses. the proximity of passen gers and crew members in a semi-enclosed environ ment, with interactions in the dining halls, recreational rooms, spas, and pools, creates a unique environment for the person-to-person transmission of microbes. contamination of commonly shared and frequently touched surfaces, food, or water supply or sanitation systems can occur and can cause considerable morbidity and mortality. cruise passengers tend to be older people, with the 60-69-year-old group accounting for the majority, 2 who are more likely to have underlying chronic medical comorbidities and thus be more susceptible to infection and associated complications than the general population. common reported out breaks on cruise ships have included respiratory infections with influenza a h1n1 and h3n2, legionnaires' disease, and acute gastroenteritis due to norovirus. 1, [3] [4] [5] [6] since the emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) in december, 2019, the virus has caused a pandemic affecting more than 4·7 million people, with more than 300 000 deaths in 229 countries. [7] [8] [9] [10] on jan 20, 2020, an 80-year-old man from hong kong boarded the diamond princess cruise ship in yokohama, japan, and disembarked in hong kong on jan 25, 2020 (figure 1). on feb 1, 2020, he was hospitalised with fever and tested positive for sars-cov-2. the cruise continued to vietnam and taiwan, then returned to yokohama, at which time ten passengers were diagnosed with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), 11 and a 14-day quarantine order was imposed for all passengers and crew on board. between feb 5, and feb 17, 2020 , the japanese health ministry tested all passengers by throat swab rt-pcr; individuals who tested positive were isolated in local hospitals. individuals who tested negative were kept on board confined to their cabins and were only allowed out of the cabin for 1 h per day to exercise. the ship remained docked in the port of yokohama. by feb 17, countries were allowed to air-evacuate citizens back to their home nations. therefore, the hong kong government chartered two flights on feb 20 and feb 21 to transfer passengers who had tested negative to hong kong for a further 14 days of quarantine in a newly completed public estate. as of may 14, 2020, 712 (19%) of the 3711 passengers and crew had been infected with sars-cov-2, and 13 deaths had occurred among those with confirmed infection. 12 we investigated the sequential sars-cov-2 shedding and the specific antibody response in this cohort of passengers quarantined in hong kong.hong kong citizens were air-evacuated from the diamond princess cruise ship on feb 20 and feb 21, 2020, and entered quarantine in the chun yeung estate, a newly built and vacant public estate in hong kong, on feb 22. each unit had a bathroom and kitchen and housed one to two people. during the 14-day quarantine period, they were placed in complete isolation. only health-care workers from the hong kong department of health would visit daily to do health checks and to deliver meals. family visits and contact with the general public were not allowed and individuals were asked to handle their own laundry. with approval by the department of health, we visited and collected samples from the individuals together with the aforementioned health workers. all adult passengers aged 18 years and older were screened and given the choice to join the study. there were no exclusion criteria. all participants provided written informed consent and could withdraw from the study at any point. the institutional review board of the university of hong kong and hospital authority approved this study.participants were screened by quantitative rt-pcr (rt-qpcr) for sars-cov-2 in nasopharyngeal, throat, and rectal swabs at baseline (feb 22, 2020), day 4, day 8, and day 12, and tested for serum igg and igm against both internal nucleoprotein and the surface spike receptorbinding protein (rbd) of sars-cov-2, at baseline, day 4, day 8, and day 12.the following participant data were entered into a database: name, hong kong personal identification number, age, sex, medical history by completion of a questionnaire, presenting symptoms and signs, and laboratory, radiological, virological, and serologicalevidence before this study we searched pubmed on march 14, 2020, with no date restrictions, for articles in english, using the terms "covid-19", "coronavirus", "antibody", "viral load", "cruise ship", "quarantine", "shedding", and "seroconversion". our search did not identify any reports on the prospective follow-up of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) viral shedding and seroconversion in a cruise ship setting. we identified one case report on the clinical presentation of two individuals on the diamond princess cruise ship, and an article estimating the effectiveness of public health measures on controlling the covid-19 epidemic potential on a cruise ship.to our knowledge, this is the first cruise ship study of the clinical evolution and seroconversion from coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) from last possible exposure to the pathogen to the end of the suspected incubation period. the study showed that asymptomatic individuals might seroconvert while carrying a high viral load and continue to shed the virus. patients who had viral pneumonitis detected by high-resolution ct tended to have a higher antibody response. high-resolution ct also helped to establish a clinical diagnosis and detect cases of asymptomatic lung infection.asymptomatic covid-19 infection with continuous viral shedding makes infection control difficult. therefore, a combination of rt-pcr and serology should be implemented for case finding and contact tracing in a community outbreak of covid-19 to facilitate early diagnosis, prompt isolation, and treatment. high-resolution ct could also help to detect cases of asymptomatic infection.findings. participants who developed symptoms or who were found to have virological or serological evidence of sars-cov-2 infection at the time of screening were admitted to the queen mary hospital or the queen elizabeth hospital in hong kong for further investigation and treatment. all hospitalised participants under went chest radiograph and high-resolution ct examination.nucleic acid extraction and rt-qpcr were done as previously reported. 13 enzyme immunoassays for nucleoprotein and rbd and optical density (od) cutoff values at 450 nm and 620 nm were established as previously described. 14 the cutoff value for positivity was based on the mean value plus 3 sds of the negative control, using archived serum specimens collected in 2018 from 93 anonymous individuals without sars-cov-2 infection. 14descriptive statistics are presented. findings of the participants who tested positive for sars-cov-2 are presented as a case series. all data were analysed with spss (version 26.0).the funders of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. the corresponding author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.of 3711 passengers and crew members on board the diamond princess cruise ship, 369 passengers (10%) were from hong kong (appendix). the passengers returned to yokohama on feb 1, 2020, and were quarantined onboard for a further 20 days (figure 1). by feb 20, 2020, 76 passengers from hong kong were hospitalised in japan after testing positive for sars-cov-2 by throat swab rt-pcr, of whom two individuals died from complications of the infection (appendix). 293 passengers from hong kong who tested negative were allowed to disembark, of whom 65 decided to stay in japan and 228 passengers (225 adults and three children) returned to hong kong for further quarantine. the three children were excluded from the study because their clinical data were not available for assessment. ten passengers declined to join the study and remained well until discharge. thus, 215 adult participants were enrolled. baseline charac teristics of participants who tested positive (n=9) and negative (n=206) for sars-cov-2 were well matched (table 1) . nine (4%; 95% ci 2-8) of 215 participants were found to have evidence of sars-cov-2 infection and were hospitalised. these nine individuals were not related to each other; they boarded the ship in hong kong on jan 25, 2020, when the index passenger had already disembarked and therefore had no contact with him (figure 1). at the last onboard covid-19 testing by throat swab on feb 17, 2020, all nine individuals tested negative. both parents and the grandfather of patient 7 had tested positive for sars-cov-2 at the initial governmental screen in japan. they were subsequently discharged from hospital in japan after testing negative, and they returned to hong kong in march, 2020.we have ordered the nine patients who tested positive for sars-cov-2 in the probable order of infection, according to their viral load and serological profile ( patients vs none). three (33%; 95% ci 12-65) of the nine patients with sars-cov-2 were men, and six (67%; 35-88) had underlying diseases, including hypertension, ischaemic heart disease, diabetes, hyperlipidaemia, old pulmonary tuberculosis, and non-toxic multinodular goitre. the median age was 58 years (iqr 57-65). the median (iqr) laboratory findings were: haemoglobin 12·5 g/dl (12·0-13·6), white cell count 6·49 × 10⁹ per l (5·82-7·20), neutrophil count 4·84 × 10⁹ per l (3·18-5·39), lymphocyte positive viral load could precede the onset of symptoms, as evidenced by patient 9. the median nasopharyngeal viral load at baseline was 4·31 log 10 copies per ml (iqr 3·79-6·65), on day 4 was 2·87 log 10 copies per ml (2·70-4·95), on day 8 was 2·84 log 10 copies per ml (2·70-4·61), and on day 12 was 2·7 log 10 copies per ml (2·70-3·44).three patients (33%; 95% ci 12-65) were found to be positive for sars-cov-2 on throat swab rt-qpcr (table 2). the median throat swab viral load at baseline was 2·70 log 10 copies per ml (iqr 2·70-5·50) and at day 4 was 2·70 log 10 copies per ml (2·70-3·66). the viral loads in the throat swabs were lower than those in the nasopharyngeal swabs at the same timepoints. rectal swab viral load was negative in all nine patients. the nasopharyngeal sars-cov-2 rt-qpcr median viral load was higher in symptomatic patients than in asymptomatic patients (7·62 log 10 copies per ml vs 3·86 log 10 copies per ml).chest radiographs showed changes consistent with interstitial pneumonia in four patients (44%; 95% ci 19-73), with right lower lobe changes in patient 2, right middle lobe changes in patient 6, left lower lobe changes in patient 7, and right lower lobe changes in patient 9 (table 2, figure 3 ). chest radiographs were normal in four patients (44%; 95% ci 19-73) and patient 4 had old granuloma from previous pulmonary tuberculosis. highresolution ct (table 2, figure 3 ) showed ground-glass changes typical of covid-19 in five patients (56%; 95% ci 27-81): patients 1 and 9 had right lower lobe ground-glass changes, patient 2 had right upper and lower lobe changes, patient 6 had right middle lobe changes, and patient 7 had left upper and lower lobe changes. patients 3, 5, and 8 had normal chest radiograph and ct results, but tested positive on nasopharyngeal swab rt-pcr (table 2) . patients 3 and 5 were asymp tomatic, whereas patient 8 developed fever and rhinorrhoea on day -2. three patients (patients 1, 2, and 6) had pulmonary ct changes but were asymptomatic.all nine patients were found to be positive for anti-rbd igg (100% seroconversion) on days 8 and 12 (table 2) . to our knowledge, this is the first study that investigates the real-time progression of a group of individuals who were initially negative for sars-cov-2 on rt-pcr after exposure to an outbreak of covid-19 on a cruise ship. nine individuals later tested positive on rt-pcr from nasopharyngeal swab, had high-resolution ct changes, or showed seroconversion, and were thus found to be infected with sars-cov-2. despite the positive clinical findings, six of the nine patients remained asymptomatic throughout the 14-day quarantine after leaving the ship (ratio of symptomatic to asymptomatic patients 1:2). if the cruise ship epidemic is a microcosm of the community outbreak scenario, then individuals with or without pneumonia could carry the virus for a long period but remain asymptomatic. 8, 9 asymptomatic patients with few or no comorbidities could spread the disease, whereas symptomatic patients represent only a small, but visible, proportion of total cases. 15 this finding is particularly important in densely populated cities like hong kong, with an average living space of 4·6 m² per person, equivalent to half a parking space. 16 viral shedding from asymptomatic individuals could be transmitting the virus to others, making it difficult to identify and isolate index patients by contact-tracing for early quarantine. trans mission from asymptomatic individuals could explain in part the rapid increases in numbers of new cases in high-incidence countries such as the usa, russia, the uk, brazil, and european nations. 10 sars-cov-2 could be spreading via respiratory droplets or through direct and indirect contact via the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts. 17, 18 considering that most outbreaks on cruise ships are of respiratory and gastrointestinal infections, the risk of infection and associated morbidity and mortality in passengers increases with longer duration of travel and colder weather. 19, 20 the period of exposure on the diamond princess cruise ship was 3 weeks, during which the passengers were unable to disembark, which is consistent with the high number of passengers (n=712) who contracted the infection. 12 the situation was likely to have been made worse by infected but asymptomatic crew members who continued to work unprotected, but who could have been shedding the virus. a recent modelling study 11 estimated that the initial basic reproduction number (r 0 ) of the outbreak on the diamond princess cruise ship was 14·8, before any infection control measures had been implemented and while the passengers were a completely naive group. the r 0 then decreased to 1·78 after the quarantine and transfer interventions were initiated (feb 5-17, 2020). 11 this estimation of r 0 was lower than that of 2·2 (95% ci 1·4-3·9) that was suggested at the beginning of the outbreak in wuhan, 21 although a higher r 0 of more than 3 has also been reported. 22 an r 0 of 2·2 for covid-19 would be similar to that of sars and influenza. 23 nevertheless, evacuation of all passengers and crews early on in the outbreak would probably have prevented more infections, as suggested by the current findings. because the screening test was done between early february and mid-february, before the air evacuation, we assumed that passengers could have acquired and been incubating the infection shortly before the test, and therefore tested negative, or they could have acquired the infection after the test. based on this assumption, we screened 215 passengers by serial virological, serological, and radiological methods.our findings show a dynamic clinical presentation of sars-cov-2. of the three diagnostic methods we used, the immunoassay for igg and nasopharyngeal swab rt-qpcr were the most sensitive. throat swab rt-qpcr was less sensitive; 24 it identified only the two patients who consistently had the highest viral load in nasopharyngeal swab rt-qpcr and did not identify the other six patients identified by nasopharyngeal swab rt-qpcr. the apparent low sensitivity of throat swab rt-qpcr might also account for the negative screening test done on board the ship by the japanese health ministry. the three patients who were febrile felt transiently unwell, with concomitant symptoms of malaise, unproductive cough, and rhinorrhoea. the higher baseline nasopharyngeal swab viral load in symptomatic than asymptomatic patients in this study could be explained by the difference in time and degree of exposure to the virus, and might not be related to the symptoms. 25 nevertheless, the per sistent nasopharyngeal viral load in asymptomatic patients is a major concern for infection control. rectal swabs were negative in all nine patients, which was expected because none of the patients presented with diarrhoea. 18 important initial laboratory markers, including lymphocyte count, c-reactive protein, and lactate dehydrogenase, remained normal in these asym ptomatic patients.seroconversion occurred in all nine patients and it was the only diagnostic marker that was positive for one patient in this cohort who had high-resolution ct changes characteristic of a recent sars-cov-2 infection. for those patients who might have acquired the infection earliest and only shortly before the screening test, they might have seroconverted with a high igg titre and remained asymptomatic with a negative rt-qpcr, with high-resolution ct radiological evidence of sars-cov-2 pneumonitis with ground-glass changes. the immunological response could be explained by the lower respiratory tract infection consistent with pneumonia. similar to influenza viral infection, patients with severe disease and pneumonia had the highest antibody response. 26 this finding could be related to the more severe viral infection resulting in a stronger induction of the host's adaptive immunity mediated by b and t cells. 27 because sars-cov-2 and sars-cov have 90% amino acid homology for nucleoprotein and 73% amino acid homology for rbd, serum from patients with sars-cov might cross-react with our sars-cov-2 immunoassay, as shown by another group. 28 however, the cross-reactivity between sars-cov-2 and other human coronaviruses is expected to be lower, because the amino acid homology with nucleoprotein is less than 50%. based on our previous study, 14 the sensitivity of the serology assay was 94% for anti-nucleoprotein igg, 88% for anti-nucleoprotein igm, 100% for anti-rbd igg, and 94% for anti-rbd igm. as stated in the methods, the cutoff was based on a pre-pandemic general population cohort of 93 individuals without sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, we expected that 1% would be outliers. 14 the clinical presentation of the nine patients in this cohort ranged from mild to severe. among the mild cases, patients could remain asymptomatic (patients 3, 4, and 5) or symptomatic (patient 8), with no lower respiratory tract involvement, as suggested by normal chest radiograph and high-resolution ct. their antinucleoprotein and anti-rbd igg levels were low. patients with moderate infection had lower respiratory tract involvement, as suggested by the ground glass changes on high-resolution ct. nevertheless, they could still remain asymptomatic (patients 1, 2, and 6) or become symptomatic (patient 7). these patients had higher antinucleoprotein and anti-rbd igg than patients with mild disease. patient 9, who acquired the infection more recently, developed symptoms upon hospitalisation. the infection was more severe, involving the lower respiratory tract, with ground glass changes on high-resolution ct. seroconversion took place during the observation period, with anti-nucleoprotein and anti-rbd igg still increasing at the end of the observation period.overall, anti-rbd igg was the most sensitive serology marker, although the anti-nucleoprotein igg response was stronger. the difference in anti-rbd igg and antinucleoprotein igg could be related to the severity of the viral infection, in which anti-rbd igg was positive even in patients with upper respiratory tract infection, but at low od values. indeed, serology provides a feasible strategy to track sars-cov-2 infections. 29 we also investigated changes in igm/igg ratio for anti-nucleoprotein and anti-rbd and did not identify any trends that might reflect the timing of infection.similar to findings from one of the largest case series from china, 8 high-resolution ct provided a reasonable diagnostic tool, especially in asymptomatic patients. in this cohort, it was able to detect lung ground-glass opacities in five of nine patients, including the three patients with asymptomatic lung infection. similar to other studies, right-side changes were more common. 30 individuals with more severe radiological changes tended to have higher nasopharyngeal viral load. high-resolution ct could also detect an rt-qpcr-negative asymptomatic patient (patient 1) who had high igg and igm titres, suggestive of a recent infection. nevertheless, individuals who develop only an upper respiratory tract infection could still have a normal high-resolution ct. chest radiograph detected radiological changes in only four patients.this study has several limitations. we did not have access to the data of patients who were hospitalised in japan. we also did not have the cabin number and location of the participants when they were on board the ship, which could have provided some insight into how the infection was transmitted. ten passengers did not give consent to participate in the study, and therefore we did not have their virological or serological data. lastly, the study period was limited by the quarantine period and we could not follow up the participants beyond 14 days. the participants could have become rt-pcrpositive or antibody-positive after the quarantine period.the cruise ship setting provided an unusual opportunity to study the viral shedding and seroconversion of sars-cov-2, mimicking the start of a community outbreak. passengers who are exposed to the virus might seroconvert while remaining asymptomatic with a high viral load, and they could continue to shed the virus. highresolution ct also helped to establish a clinical diagnosis and to detect cases of asymptomatic lung infection. a combination of rt-qpcr and serology should be done to screen for community outbreaks and effectively perform contact tracing. we declare no competing interests.f eline infectious peritonitis (fip) is an uncommon, fatal, progressive, and immune-augmented disease of cats caused by feline coronavirus (fcov) infection. although fcov is common in most domestic, feral, and nondomestic cat populations worldwide (seroprevalence 20%-100%), fip will develop in <10% of fcov seropositive cats (1) (2) (3) (4) . fip tends to occur most frequently in cats <2 years of age or, less commonly, in geriatric cats (4, 5) . the clinical manifestations of fcov infection can be either a pathogenic disease, fip (cases infected with feline infectious perito-nitis virus [fipv] ) and, more commonly, a benign, or mild enteric infection (feline enteric coronavirus [fecv] asymptomatic) (6, 7) . specific genetic determinants of these clinical outcomes have yet to be discovered. there is no effective treatment, vaccine, or diagnostic protocol that can discriminate the avirulent fecv from fipv.fip pathology is characterized typically by severe systemic inflammatory damage of serosal membranes and widespread pyogranulomatous lesions, which occurs in the lungs, liver, lymph tissue, and brain (8) . evidence suggests that the host immune system is crucial in this pathogenesis; profound t-cell depletion from the periphery and lymphatic tissues and changes in cytokine expression are observed in end-stage fip (9, 10) . the clinical finding of hypergammaglobulinemia-associated fip is indicative of virus-induced immune dysregulation (11) .viral genetic determinants specifically associated with fipv pathogenesis have yet to be discovered. an in vivo mutation transition hypothesis postulated that de novo virus mutation occurs in vivo, giving rise to virulence (12, 13) . the precise nature of the mutation responsible for pathogenesis has not been identified, although studies have suggested sequence differences in the spike protein (14) , nonstructural protein (nsp) 7b, and nsp3c (13) as disease determinants. together with in vitro studies describing the fipv strains affinity for macrophages in contrast to fecv strains (15) , the hypothesis was extended to propose that the enteric coronavirus (fecv) undergoes a mutational shift in the gastrointestinal system, thus allowing infection of macrophages, systemic dissemination, and fatal disease manifestation (12, 13) . however, attempts to use engineered chimeric viruses designed to identify the operative virulence determinants have been unsuccessful (16) . furthermore, circulating fcovs found in different tissues of fcov-infected asymptomatic cats were indistinguishable (17, 18) .the in vivo mutation hypothesis of fipv pathogenesis is widely cited, although it has never been explicitly confirmed. mutational transition of hiv-1 has been demonstrated in aids patients, in which mutation of envelope residues alters coreceptor use from ccr5 to cxcr4, a prelude to the collapse of the cd4-bearing lymphocyte population (19) . similarly, key amino acid changes in the porcine coronavirus spike gene lead to increased virulence in the coronavirus transmissible gastroenteritis virus, a fatal disease causing high rates of illness and death in young pigs (20) (21) (22) .an alternative circulating virulent-avirulent fcov hypothesis of viral pathogenesis suggests that distinctive benign and pathogenic strains of fecv circulate in a population, and that the disease will develop only in those persons infected by the virulent strains. dengue virus may offer an example because it has been shown that 4 distinctive viral strains circulate worldwide, and severe hemorrhagic fever develops in persons exposed sequentially to distinct strains (23) . zoonotic equine venezuelan encephalitis virus also displays circulating virulent and avirulent strains, which through interaction with ecologic and epidemiologic factors, contribute to or constrain the disease incidence (24) .this study aimed to systematically test evolutionary predictions of the in vivo mutation hypothesis versus the circulating virulent/avirulent hypothesis in the pathogenicity of fip in the cat. we developed a study of naturally occurring fecv and fipv using molecular genetic tools by collecting samples from field cases of fip (cases) and fecv-positive but asymptomatic cats (controls). cases were infected with feline coronavirus (fcov) and had the clinical disease of feline infectious peritonitis (fip). controls were also infected with fcov, but were clinically asymptomatic (fecv-asymptomatic). the prediction was that phylogenetic analysis of viral gene sequences would demonstrate paraphyly for fip case-cats and fecv-asymptomatic cats if the in vivo mutation hypothesis was supported, and monophyly of the 2 if the circulating virulent/ avirulent hypothesis was supported ( figure 1 ). additionally, we surveyed the viral genetic diversity and dynamics and determined genetic signatures associated with pathogenesis in fip.a total of 56 live, euthanized, or recently deceased domestic cats were clinically examined and sampled in maryland veterinary hospitals during 2004-2006 (online appendix table 1 , available from www.cdc.gov/eid/ content/15/9/1445-appt1.htm). blood (3-6 ml) was collected routinely by venipuncture from manually restrained or anesthetized domestic cats. feces were obtained from the rectum by cotton swab and frozen in 0.5 ml of phosphatebuffered saline. cats from 1 (weller farm) of 6 farms were micro-chipped (avid, folsom, la, usa) for identification for repeat sampling of individual cats. samples were collected in full compliance with specific federal permits (convention on international trade in endangered species; endangered and threatened species) issued to the national cancer institute by the us fish and wildlife service of the department of the interior.for euthanized and recently deceased cats, gross necropsy examination and sample collection were performed within 2 hours of death. samples from liver, spleen, mesenteric lymph node, kidney, jejunum, and colon were taken, fixed in 10% buffered formalin, and routinely embedded in paraffin. sections (5 μm) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (he). tissues were also flash frozen in liquid nitrogen (-220°c) for rna extraction and stored at either -220°c or -70c°.for complete blood counts, fresh (<12 hours) wholeblood samples were assessed by antech veterinary diagnostic laboratory by using an automated cell counter a) the in vivo mutation transition hypothesis predicts paraphyly of feline infectious peritonitis (fip) cases and feline enteric coronavirus (fecv) asymptomatic feline coronavirus (fcov) isolates). b) the circulating virulent/avirulent strain hypothesis predicts reciprocal monophyly of fiv-cases versus fecv asymptomatic. numbers represent individual cat (or locale), which is either fipv case (red) or fecv asymptomatic (blue). evidence presented in this article supports the circulating dual virulent and avirulent strains. usa), and coronavirus (virachek cv, synbiotics corp., san diego, ca, usa) antibodies were also performed.he-stained slides of spleen, liver, lymph node, intestine, and kidney sections were evaluated for evidence of granulomatous and pyogranulomatous lesions (national cancer institute laboratory animal sciences program, frederick, md, usa). formalin-fixed sections (3 μm thick) were cut from paraffin blocks and placed on glass slides for immunohistochemical (ihc) testing, as previously described, with cov p56, a cross-reacting antibody for the demonstration of feline coronavirus (fecv and fipv biotypes) (9,10) (washington animal disease diagnostic laboratory, pullman, wa, usa) ( figure 2 ).rna from 160 μl ascites fluid or frozen feces suspended 10% in phosphate-buffered saline was extracted by using the qiaamp virus rna mini kit (qiagen, valencia, ca, usa) following the manufacturer's instructions. rna from tissue was extracted from ≈60 mg of frozen liver, lung, spleen, colon, jejunum, or lymph node by using rnaeasy (qiagen) following the manufacturer's instructions. extracted rna was eluted in 35 μl of rnase-free water and stored at -70ºc. cdna was reverse transcribed using 9 μl of eluted rna (10 pg-5 μg) in an initial 12-μl reaction mixture containing 50 ng of random hexamers and 0.5 mmol/l of dntps. after incubation at 65ºc for 5 min to denature the rna, 10 mmol/l of dithiothreitol, 5× synthesis buffer, 40 u of rnaseout, and 15 units of thermoscript rt were added on ice (invitrogen, carlsbad, ca, usa). reaction mixtures were incubated in thermocycler at 25ºc for 10 min, followed by 50ºc for 30 min. cdna was stored at -20ºc.primers amplifying 7b (736 bp), membrane protein (575 bp), polymerase (386 bp), and spike-nsp3 (1,017 bp) ( figure 3 ) were designed based on available feline coronavirus sequence (1, 12, 13) . pcr was performed by using 2 μl of cdna in a 50-μl reaction containing 50 mmol/l kcl, 10 mmol/l tris-hcl (ph 8.3), 1.5 mmol/l mgcl 2 , 0.25 mmol/l concentrations of dntps (datp, dctp, dgtp, and dttp), 2 mmol/l concentrations of each primer, and 2.5 units of platinum taq dna polymerase (invitrogen). pcr was conducted on a geneamp pcr system 9700 thermocycler (applied biosystems, foster city, ca, usa) with the following touchdown conditions: 2 min at 94ºc then a touchdown, always starting with 20 sec at 94ºc, then 30 sec at 60ºc (3 cycles), 58ºc (5 cycles), 56ºc (5 cycles), 54ºc (5 cycles), 52ºc (22 cycles), and then 1 min at 72ºc for extension, and with a final extension at 72ºc for 7 min and a hold at 4ºc. pcr products were visualized by electrophoresis on a 1% agarose gel and primers and unincorporated dntps were removed by using microcon ym (millipore, billerica, ma, usa).representative pcr products were cloned and sequenced ( figure 3 , panel b). cloning was performed by using a topo-ta cloning kit (invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. plasmid dna was isolated from 1-47 clones from each reaction product (agencourt cosmcprep; agencourt bioscience corporation, beverly, ma, usa). the presence of the correct sized insert was verified by restriction enzyme digestion (ecori), and sequences were obtained from clones with the correct insert by using standard abi bigdye terminator reactions (applied biosystems). anticontamination measures were taken at all steps of reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr) amplification and post-pcr processing.sequences from pol 1a, spike-nsp3, membrane, and nsp7b were analyzed separately. nucleotide sequences were compiled and aligned for subsequent phylogenetic analysis by using clustalx (25) and verified visually (26). analyses involved producing a phylogenetic tree of viral gene sequences based upon the following approaches: minimum evolution, maximum parsimony, and maximum likelihood in paup (27) . modeltest was used to estimate the optimal model of sequence evolution, and these settings were incorporated into subsequent analyses (28) . minimum evolution trees were constructed from models of substitution specified by modeltest, with starting trees obtained by neighbor joining followed by application of a tree-bisection-reconnection (tbr) branch-swapping algorithm during a heuristic search for the optimal tree. maximum parsimony analysis employed a heuristic search of starting trees obtained by stepwise addition followed by tbr. maximum-likelihood parameters specified by modeltest selected the general time-reversible model of substitution, included empirical base frequencies, and estimated rate matrix and corrected for among-site rate variation (gamma distribution). a bootstrap analysis using 1,000 iterations was performed for maximum parsimony and minimum evolution and 100 iterations by using the nearest neighbor interchange branch-swapping algorithm for maximum likelihood. amino acid residue alignments were generated using macclade 3.05 (26) and clustalx (www.softpedia. com/get/science-cad/clustal-x.shtml).variable sites and parsimoniously informative sites were computed in mega version 3.0 (29) . pairwise comparisons of genetic distances were performed in paup and the mean and range of genetic distances were calculated in excel (microsoft, redmond, wa, usa). the sequences of fcov pol 1a, membrane, nsp 7b, and spike-nsp3 were deposited in genbank under accession nos. eu663755-eu664317.during 2004-2006, fifty-six domestic cats with suspected fip or exposure to infected fip cats from maryland farms and veterinary hospitals were sampled (online appendix table 1 ). all samples producing rt-pcr products were from cats positive for antibodies against fcov (titers >25). thirty-six sampled cats were from the weller farm where several individual cats were sampled once per year for the 3-year study period. healthy and recently deceased or euthanized cats were included from the ambrose farm (n = 7), palmer veterinary hospital (n = 3), frederick county animal shelter (n = 7), seymour farm (n = 1), and the new market animal hospital (n = 2). fca-4590 from the weller farm is an important fip case because samples were obtained on may 20, 2004, when the cat was clinically healthy (predisease) and again on december 22, 2004, when fip developed in the cat and it died (postdisease).necropsies were performed on 23 cats that died or were euthanized due to suspected fip. most of the necropsied cats were fcov antibody positive (online appendix ( figure 2 ; online appendix table 1 ). the presence of pyogranulomatous lesions at histology evaluation was sufficient for designation of an fip case. additionally, 5 of the 8 fip cases were evaluated by ihc testing. multiple tissues were positive by ihc in each of these cats. one cat (fca-4561) was ihc positive only in the jejunum and negative by histopathologic analysis on all tissues, therefore it was classified as fecv asymptomatic. the fcov-seropositive necropsied cats with no characteristic fip histopathologic changes and ihc lesions were classified as fecv asymptomatic (online appendix table 1 ; figure 2 ). healthy cats were classified as fecv asymptomatic if they had normal results on physical examinations, were fcov antibody positive (titer >25) but not lymphopenic (<1.5 cells/μl), or were monitored until 2007 and known to be free of fip disease (online appendix table 1 ). rt-pcr was attempted with 4 primer pairs designed from fcov genes for all cats (figure 3, panel b) . of the 82 samplings from 56 cats, 42 samplings amplified virus with at least 1 primer pair yielding a 51% rate of recovery of viral sequence (online appendix table 1 ). from 8 cats with clinical fip and 23 fecv-asymptomatic cats, amplification from the 4 viral regions produced 735 cloned viral gene segments that resulted in 501 unique gene sequences (online appendix table 2 , available from www.cdc.gov/ eid/content/15/9/1445-appt2.htm; figure 3, panel b) .phylogenetic analysis of the cloned virus sequences from 3 maryland locales sampled during 2004-2006 showed specific patterns of viral dynamics. first, gene sequences from healthy cats infected with fecv displayed a monophyletic cluster pattern that was generally distinctive from cats diagnosed with fip in the membrane, nsp 7b, and spike-nsp3 gene segments (figure 4 ). for example, every fcov gene sequence for the membrane gene from fip cases fell within a major cluster consisting of 3 principal clades (figure 4 ). by contrast, 127/154 (82%) virus gene sequences from fecv-asymptomatic cats sorted in 2 separate clades that were distinct (100 bootstrap statistical support) from the viral gene sequences of fip cases ( figure  4 ). similar reciprocal monophyly of 140 nsp7b sequences was obtained for fip cases versus fecv-asymptomatic cats (figure 4) . a consistent disease driven phylogeographic sorting was also observed for the 1,017-bp sequence spanning the spike-nsp3 genes, albeit with less statistical resolution, likely because of evolutionary constraints on gene divergence in this region (figure 4 ). together the remarkable reciprocal monophyly in these 3 genes supports the predictions of the circulating virulent-avirulent strain hypothesis illustrated in figure 1 .samples from 1 cat, fca-4590, were particularly informative. the virus was isolated from the cat predisease, and then again 7 months later postdisease. fca-4590 was asymptomatic but infected with fecv in may 2004. fcov sampling from that month showed strong (high bootstrap) affiliation with the fecv-asymptomatic clades for the membrane and the nsp7b genes. however, virus isolated fca-4590 fell within the fip-case clades (also with high bootstrap), and was indistinguishable from fcov isolated from other cats with fip. this finding suggested that the pathogenic fip-case type of fcov infected this cat subsequent to its infection with an avirulent fecv and apparently replaced it.tissue-specific differentiation within each cat was minimal (figure 4 ). by contrast, there were notable localespecific distinctions within the sick and healthy cats (figure 4) . for example, the fecv strains in asymptomatic cats from the weller household were associated together in a major fecv subclade; strains in cats from the frederick animal shelter were classified in a different subclade, nested within the fecv-asymptomatic clade (figure 4) . the archival fcov virulent strain (aju-92), isolated from cheetahs in oregon in 1982 (30) , defined a phylogenetic lineage distinctive from the fip and fecv-asymptomatic clades resolved in the maryland domestic cats (figure 4) .nucleotide sequences of membrane and nsp 7b generated in this study were translated to amino acid sequences (online appendix figure 1 , available from www. cdc.gov/eid/content/15/9/1445-appf1.htm). relative to pathogenesis, 5 informative amino acid sites were found in the membrane protein at positions 108, 120, 138, 163, and 199 (based on reference sequence for tgev genbank no. np058427) (22) , giving rise to 6 composite genotypes potentially diagnostic of fip cases versus fecv-asymptomatic cats (online appendix table 2 ). among the 8 cats with fip, 19 fecv-asymptomatic cats, and 1 cheetah with fip, 6 composite genotypes were identified based on these 5 diagnostic sites (online appendix table 2 ).all domestic cats with fip diagnosed by pathologic or immunohistochemical changes displayed the amino acid signature of either yival (i) or yiial (ii); infected cats without clinical fip had the hiivi (iii), hiivl (iv), hvi-al (v), yvval (vi), or yival (i) haplotype. no fip cases had haplotype iii, iv, v, or vi, whereas 3 fecvasymptomatic cats carried the yival signature found predominately in fip cases (fca-4594, 4624, and 4657; online appendix table 2 ). of these, 2 cats (4624 and 4657) were euthanized at the time of sampling (all euthanized fecvasymptomatic cats are highlighted in light green in online appendix although a strong phylogenetic signal differentiating fip cases from fecv-asymptomatic cats was seen in nsp 7b (figure 4) , no diagnostic amino acid changes specific to fip cases vs. fecv-asymptomatic controls were found in the nsp 7b nucleotide or amino acid alignments. in contrast to the monophyletic findings in the membrane, nsp 7b, and spike-nsp3 genes, cloned viral sequences of pol 1a, were paraphyletic in terms of disease phenotype (online appendix figure 2 , available from www.cdc.gov/eid/ content/15/9/1445-appf2.htm).infection with fcov is common in cats throughout the world, although in most cats the virus causes no clinical signs. however, in some cats, fcov infection is associated with the development of the progressive and fatal disease manifestation of fip. this disease is among the most serious viral infections in cats, not only because of its fatal nature, but also because of the difficulties in diagnosing fip antemortem and controlling the spread of fcov. we have presented a molecular virologic study of naturally occurring fcov infection and phylogenetic analysis of the cloned virus sequences obtained from the membrane, nsp 7b, spike-nsp3, and pol 1a genes isolated from domestic cats located in maryland households infected with fcov during 2004-2006. we observed predominately monophyletic clustering of strains correlating with disease phenotype in membrane and nsp 7b genes consistent with the circulating virulent/ avirulent strain hypothesis of fip pathogenesis, which calls into question the in vivo mutation hypothesis.the amino acid alignments presented in online appendix figure 1 clearly demonstrate that in the fipv cases included in this study the genotypes correlated with disease phenotype are ancestrally derived and not the result of a few de novo mutations. given the clear genetic differentiation between viruses from fip cases and fecv asymptomatic cats in multiple gene segments, we infer that cats become reinfected with new strains of fcov from external sources, rather than by in vivo mutations. cats in our study were not co-infected with multiple strains of fecv and fipv at the same time and were generally infected with one predominant virus strain. two exceptions to this finding in our study were cats with cases of fipv (fca-4662 and 4664) that from which distinct gastrointestinal (feces or intestine) and systemic (liver and/or ascites fluid) viral isolates were obtained, which indicates that in vivo superinfection does occur (figure 4 ; online appendix table 2 ).a role of the membrane protein in fip pathogenesis seems likely, given its known functions in other coronaviruses. the membrane protein is the most abundant structural protein with important functions in virus budding and with cell-mediated host immunity (31) . the specific functions of the membrane protein amino acid sequences have been determined in severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov (32) . aligning the sequences from this study with sars-cov, the first diagnostic amino acid site 108 aligns to a site just upstream from the second transmembrane helix (online appendix figure 1) . a tyrosine at position 108, which is found in all fipv biotypes and shared among sars-cov, has a neutral polarity (in contrast to a histidine there, found in most fecv biotypes, which have a positive polarity) and may play a role in the stability of the virus within the membrane. site 120 aligns within the third transmembrane helix, site 138 aligns just downstream to the transmembrane helice, site 163 aligns within the cterminus, which projects inside the virus particle, and site 199, also within the c-terminus domain, aligns within a defined sars-immunodominant epitope (32) (figure 5 ).the demonstration of 6 naturally occurring composite genotypes based on 5 variable sites in the membrane protein amino acid alignment that are highly correlative with disease phenotype (online appendix table 2 ) offers specific opportunities for developing diagnostics and for the preventive management of this disease. by extending this study to additional cat populations in disparate geographic locations, designing chimeric fcov challenge experiments, and investigating host genetic correlations with pathogenesis, we will be able to further discern the causative factors in fip pathogenesis. fca-4594, which was infected with the diseaseassociated genotype composite without succumbing to fip, suggests additional requirements for viral pathogenesis. as has been suggested in the outbreak of fip in a colony of captive cheetahs (33) , host immune genetics may play a role.both the viral strain and host immune genes contribute to disease progression and virus-related death, such as aids progression in hiv infection. with the recent publication of the full cat genome sequence (34) and the viral genotype composites described here, new genomic tools are now available to proceed with both viral and host genetic association studies in the pathogenesis in fcov infection, a model for coronavirus infection in humans, such as sars-cov. table 2 ) as determined by sequence comparison to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (32) . amino acid residue, polarity, and hydrophobicity or hydropholicity is stated.in this perspective, we recommend universal masking of the us public during coronavirus disease 2019 due to the high contagiousness of severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), viral shedding of viable sars-cov-2 from asymptomatic individuals, and the likely contribution of masking to core distancing public health strategies for curbing transmission.the time for universal masking of the public for coronavirus disease 2019 is nowin this perspective, we recommend universal masking of the us public during coronavirus disease 2019 due to the high contagiousness of severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), viral shedding of viable sars-cov-2 from asymptomatic individuals, and the likely contribution of masking to core distancing public health strategies for curbing transmission.the time for universal masking of the public for coronavirus disease 2019 is nowhealthcare workers (hcws) should wear isolation masks in all clinical settings to reduce their risk of acquiring coronavirus disease 2019 . however, should the us public wear isolation masks when in crowded indoor or public areas to prevent the spread of the virus? the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) recommended the use of cloth face coverings for the public on april 3, 2020, especially in areas of high community transmission [1] . the world health organization (who)'s updated interim guidance on april 6, 2020 does not make this recommendation [2] . in this perspective, we briefly review the current scientific evidence behind universal public masking based on 4 considerations: (1) the highly contagious nature of severe acute respiratory syndromecoronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the virus that causes covid-19; (2) increasing evidence of viral shedding of sars-cov-2 from asymptomatic and presymptomatic individuals; (3) experience from asian countries with receding epidemics that incorporated universal masking as a part of stringent public health measures; and (4) the potential contribution of masking to facilitate selective return-to-work policies contagiousness of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2although the debate on whether sars-cov-2 is airborne versus droplet is still raging [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] , sars-cov-2 is highly contagious compared with the following: sars-cov-1, the coronavirus that led to the sars epidemic in 2002 [8] ; middle east respiratory syndrome (mers), the coronavirus that led to mers in 2012 [9] ; and seasonal viral influenza. coronavirus disease 2019 has spread exponentially worldwide since the cluster of infections in wuhan province was first reported to the who on december 31, 2019 [10] . as of this writing, worldwide estimates of covid-19 cases exceed 1.8 million, a number that is likely grossly underestimated due to inadequate testing capability in many settings. although the airborne versus droplet question is relevant to healthcare settings (which involve close contact) and has guided infection control recommendations and type of masks required accordingly [7, 10] , the most compelling reason for public masking is due to the data on spread from asymptomatic individuals [11] . for the general public, surgical isolation masks (as part of an overall public health strategy) should be able to curb dissemination of both droplet-spread and airborne viruses to the breathing zones of nearby individuals [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] .there is considerable evidence that presymptomatic persons (those without current symptoms who eventually go on to develop symptoms) or asymptomatic persons (defined as individuals who never go on to develop symptoms) with sars-cov-2 can infect others. asymptomatic or presymptomatic (heretofore combined into the single term of "paucisymptomatic") transmission of a respiratory virus requires shedding of viable virus in the oropharynx, nasopharynx, or other body fluids. mounting evidence that sars-cov-2 displays high rates of viral shedding in the upper respiratory tract (eg, nasopharynx, oropharynx), even among paucisymptomatic individuals, distinguishes it from sars-cov-1, in which replication occurs mainly in the lower respiratory tract [18] [19] [20] , and viral influenza, in which individuals with asymptomatic disease have lower viral loads in the upper respiratory tract versus those without symptoms [21, 22] .data from the diamond princess cruise ship suggest that up to 18% of cases were asymptomatic, despite detectable sars-cov-2 ribonucleic acid in the nasopharynx or oropharynx [23] . a similar report in the morbidity and mortality weekly report (mmwr) [24] detailed clusters of cases in singapore from january 23 to march 16, 2020 and estimated that more than 6% of transmissions occur from paucisymptomatic individuals. finally, after identification of a case of covid-19 in a hcw in a skilled nursing facility (snf) in washington state, 76 residents of the snf were tested for sars-cov-2 and 48 (63%) had positive swabs, with 27 (56%) being paucisymptomatic. moreover, sars-cov-2 viral loads were quantitatively similar in those with symptoms and those who were asymptomatic [11] , with viral culture demonstrating viability even before symptoms.two other studies besides the one from the washington state snf [11] have demonstrated similar quantitative nasopharynx and oropharynx sars-cov-2 viral loads among paucisymptomatic and symptomatic individuals with covid-19 [25, 26] . analysis of presymptomatic and symptomatic patients demonstrates high viral loads and viable virus readily isolated in culture shortly before and after the onset of symptoms [27] . a study detailing the clinical and virological characteristics of 5 patients in france showed that 2 patients had high viral loads of sars-cov-2 in nasopharyngeal secretions soon after symptom onset [28] . lower respiratory tract specimens may have higher viral loads than those in upper respiratory samples during the phase of active pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome with sars-cov-2 [29] . however, high viral loads of sars-cov-2 in upper respiratory tract samples among patients "without symptoms" suggest a high risk of transmissibility [30] . modeling studies have also demonstrated that paucisymptomatic infections with sars-cov-2 could be responsible for a large proportion of transmissions [31, 32] , with early case reports and familial clusters also indicating asymptomatic transmission [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] . in sum, the degree of transmissibility from asymptomatic individuals in sars-cov-2 is the most compelling argument for universal public masking.the literally breathtaking pace of the covid-19 pandemic is reflected in the lack of a unified public health responses to curb transmission. however, recommendations have coalesced on the use of isolation facemasks (eg, "surgical masks") for hcws in the clinical workspace. after an article in the new yorker on march 21, 2020 by dr. atul gawande [41] encouraging this protective measure for hcws in the united states based on experiences from singapore and hong kong, the boston hospitals mandated this measure for hcws on march 22, 2020 [42] , followed by hospitals around the country in quick succession. universal cloth face masking for the public was recommended by the cdc on april 3, 2020, but it has been actively debated in the white house [43] .a systematic review of physical interventions to reduce the spread of respiratory viruses for the public showed that surgical masks are the most consistent and comprehensive measure to interrupt transmission, because n95 masks can irritate the skin and thereby reduce compliance [16, 44] . universal public masking was adopted in singapore, south korea, hong kong, mainland china, thailand, and taiwan [45, 46] after their respective covid-19 outbreaks and may have contributed to their initial success rates to curbing transmission, along with widespread testing, isolation and quarantining, contact tracing, and border control measures. asian countries were heavily impacted by sars-cov-1 [8] , which may have led to a more rapid institution of universal masking for sars-cov-2 [47] . in the early stages of the epidemic, taiwan immediately increased its capacity to mass produce surgical isolation masks for hcws and the public [28] , and they announced plans on april 1, 2020 to donate 10 million masks to countries most severely impacted by the coronavirus.a major argument against universal public masking in addition to other public health measures has been limited supplies of personal protective equipment, including surgical masks, in the face of a sudden pandemic for which hcws must be prioritized. we cannot conflate what we think should be done and what can be done. industries in the united states can repurpose to produce surgical masks in vast quantities for the public [48] (as in taiwan) [45] , and such production will allow equal access to mask supplies across all strata of society. the cdc has provided guidance on which cloth materials are the most effective for preventing the spread of respiratory droplets [12, 49] , although ensuring that equality to access is imperative and recommendations on how to prolong the life of disposable masks and reuse masks are widespread [50] . another major concern is that the public will let their "guard down" with masking [2] . this can be addressed with strong public health messaging performed in tandem with new policy.the effects of the "lockdown" and shelterin-place guidelines for most of the united states on the economy have been devastating. taiwan, with the most consistent supply of surgical isolation masks for its people (including medical, public and industrial sectors), and with stringent social distancing guidelines and other public health measures, has maintained control of its epidemic without mandating work and school closure. when social distancing is not possible, the taiwanese centers for disease control has mandated that members of the public wear face masks, including on public transportation where fines may be incurred for noncompliance. the country of taiwan remains one of the most controlled in terms of the covid-19 epidemic to date, with 388 cases and 6 deaths as of april 12, 2020 [51] . an eventual and cautious recommendation for a return to work in the united states, with public masks for crowded indoor or outdoor spaces as one component of the updated guidelines, could provide much-needed relief for the economy. tips for how children can be encouraged to wear face masks are already emerging [52] .in conclusion, we strongly endorse universal public masking in the united states for crowded indoor or public spaces, including supermarkets, public gatherings, and in close workplaces. this recommendation does not replace our populationlevel, public health approaches, including social distancing in the short term, but it does serve as an adjunct, with the hope that we will be able to relax such measures as transmission slows. by the end of 2019, just before the chinese new year, an outbreak of idiopathic pneumonia surfaced in wuhan, china (li q. et al., 2020) . soon afterwards, the causative pathogen was identified as a novel coronavirus (huang et al., 2020; wang d. w. et al., 2020) . with rapidly increasing clinical cases, person-to-person transmission was confirmed (chan et al., 2020b) . this novel coronavirus was later named by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (coronaviridae study group of the international committee on taxonomy of viruses, 2020). on january 30, 2020, a public health emergency of international concern was declared by the world health organization (who) (public health emergency of international concern declared by who, 2020) . by march 30, 2020, a total of 82,545 coronavirus disease 2019 cases were confirmed in china (china center for disease control and prevention, 2020) and more than 780,000 confirmed covid-19 cases were identified globally (who director-general's opening remarks at the media briefing on covid-19-11 march, 2020) . in hubei province, there were 67,801 confirmed cases (49, 986 in wuhan), including 7,984 severe cases (7,049 in wuhan) and 3,187 deaths (2,430 in wuhan) (china center for disease control and prevention, 2020) . as previously reported, the most common symptoms at onset of covid-19 were fever, cough, expectoration, headache, myalgia or fatigue, diarrhea, and hemoptysis, along with abnormal lesions on chest computed tomography (ct) (shi et al., 2020; wu and mcgoogan, 2020) . there was also evidence of lymphopenia in a proportion of patients (chen h. j. et al., 2020) .the movement of millions of people with no effective protection measures is considered one of the main reasons for the spread of the epidemic; in particular, the massive population inflows from wuhan to other hometowns before the spring festival fostered the outbreak of this disease to other regions. during the spread, interventional measures including lockdown of public places, cessation of highways and city traffic, wearing facial masks when outside, and refusion of social activities were taken to lower the transmissibility (wuhan novel coronavirus infection pneumonia epidemic prevention control headquarters., 2020) . collection and analysis of the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of confirmed cases outside wuhan helped to adopt and adapt strategies, resulting in prevention and control of the pandemic in these regions.in this study, we summarized the dynamics and clinical features of the covid-19 pandemic in shiyan city in the hubei province, a city 440 km from wuhan city, based on the surveillance data up to february 24, 2020. it is very important to understand the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of covid-19 in the surrounding cities of wuhan. we hope that these data can provide positive suggestions for other cities to prevent the further spread of covid-19.this study was conducted in accordance with the tenets of the helsinki declaration. this study was approved by the institutional review board of shiyan renmin hospital of hubei university of medicine, and the need for informed consent was waived. this study was designed as a retrospective case series, and no patients were directly involved in the study design, setting of research questions, or outcome measures. no patients were consulted for advice on interpretation or writing of results.data of the 176 confirmed covid-19 patients were collected from january 22, 2020 to february 6, 2020, and included seven children aged <14 years and 169 adults. covid-19 was confirmed by two positive rt-pcr tests in hospitals. asymptomatic carriers were quarantined at the hospital or hotels after having been discovered.per the guidelines on investigation and management of close contacts for covid-19 patients issued by the chinese center for disease control, close contacts of suspected cases, clinically diagnosed cases, and confirmed cases 2 days before the onset of illness were required to meet the following criteria: family members living in the same room, medical workers without secondary protection, and sharing personal meals or communication in confined spaces. the contact traces of confirmed cases were informed by patients or family members, and the duration spans 14 days before onset.suspected cases were defined as meeting two of the following criteria: (1) fever, and/or respiratory symptoms; (2) presence of radiographic pneumonia; and (3) white blood cell (wbc) counts within upper limit of normal (uln) or hypo-lymphocytosis during early course of the disease. once the cases were identified, respiratory tract secretions and other samples were collected for real-time fluorescence reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr). in all, 176 patients who tested positive for sars-cov-2 nucleic acids were identified as confirmed cases and enrolled in the study.of these 176 confirmed patients, 53 (26 male and 27 female; mean age, 38 ± 17 years; age range, 6 months to 80 years) were admitted to the department of infectious diseases, department of respiratory, shiyan renmin hospital, hubei university of medicine. data were collected and analyzed from the 53 patients from january 23, 2020 to february 24, 2020 ( table 1) . the inclusion criteria were as follows: suspected cases were screened according to the diagnosis and treatment protocol for covid-19 pneumonia [diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia (6rd interim edition), 2020].after admission to shiyan renmin hospital, indirect immunofluorescent assay was performed to simultaneously detect igm antibodies against the following main etiological agents of pneumonia: legionella pneumophila, mycoplasma pneumoniae, coxiella burnetii, chlamydia pneumoniae, adenovirus (adv), influenza a virus (iav), influenza b virus (ibv), parainfluenza virus type 1+2+3 (piv 1+2+3), and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv). the pneumoslide-m kit (vircell ifa kit) was used for testing according to the manufacturer's instructions. igm antibody detections for mycoplasma pneumoniae of the coinfection pneumonia patients were performed at least three times during the acute phase and recovery phase. igm antibody for mycoplasma pneumoniae was also quantified by serodia-myco ii assay (fujirebio inc., tokyo, japan), and igg antibody were tested by the mycoplasma eia kit (euroimmun inc., german).in addition, respiratory tract samples including sputum and nasopharyngeal swabs collected from the patients were tested for severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) by using ag path-id one-step rt-pcr kit (cat: am1005, abi) according to the manufacturer's instructions. respiratory tract samples were also used for real-time fluorescence rt-pcr to detect the presence of sars-cov-2 by using the sars-cov-2 (orf1ab/n) nucleic acid detection kit (cat: sj-hx-009-2, bio-germ, shanghai, china) according to the manufacturer's instructions.interferon alpha (5 million u or equivalent dose per time for adults, 2 times a day for atomization inhalation), lopinavir (200 mg/pill for adults, 2 pills for each time, 2 times a day, the course of treatment was <10 days), ritonavir (50 mg/pill for adults, 2 pills for each time, 2 times a day, the course of treatment was <10 days), ribavirin (500 mg/pill for adults, 2-3 times a day for intravenous infusion, the course of treatment is not more than 10 days), and abidol (200 mg for adults, 3 times a day, the course of treatment was not exceed 10 days) were used. antiviral traditional chinese medicine was used for adjuvant treatment.basic demographic and clinical data including age, sex, underlying diseases, and comorbidities were collected for each patient ( table 1) . laboratory findings of covid-19 patients categorized by m. pneumoniae lgm antibody presence were recorded ( table 2 ). in addition, epidemiological histories were taken. laboratory test results of standard blood counts (absolute white blood cells and lymphocytes); blood biochemistry (alanine transaminase, aspartate transaminase, creatine kinase, and creatinine); coagulation function; procalcitonin; c-reactive protein; erythrocyte sedimentation rate; and myocardial enzyme spectrum were compiled ( table 3) . additional data collected included medical imaging; treatment regimens (antiviral, antibacterial, systemic corticosteroid, immunoglobulin g, respiratory support); and prognosis (recovered and discharged, inpatient treatment, or death) ( table 4 ).epidemiological and clinical data were collected and analyzed by microsoft office (version 2016) and graphpad prism (version 5.0), and the epidemiological figures were plotted using microsoft excel. continuous clinical data were expressed as medians and ranges, and categorical data, as counts and percentages.the resident population of wuhan, the capital of hubei province, was 11.081 million at the end of 2018, and the migrant population exceeded 5 million (national health commission of the prc, 2020). at the beginning of "chunyun" (migration during spring festival) from january 10, 2020 to january 24, 2020, most of the migrants from wuhan travel to other counties and cities in hubei province, accounting for about 69.4% of the total migrating population. they travel especially to xiaogan (13.8%) and huanggang (13.04%) (data came from baidu qianxi map, 2020), which are adjacent to wuhan (figure 1) . as of midnight of february 11, 2020, the confirmed covid-19 cases in the cities outside wuhan are migrate rate-dependent emerged (figure 1) . in shiyan city, located in the southwest of hubei province and 440 km from wuhan city, the migrant population was 1.86% (about 93,000 people) which accounted for people who came back from wuhan in the period between january 10 and january 24, 2020 (figure 2a) . based on the incubation period of sars-cov-2, the epidemiological data of confirmed covid-19 cases that emerged in shiyan were collected from january 23, 2020. the number of confirmed covid-19 cases onset in hubei province showed a rapid increase before february 4, 2020, peaking at 3,156, and then showed a gradually decreasing trend ( figure 2b) . the same trend of newly confirmed cases was also found in shiyan city, with a peak of 44 cases that fluctuated between february 2 and february the 64 confirmed cases returning from wuhan were surveyed. the 112 confirmed cases in local clusters without travel history to wuhan implied that second-generation patients appeared in shiyan through close contact; these included 52 local cases that had clear contact history with the covid-19 patients from wuhan or local citizens ( figure 3a) . fifteen of them with no close contact with covid-19 patients, and 45 local cases with unknown sources had been infected with the virus. notably, the onset of 12 cases were confirmed after close contact with 11 travelers from wuhan who were asymptomatic carriers and showed no signs of illness after returning from wuhan after nearly 1 month ( figure 3b ). another 12 cases caused four secondary infections in this period. the transmission rate caused by asymptomatic carriers was 10.7% (12/112).among the 176 surveyed cases including wuhan travelers and local citizens, 689 related close contacts were tracked (figure 4) . forty-seven patients transmitted the virus and caused 85 confirmed cases, including 40 patients who transmitted the virus to 64 family members. the infection rate in our surveyed data was 12.34% (85/689), and the r 0 was 1.81 (85/47), which is lower than the recent reports because of the family quarantine measures (chen t. m. et al., 2020) . contact tracing of the 47 cases showed that 14 of them traveled back from wuhan, 13 contacted covid-19 patients, and nine came into contact with wuhan travelers and confirmed covid-19 cases. in addition, six patients had contact history with wuhan travelers, and five showed unknown infection routes, which included three patients that transmitted the virus to their family members and colleagues and another two that spread the virus to their colleagues or friends. to better understand the clinical features of covid-19 cases we tracked, up to february 23, 2020, the clinical data on 53 patients (26 male and 27 female) were collected in the department of infectious diseases of shiyan renmin hospital, hubei province, with laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2 infection. six (11.3%) of these patients were <14 years old, 12 (22.6%) were aged between 15 and 30 years, 29 (54.7%) were aged between 31 and 59 years, and six (11.3%) were ≥60 years. the median age was 38 years (interquartile range, 28-47 years) ( table 1) . interestingly, we noticed that 25 (47.2%) patients were co-infected with m. pneumoniae (table 5) , who had a lower neutrophils percentage (59.64 ± 3.119 vs. 70.28 ± 2.558, p < 0.0264) and higher monocytes percentage (18.18 ± 1.654 vs. 9.733 ± 1.615, p < 0.0044) compared with m. pneumoniae negative patients ( table 2) . six (11.3%) of the 53 covid-19 patients were coinfected with other common respiratory pathogens, such as iav, ibv, and rsv, respectively. among the 53 covid-19 patients, 26 (49.0%) had the following underlying diseases: three (5.7%) had hypertension, one (8%) had diabetes, eight (15.1%) had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, three (5.7%) had cerebrovascular disease, three (5.7%) had renal disease, and nine (17.0%) had liver disease. only six (11.3%) of the figure 4 | survey of the close contacts of 176 confirmed cases. the close contacts mainly included family members, colleagues, or friends who lived together, shared meals, and/or physically communicated with the confirmed covid-19 patients 2 days before the onset of illness. the close contacts were interviewed. 53 patients had history of exposure in wuhan. twenty-two (60.4%) of the 53 patients were associated with familial clusters. the most common symptoms at illness onset were fever (46, 86.8%); cough (35, 66%); and expectoration (32, 60.4%). other symptoms at illness onset were myalgia or fatigue (17, 32.1%); hemoptysis (1, 1.9%); headache (14, 26.4%); and diarrhea (3, 5.7%) ( table 1) .on admission, the blood counts of 21 (39.6%) of the 53 patients showed leucopenia (white blood cell count: <4 × 10 9 /l) and 22 (41.5%) showed lymphopenia (lymphocyte count: <1.0 × 10 9 /l) ( table 3 ). the levels of c-reactive protein (crp) were elevated in 22 (41.5%) patients and the levels of aspartate aminotransferase (ast) were increased in 11 (20.8%) patients. twenty-two (79.2%) patients had normal serum levels of procalcitonin (pct) (<0.1 ng/ml). all patients had pneumonia and showed abnormalities on either chest ct or radiographs. typical chest ct findings of infected patients on admission were bilateral or multiple lobular or subsegmental areas of consolidation or bilateral ground glass opacity (figure 5) . of the 53 patients, only one patient (age, 40 years) was transferred to an intensive care unit for acute respiratory distress syndrome and received mechanical ventilation.all patients received antiviral treatment (table 4) . among the 53 covid-19 patients co-infected with m. pneumoniae, 25 (25/53, 47.2%) were given antibiotic (levofloxacin) treatment, and 12 (12/53, 22.6%) were given systematic corticosteroid and γ-immunoglobulin treatment. at the time of writing this paper, all 53 (100%) patients were discharged and there were no deaths. fitness for discharge was based on subsiding of fever for at least 3 days, with improved evidence on chest radiography and viral clearance in samples from the lower respiratory tract.in shiyan city, the first laboratory-confirmed case of covid-19 was identified in january 23, 2020, and the epidemic has experienced an increasing trend before february 2. the growth phase of new cases is consistent with most other regions outside wuhan in hubei province. because ct-based diagnosis of covid-19 was considered a confirmatory criterion in hubei province [diagnosis treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia (trial version 6, revised), who china office, 2020], more than 10,000 patients were treated in hospital on february 12, 2020 . the growth trend in hubei province and shiyan city was lower than the expected growth curve because of the strict quarantine measures (peng et al., 2020; roosa et al., 2020) . during the chinese traditional new year, most family members and relatives gather at home and share the festivities. therefore, cluster cases occurred mainly among family members and originated either from wuhan travelers or those that came into contacting with covid-19 patients. the origin of the virus could not be confirmed in five patients, and 12 patients had made contact with passengers traveling from wuhan who were asymptomatic carrier and not in the incubation period. although asymptomatic and presymptomatic infection of sars-cov-2 has been reported recently, most of them subsequently developed symptoms (arons et al., 2020; bai et al., 2020; rothe et al., 2020) . there was no evidence that these 11 individuals from wuhan had an incubation period of more than 1 month and transferred the virus to their family members during this period. currently published research basically reported that confirmed cases in the presymptomatic stage can result in transmission yu et al., 2020) , it is yet not clear the transmissibility and transmission rate by asymptomatic carriers. therefore, it is necessary to assess the transmissibility of asymptomatic carriers, strengthening the management of asymptomatic patients and tracing the close contacts of asymptomatic individuals can close the loophole.according to the statistics of clinical cases, children seem to be less infected. the infection is mainly concentrated in the age group of 31-59 years. children and youth have been less infected, which may be due to other unknown reasons. according to previous reports, men are more likely to be infected with sars-cov-2 than women , but our study found no significant difference in the infection rate of men and women. most importantly, 25 (47.2%) of the 53 covid-19 patients were co-infected with m. pneumoniae. common respiratory pathogens such as seasonal influenza viruses were not common in the 53 covid-19 patients. because monocytes increased after m. pneumoniae infection alone (puljiz et al., 2006; wang et al., 2019) , indicating the involvement of monocyterelated mechanisms in the pathogenesis of m. pneumoniae coinfection in covid-19 patients. this suggests that we should pay more attention to m. pneumoniae co-infection for covid-19 patients during clinical testing and corresponding treatment. the existence of underlying diseases may promote the generation of sars-cov-2 infection to a certain extent. this is also one of the reasons for the higher mortality rate of the elderly covid-19 patients (ji et al., 2020) . only a few patients had been to wuhan, while most of the other patients acquired local infections. this confirmed the strong infectivity of sars-cov-2; therefore, controlling local clusters is key to prevent outbreaks from imported cases. fever, cough, and expectoration are the main clinical symptoms of covid-19. however, it is particularly interesting to note that 13.2% patients in our study showed no fever symptom despite being infected. this suggests that the severity of sars-cov-2 infection could be graded by combining crp levels with the patient's age (lu h. et al., 2020) . in this study, we showed that 41.5% of patients had abnormally high crp levels (≥5 mg/l). on admission, decreased leukocyte and lymphocyte counts indicated that the immune function of patients was compromised, consistent with a previous report by xu et al. (2020) .from the perspective of clinical treatment, antiviral treatment (including antiviral traditional chinese medicine) played a better therapeutic role. in addition, early detection of infection and symptomatic treatment were essential to reduce mortality. however, rt-pcr test results had a falsenegative rate (chan et al., 2020a; li z. et al., 2020) . at present, asymptomatic carriers have been identified , and patients discharged from hospitals may still be carriers of the virus (lan et al., 2020) . therefore, it is very important to find more effective detection methods. according to our clinical observation, ct imaging can effectively detect sars-cov-2 infection. however, fever, cough, and other related symptoms cannot be used as absolute evidence of infection.controlling and stopping the outbreak of a new pathogen that is effectively transmitted from person to person remains extremely challenging for most countries, especially when the sars-cov-2 has become a global pandemic having spread to 114 countries (who director-general's opening remarks at the media briefing on covid-19-11 march, 2020). therefore, vaccine research is crucial for effective treatment and control of viral transmission; however, animal experiments and clinical trials are time consuming and cannot produce immediate results. china has heavily invested in medical resources to treat the covid-19 patients, especially elderly patients with severe and critical illness. strict intervention measures adopted by the government should be referenced in other regions with heavy outbreaks. moreover, high-quality epidemiological investigations can find close contacts and early asymptomatic infections, reducing the potential risk of transmission by asymptomatic infection could lead to the stabilized epidemic.all datasets presented in this study are included in the article/supplementary material.this study was approved by the shiyan renmin hospital of hubei university of medicine institutional review board and the need for informed consent was waived.both of them did not wear masks. 5 sars-cov-2 possesses powerful pathogenicity and transmissibility, being more infectious than sars-cov and mers-cov. 6 encountering a confirmed patient and being close for 15 or 50 seconds is not the only route of infection, though it is the most likely route in the above two cases. moreover, being infected within a very short exposure time is possible in the absence of masks. 7 the powerful infectivity of sars-cov-2 may be explained by the latest findings reported by wrapp d et al, 8 which showed that the sars-cov-2 s binds to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptors with a higher affinity than sars-cov s. another underlying reason was reported by zou l et al 9 in that the shedding pattern of viral nucleic acid in patients infected with sars-cov-2 is similar to that in patients with influenza and appears to be different from that in patients infected with sars-cov.sars-cov-2 often causes cluster transmission, especially within family clusters. in some cities, cases involving cluster transmission accounted for 50% to 80% of all confirmed cases of covid-19. 10 human-to-human transmission of sars-cov and mers-cov occurred mainly through nosocomial transmission, and transmission between family members only occurred in 13% to 21% of mers cases and 22% to 39% of sars cases. 11 sars-cov-2 can be transmitted by droplets and contact. a study in south korea showed that many environmental surfaces of patients with mers were contaminated by mers-cov, and virus rna was detected from environmental surfaces within 5 days after the last positive pcr of patients' respiratory samples. 12 guangzhou cdc also found sars-cov-2 in the house of a confirmed patient, 13 which serves as evidence of contact transmission. moreover, live viruses have been found in the feces of patients with covid-19, 14 however, the fecal-oral transmission of the virus has not been shown. studies have shown that sars-cov may be detected in the feces of most sars patients, 15 and the virus within feces could survive at room temperature for at least 1 to 2 days. 16 it is possible but infrequent for sars-cov to spread via the fecal-oral route. 17 in patients with mers, feces and urine samples also yielded viral rna. 18 given the evidence of fecal contamination of sars-cov and mers-cov as well as their ability to survive in feces, it is possible that sars-cov-2 may also be transmitted through the fecal-oral route. 19 additionally, in regard to the expression of ace2 in the intestine and kidney, sars-cov-2 may infect these tissues and enter the feces, allowing its potential spread via fecal-oral route. 20 the lancet also reminded doctors not to ignore sars-cov-2 transmission via ocular surfaces as infected droplets and bodily fluids may easily contaminate the human conjunctival epithelium. 21 guangfa wang, a member of the national health commission of the people's republic of china (nhc) expert panel on pneumonia, was exposed to a fever clinic in wuhan with only his eyes unprotected. he then demonstrated symptoms of conjunctivitis in his left lower eyelid 2 days before the onset of covid-19. 22 on february 19, the nhc published the 6th edition of guideline on diagnosis and treatment of covid-19 (the 6th guideline for covid -19) . 23 this document asserted that the transmission of sars-cov-2 mainly occurs via large droplets and contact. additionally, the virus may spread in an unventilated environment with high levels of viral aerosols.in addition, researchers claimed the spread of sars-cov-2 could be characterized by super-spreading events. 24 however, there is no evidence of super-spreading events in any medical institution that treats patients suffering from covid-19. 6 and a study in south korea showed that for transmission of mers-cov nonisolated in-hospital days was the only factor which tended to be higher in super-spreaders than usual-spreaders. 25 therefore, whether there are super-spreaders or not, early isolation is necessary to reduce the size of the outbreak of sars-cov-2.over the past few days, asymptomatic patients were found in many chinese cities. table 1 outlines its summary.t a b l e 1 summary of asymptomatic patients wuhan were confirmed to have covid-19 after returning to shenzhen, with their asymptomatic child presenting with no fever, respiratory tract symptoms or diarrhoea but had ground-glass lung opacities seen on radiography. 26 subsequently, asymptomatic patients were discovered in many chinese cities with most of them having an epidemiological history.asymptomatic infections may occur due to weakened immune responses and subclinical manifestations, or because the virus is waiting for opportunities to reproduce and invade. to understand its mechanism requires additional investigation of asymptomatic patients as well as blood tests pointing to signs of an immune response, which can help detect asymptomatic or presymptomatic cases. 27 a study showed that during the outbreak of sars-cov, of all exposed health care workers, 7.5% were asymptomatic sarspositive cases. asymptomatic sars was associated with lower sars antibody titers and a higher use of masks compared to that of pneumonic sars. 28 another study showed that of 255 patients with laboratory-confirmed mers-cov, a total of 64 patients (25.1%) were reported to be asymptomatic. however, 33 (52%) of the 64 patients were interviewed with 26 (79%) of them having reported at least one respiratory symptom. 29 this phenomenon indicates whether asymptomatic patients were actually infected without showing symptoms.whether asymptomatic people can transmit sars-cov-2 to others is unclear. the 6th guide for covid-19 noted that asymptomatic patients may serve as a source of infection. an article in nejm first reported a german to be confirmed with covid-19 after contact with an asymptomatic chinese patient. 30 however, it turned out that the chinese patient had a fever in germany and took antipyretics. a recent study in nejm reported that a viral load detected in an asymptomatic patient was similar to that detected in symptomatic patients, indicating the potential for transmission in asymptomatic patients. 9 table 1 indicates that these asymptomatic patients may infect others or develop symptoms later, but the number of patients involved is small. we remind readers to take this into account when interpreting the research results and conclusions as some of the above observations may be accidental.another uncertainty is whether those who are asymptomatic can cause large-scale infections. a study in south korea showed that during the mers outbreak in korea, an asymptomatic patient with mers was discovered, and none of the 82 persons exposed to that patient without protection was infected. 31 most of the asymptomatic patients had close contact with confirmed patients, hence, they may be isolated in a timely manner when tracking close contacts. moreover, the number of asymptomatic patients was very small; according to epidemiological data in mainland china, only 1.2% of patients with covid-19 are asymptomatic. 6 due to the above reasons, such patients will generally not cause large-scale transmissions of sars-cov-2. 32 february 2, was delivered by a mother who was confirmed to have covid-19. the cord blood and placental tissue were collected immediately and tested negative for sars-cov-2, but nasopharyngeal swab samples collected 36 hours after birth were positive. 33 sars-cov-2 is a novel virus and shares a 79.0% nucleotide identity with the sequence of sars-cov and a 51.8% identity with that of mers-cov. 34 the alveolar lavage test is the best way to confirm sars-cov-2, however, the detection of alveolar lavage fluid is mostly used in severe patients using an invasive ventilator. sputum is considered the second choice, though the coughs of many patients with covid-19 are unproductive. 46 therefore, pharyngeal swabs are the most common sampling method, however, they may occasionally cause missed diagnoses for smaller levels of sars-cov-2 residing in the pharynx. in addition, pcr detection takes up a lot of time, hampering the control of infectious diseases. therefore, the revised version of the 5th edition added clinical confirmed standards for the hubei province. 47 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is the focus of global attention which began with an outbreak of a febrile respiratory illness in december 2019 in wuhan, hubei province [1] . it was reported that the virus was transmitted between humans [2, 3] , especially among family members [4] . prompt public health measures were taken in china, including intensive surveillance and epidemiological investigations. according to the latest recommendations [5] , 2019 novel coronavirus disease (covid-19) is classified into 4 types: mild, ordinary, severe, and critical. mild and ordinary cases have good prognoses, but severe cases, and especially critical cases, always present with systematic organ dysfunction and involve prolonged hospitalization [6] . to date, no obvious breakthroughs in the treatment of severe coronavirus infection have been identified. previous reports have indicated that the onset of symptoms may help physicians identify patients with poor prognosis and that meticulous supportive care can be effective [7] .shenzhen city is located in the southern part of guangdong, china, and approximately 70% of the population is migrant people. after the traditional chinese new year holidays, massive human movement occurred. since the first clinical case of covid-19 was reported on 11 january 2020, shenzhen has become one of the main epidemic areas for this disease. close contacts are isolated and monitored at home or at designated hotels, and more and more asymptomatic cases were found. we reviewed findings in asymptomatic cases that were laboratory confirmed to be positive for sars-cov-2 through nucleic acid testing of pharyngeal swab samples. we retrospectively analyzed clinical outcomes in 55 asymptomatic patients who were infected with sars-cov-2 and admitted to the third people's hospital of shenzhen, china.this study was approved by the ethics committee of the third people's hospital of shenzhen, china, on 23 february 2020. informed consent was obtained from all of the patients or their guardians.cases were classified as follows: (1) mild, mild clinical symptoms without pneumonia seen at chest computed tomography;(2) ordinary, fever and other respiratory symptoms with pneumonia seen at imaging; (3) severe, respiratory distress, hypoxia (oxygen saturation, ≤93%), or abnormal results of blood gas analysis (pao 2 < 0 mm hg or paco 2 >50 mm hg); and (4) critical, respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, shock, or other organ failure requiring intensive care unit monitoring and treatment.we obtained data from medical records, including all symptoms at onset, physical examination findings (all study subjects were asymptomatic at admission; symptoms that developed during hospitalization were recorded), laboratory and imaging data, and personal history. we included in the study asymptomatic patients who had laboratory-confirmed positive results for sars-cov-2 (based on nucleic acid testing of pharyngeal swab samples [8] ) after the diagnosis of covid-19 in a family member and who were admitted to the third people's hospital of shenzhen from 11 january 2020 to 29 february 2020. the exclusion criteria were suspected covid-19 with symptoms such as fever, cough, fatigue, poor appetite, diarrhea, and headache at admission.laboratory data include complete blood cell count, c-reactive protein (crp) level, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, liver and renal function, electrolyte levels, coagulation test results, and levels of procalcitonin, interleukin 6, lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), and creatine kinase. pharyngeal swab samples were collected for the sars-cov-2 test on the day of admission.the collected samples, stored at 2°c-8°c, were sent on ice to the center for disease control and prevention of shenzhen. viral rna was extracted from pharyngeal swab samples using the qiaamp rna viral kit (qiagen), and quantitative reversetranscription polymerase chain reaction was performed using the primers and probes targeting the orf1ab and n genes of sars-cov-2, as recommended by the chinese center for disease control and prevention [9] . virus clearance was defined as 2 consecutive negative nucleic acid test results (at a sampling interval of ≥1 day).all acquired data were cross-checked by 2 investigators to ensure that there was no duplicated information. investigators were trained to use a standardized questionnaire to collect epidemiological information immediately after patients were admitted, with face-to-face interviews with the patients or their guardians and relevant medical staff.basic descriptive analyses were performed in all patients. ibm spss 18.0 statistical software was used for statistical analyses.a total of 55 asymptomatic case patients were identified with sars-cov-2 infection after the onset of illness in an infected family member. these included 22 male and 33 female patients, aged from 2 to 69 years; their median age was 49 years, and 30.9% were 30-49 years old (table 1 ). more than half of the patients belonged to the native population of hubei province. ordinary covid-19 was the outcome in 70.9% of the asymptomatic case patients.of the 55 patients, only 7 had mild cough and 7 had low fever (<38.0°c) 3-5 days later (including 2 with both). a 2-year-old boy had ordinary covid-19 diagnosed after being testing 3 times within 2 weeks. despite being asymptomatic, the 55 patients were admitted immediately and medically isolated. the interval between hospitalization and illness onset was 1-7 days. on admission, all 55 patients underwent chest computed tomography (ct), which showed pneumonia in 37. chest ct findings were initially normal in 18 patients (32.7%); 16 experienced no symptoms during hospitalization. two women >60 years old were admitted promptly after their infected family members and had normal chest ct findings on day 1. during the course of hospitalization, they both had mild cough and low fever 5 days later, along with hypoxia (oxygen saturation, 90%) and restlessness. repeated ct showed pneumonia ( figure 1 ). after informed consent was obtained, lopinavir-ritonavir therapy was initiated in all 55 patients and continued for 7 days. the 2 patients with hypoxia were also treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (10 g/d) and methylprednisolone (1-2 mg/kg/d) therapy for 3 days and with a heated humidified high-flow nasal cannula for 5 days. eventually, they both recovered without complications. none of the patients were admitted to the intensive care unit.all the patients recovered and were discharged to home. in all patients, results of 2 consecutive nucleic acid tests of nasopharyngeal swab samples (sampling interval, ≥1 day) were negative for sars-cov-2 after 4-21 days. three sputum samples from patients with ordinary covid-19 were negative 3-5 days after nasopharyngeal swab testing. a history of hypertension was present in 8 patients, and a history of cholecystitis. hypothyroidism, chronic pharyngitis, hepatitis b, and asthma in 1 patient each. epstein-barr virus was diagnosed serologically in 1 patient, and mycoplasma pneumoniae in 3. neutropenia and lymphocyte counts below normal occurred in 11 patients each. initial biochemical results showed elevated crp levels, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and ldh levels in 10, 20, and 13 patients, respectively (table 2) .overall, of the 55 patients admitted with asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection in this study group, 14 had mild, 39 had ordinary, and 2 had severe covid-19 during hospitalization. age was significantly associated with asymptomatic occurrence. asymptomatic cases occurred seldom among young people (18-29 years old). this was a novel discovery but one we should interpret with caution owing to the small number of patients.in the current study, we found that 3.6% of asymptomatic patients with sars-cov-2 infection might take a turn for the worse. only 2 patients had typical symptoms (both cough and fever) [10] , 3-5 days after hospital admission. family members with fatigue and dry cough, and particularly those with fever, were easily noticed, but asymptomatic members were initially ignored. many asymptomatic persons were actually a source of sars-cov-2 infection but were considered healthy before they underwent screening. the risk of viral spread from asymptomatic patients with infection suggest that prompt screening of family members of infected persons is important.it is evident that family cluster transmission of sars-cov-2 was one main mode of transmission [11] . a previous study in nanjing found that people (<15 years old) were prone to be asymptomatic [12] . we found that asymptomatic cases of infection occurred seldom in young people (18-29 years old) in shenzhen. nucleic acid testing would therefore be crucial to screen for asymptomatic infections in this population.a previous study indicated that crp and ldh levels may be predictors of disease severity [13] . crp levels, ldh levels, and white blood cell counts were elevated occurred in 10, 13 and 1 patient, respectively. eleven patients (including the 2 with severe infection) had leukopenia. here we found no relationship between clinical type and laboratory results; this should be further investigated.in 3 patients, sputum samples became negative 3-5 days later than nasopharyngeal swab samples. to et al [14] reported that serial monitoring of saliva viral load generally showed a declining trend. we therefore recommend that monitoring viral loads in sputum samples is crucial in late-stage covid-19, as previously recommended [15] .however, the current study has several limitations. first, the data are retrospectively analyzed, so the possibility of recall bias cannot be ruled out. second, we collected most but not all laboratory data. however, shenzhen is an international city with adequate public health interventions and medications. the enrolled patients were identified through systematic screening of the family members of patients with covid-19. all asymptomatic patients were admitted to the third people's hospital of shenzhen, the only designated hospital in shenzhen, so the study population is representative of the whole city.in conclusion, we present here the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of patients with asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection in shenzhen. in our study, asymptomatic infection was seldom seen in young people; the proportion with severe covid-19 was low, and the proportion with ordinary covid-19 was high. to better minimize the risk of sars-cov-2 infection, preventive measures focusing on high-risk populations are recommended. a negative sputum swab test was recommended to the isolation of the infection source.notesa workflow of the coronavirus primary screening has been shown in figure 1 . a reliable diagnosis of the viral infection is one the most urgent priorities for public health management of the disease spread. usually in acute respiratory infection, rt-pcr is traditionally employed to identify viruses in respiratory secretions. a robust detection technology is usually based on real-time rt-pcr because it is highly sensitive and specific, although it requires infrastructure, skilled personnel and at least 4-6 hours for analysis. currently available techniques do not provide results before several hours or even days, and the tests require a well-equipped laboratory and trained personnel. indeed, these methods are not efficient to rapidly screen a high number of individuals in places where thousands of people transit per hours. these methods are effective in confirming the infections when symptoms are already present but they are completely inefficient to identify infections at asymptomatic stage. the development of a means for a quick and simple detection of this virus in humans is a worldwide priority considering that infections have been observed in world areas such as africa where the scarce health assistance will not be able to control the spread. indeed, it is important to generate new ideas that will allow the development of new detection prototypes able to quickly identify infected humans and prevent the virus from spreading.a large number of possible host-pathogen biomarkers (transcripts, mirnas, proteins, metabolites) may be analyzed through different omic tools. here, we propose the application of a portable instrument based on the analysis of molecular responses at transcript level. the proposed approach consists in the adaptation of an existing infield portable technology currently used for real-time detection of viral agents in plants, for detection of sars-cov-2 in for destruction of sars-cov-2 before irreversible negative effects on human health has occurred (these approaches may focus on targeting of human immune system); and (c) identification of pathways and bioactive compounds that can stimulate the innate immune responses. indeed, the proposed approach is to identify and analyze biomarkers modulated in either host or pathogen at early stages of infection. when any eukaryotic host is subjected to stress, an "induced stress response" occurs similarly to the host "inflammatory response" to pathogen-associated and pathogen-induced virulence factors. 5 if the induced stress response is enhanced, tissue injury can happen, causing to irreversible effects at asymptomatic stages, because it is often too late to avoid tissue and organ damages once symptoms appear. during the early stages of this condition, the induction of immune stress-related genes and pathways commonly associated with pathogen infection and physiological disorders occur and these genes are typically associated with general early state of stress response. other differentially regulated genes at the presymptomatic stage are stress specific and may work as useful biomarkers for the early diagnosis of the host health conditions. these responses include changes in the key metabolic pathways associated with key indicators of early stages of infection of known pathogens. usually, this stress condition usually anticipates the manifestation of symptoms associated with diseases. for this reason, a focus on the analysis of key genes, transcripts, proteins, metabolites, or pathways could be used to monitor the human health status. these induced biological molecules may be used as biomarkers for both stress identification and recovery. the identification of molecules that are early host responses associated in a reversible stress status using portable instruments is the first stage for asymptomatic diagnosis. the biomarker's identification needs the analysis of large data sets through web-based applications that queries large public databases of information on transcripts, proteins, or metabolites modulated in specific biological conditions (ie, genevestigator).here, we propose the employment of an instrument that is already widely used for plant pathogens 6,7 and could be easily adapted also for the detection of sars-cov-2. the idea is to use a porta- no host genes strictly specific for a specific pathogen. however, a pool of responsive host genes might be employed as host biomarkers to quickly identify early alarm stress state, better than aspecific methods currently used such the measurement of body temperature for fever detection. a biomarker can be defined as a biological characteristic that can be analyzed and considered as an indicator of a particular physiological such as pathogenic processes, or responses to a therapeutic intervention. in omic sciences, a "biomarker profile" includes a series of transcriptomic, proteomic, and/or metabolomic features linked with a particular stress, development of physiological condition. combined, these characteristics could become a biomarker of pathogenic condition assisting in diagnosis and therapy. a systems-based approach could gain insight into underlying biological regulatory network (brn) governing interactions between hosts and pathogens. heterogeneous omic data sets could be integrated to define a biological regulatory network underlying early host and pathogen biomarkers for asymptomatic detection of the viral infections. to assist the biomarkers discovery, the vast amount of transcriptomic data available in public databases in response to human coronaviruses will allow a deep meta-analysis using previously customized bioinformatics pipelines ref. [8] [9] [10] [11] . this work consists of re-analyzing raw data obtained by independent experiments using a normalization and standardization procedure included in a bioinformatics pipeline. this work will provide differentially regulated genes from each study finding commonalities and differences in genes,proteomics may be also used to validate the discovery of transcriptional markers analyzing the same infection stages considered at transcript level. a possible technique could be the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (itraq), typically employed in quantitative proteomics using tandem mass spectrometry to analyze quantitative measurements of protein amount from different sources in a single experiment. briefly, once proteins are extracted from the same collected tissues (nostril tissues), they may be precipitated using proteoextracttm protein precipitation kit (calbiochem), dehydrated, resuspended, and digested with tripsin and generated peptides analyzed using a system composed by qexactive mass spectrometer, an easy-lc and a nanospray ionization source. data could be acquired using a data-dependent ms/ms method and raw data should be analyzed using x!tandem, visualized using scaffold dk/servi ces/netng lyc/). this approach has been successful to determine more than 4500 proteins in plants including both host and pathogen. 7 considering the systemic presence of sars-cov-2, the identification of specific genes from peripheral blood and different tissues would be very helpful to discover tissue-specific host biomarkers. the viral infection is typically perceived by the host before that the viral nucleic acid can be detected by traditional methods such as quantitative real-time pcr.here, we propose the use of the portable device such as bcube®2.0 (developed by hyris ltd).the device is a miniaturized device that is able to perform both temperature cycles and isothermal analysis, enabling a wide array of nucleic acid detection methods such as qpcr and isothermal ampli- gene expression could be conducted collecting samples from human nostrils with tools such as cotton swabs. confirmation may be performed blood samples. rna may be extracted from these collection instruments with a quick procedure using simplified extraction procedures.the typical workflow for the use of the instrument for pathogen detection is shown in figure 4 . results may be provided in approximately 2 hours. at the moment, the developed software and hardware are used to target the pathogen dna, but a next step could f i g u r e 2 components of hyris platform: bcube ® , bapp, bkit, and starter kit f i g u r e 3 additional details of the components of the portable system be the analysis of host xf-regulated genes discovered by meta-analysis works. implementation and validation tests of the results obtained directly by the portable device could be conducted analyzing the same tissues with traditional laboratory equipment. this work would verify the consistency of the field results delivered by the instrument.the proposed instrument fits well when a quick, easy, reliable and inhouse early detection (and confirmation) is required to rapidly decontaminate environments and initiate quarantine of infected individuals.the workflow for a secondary coronavirus screening using bcube ® is f i g u r e 4 typical workflow for the use of bcube ® for detection of pathogens from dann extraction to results readout f i g u r e 5 possible workflow of coronavirus secondary screening using bcube ® portable instrument shown in figure 5 . the system is able to detect not only viruses, but also specific bacteria, proteins, and dna molecules, an increased or reduced concentration of which in a person's saliva, blood and other tissues (ie, nostrils) provide the diagnosis of the sars-cov-2 infections.the most important aspect of this tool is the extreme ease of use and the automatic interpretation of the results. the app has an intuitive interface and can guide the operator through every step of the setup and analysis. initiation in the analysis is simple and the automatic result interpretation engine can assist the operator in determining the outcome.the supplied power source works at both 110 v and 220 v, and the power cord can be easily interchanged with the one compatible with the standard of your destination country. real-time and remote control of the bcubes is allowed thanks to the connection to hyris bdata ® service. the instrument is well suitable to work on boats and other quarantine environments for the possibility to have results in short time. it also fits well in the airports after a quick scan of other symptoms (ie, fever) in order to confirm the presence of the viral infections.we certify that lorenzo colombo, stefano lo priore, isabella della noce and simone romano are employees of hyris ltd. that produces the bcube® instrument described in this article.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8502-767xin late december 2019, a novel strand of coronavirus (sars-cov-2) was reported in wuhan, a 23 central and crowded city of china (li et al., 2020) . subsequently, the world health organization 24 (who) has since officially termed this pandemic the corona virus disease 2019 (covid-19) [1] . 25 covid-19 is a rapidly spreading infectious disease and continues to cause several outbreaks in yet infectious, in other words, they are incubating the disease; undetected asymptomatic patients a(t)-these are individuals who would have completed their incubation period and 83 can now transmit the infection. in general, these individuals cannot be recognized if they 84 are not confirmed by rt-pcr or other laboratory testing [14] . the model also includes 85 undetected clinically infected individuals and this population has been further subdivided 86 into two different classes-mild patients i m (t) and severe patients i s (t). in a recent study by 87 wu and mcgoogan [15] , it was noted that approximately 81% of the detected covid-19 88 patients were of mild symptom and the remainder (about 20%) were severe. in addition, we 89 have also included detected and quarantined patients (both asymptomatic and symptomatic) 90 q(t); as well as the deceased and successfully recovered individuals and these are respectively vealed that 6% of hcws at these two institutions were infected with sars-cov2 [18] . thus, 117 the force of infection λ(t), which represents the rate at which susceptible individuals become 118 infected is expressed as: (2) (iv) susceptible individuals who contract the disease progress to the exposed/latent stage where 135 they will incubate the disease for an average period of σ −1 days. during this period these 136 individuals will not be capable of transmitting the disease. a couple of recent studies on 137 wuhan covid-19 dynamics suggest that the average (median) incubation period could be as 138 short as 4 days [4, 20] .(v) upon the completion of the incubation period, we assume that a fraction f of the exposed 140 individuals move to the asymptomatic stage and the remainder (1 − f ) become symptomatic.prior studies suggests that of the individuals who become symptomatic, more often there exists two classes, mild patients and severe patients [4, 15] . in particular, in a study on 81% of the cases were mild symptoms (without pneumonia or only mild pneumonia), 14% 145 were severe cases with difficulty breathing, and 5% were critical with respiratory failure, septic 146 shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction or failure. based on this assertion, we assume that (vii) through rt-pcr or other laboratory testing, asymptotic patients are assumed to be detected 156 and quarantined at rate ω. furthermore, we assume that after an average period of φ −1 days, based on the aforementioned assumptions we have the following system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations:(3) figure 1 illustrates the transition of individuals from one epidemiological state to another. denotes the remaining transfer terms are respectively given (at the disease-free equilibrium ) by;it follows that the spectral radius of model (3) which is the reproduction number of the model is 182 given bythey are defined as followsfrom the expression of the reproduction number r eff , we can note the following:(i) increasing the strength of governmental action to high levels (close to 100%), will lead to a huge 186 reduction in the magnitude of the reproduction number, and the weak actions ( values of α 187 close to zero) will not be effective to reduce the magnitude of the basic reproduction number.(ii) in the absence of governmental actions (α = p 1 = p 2 = ω = q = 0), the number of sec-189 ondary cases that will be generated by each infected individual will be higher compared to 190 when actions are even weak. the expression for the reproduction number in the absence of 191 intervention strategies is given by(iii) we can also observe that if quarantined individuals do not contribute to the generation of new 194 infections, that is, q = r q = 0, then the reproduction number will be less. table 1 . other parameters 221 values which were drawn from literature are presented in table 2 . 222 we fitted the model to cumulative daily new infection data presented in the appendix. the using baseline values on table 1 to explore the impact of individual reaction and governmental action on combating covid-19 245 disease in south africa, we will simulate model (1) using parameter values in table 1 numerical illustration in figure 8 depicts the effects of different levels of exposed individuals who 279 progress to asymptomatic and infectious stage. day lockdowns with relaxation may not be as effective as an initial 35 day lockdown followed by 296 successive 35 day lockdowns with relaxation. furthermore, we observed that a detection rate of at 297 least 0.5 per day may lead to a significant reduction of the number of active cases. in addition, we 298 also noted that in the absence of intervention strategies the peak number of cases could be attained 299 around mid-june whereas in the presence of intervention strategies the peak will be attained around 300 the 23rd of august. hence, we can deduce that the presence of intervention strategies may be 301 responsible for the delay in attaining the peak, thereby prompting policy makers ample time to 302 prepare for various and effective ways of managing the disease.the proposed framework could be of significant importance on understanding the transmission 304 and control of covid-19. however, we acknowledge that there are several aspects of the disease 305 that are yet to be clearly unraveled, for instance, the duration one remains as an asypmtomatic 306 infectious patient is still debatable. in the event that additional information have been found, it 307 can be used to improve the framework. here, we provide the dataset that was used in the study. all data are publicly available and can be 310 retrieved on www.worldometer.com. we considered the data ranging from 1 march 2020 to 3 may 311 the authors received no specific funding for this work.to their institution for non-financial support during the time when they were carrying out this study.elite athletes are predisposed to the common cold due to heavy physical and mental stress which may suppress both innate and adaptive immunity. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] air travel, human crowding, housing with other athletes and competition all increase the susceptibility of an elite athlete to the common cold. 6 the winter olympic games take place during periods of low temperatures and its timing coincides with epidemics of many respiratory viruses. the common cold has been said to be 'the most dreaded opponent' at the winter olympic games, and may ruin the athlete's long-term goal of success. 7 the common cold is a prevalent, complex and heterogeneous illness. 8 more than 10 species of respiratory viruses exist, and they contain hundreds of subspecies with different immunopathologies. 9 10 signs and symptoms of different viral infections overlap, and it is not possible to identify the aetiological agent on clinical grounds alone. 11 12 antiviral treatment is only available for influenza, but virus-specific preventive measures may reduce the transmission of illnesses. 13 14 the aim of our prospective observational study was to investigate the occurrence and aetiology of the common cold in team finland during the 2018 winter olympic games. we used recently developed molecular multiplexed poct for influenza a and b viruses and respiratory syncytial virus at the games site. 15 16 after the games, we used laboratory-based pcr testing to detect 16 possible causative respiratory viruses.this prospective observational study was carried out during the winter olympic games in pyeong-chang, south korea between 26 january and 28 february 2018. during the games, the temperature and humidity measured by team finland varied between −17°c and +8°c and between 12% and 77%, respectively. monitoring of the common cold was provided to team finland members who stayed in the olympic village (45 athletes and 46 supportive staff members) and the two hotels outside the village (22 staff members) (figure 1). the mean age of the athletes (n=45) was 27 (sd 6) years and the mean age of the staff members (n=68) was 44 (sd 9). thirteen athletes and 10 staff members were female. the team members participated in the monitoring for the entire duration of their olympic trip, starting from their departure from helsinki airport and finishing with their return to helsinki airport, thus including two intercontinental flights with duration of 8 hours 50 min and 9 hours 50 min. on their departure, all team members were reported to be asymptomatic and healthy, except one subject with nasal congestion. the team members stayed in pyeongchang for a median length of 21 days (with a range of 10-32 days). they lived in groups of 5-6 in 3-bedroom to 4-bedroom flats in a single block of 16 flats. figure 1 flow chart of the study. more than one mucus sample was taken from 28 participants. eleven poct samples were not available for retesting in the laboratory. due to lack of poct reagents onsite, 12 samples were only tested in the laboratory. poct, point-of-care testing. 1total no. of tests performed including subjects tested more than once.all team members were instructed to immediately report symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection to the chief physician (mv), who stayed in the same building. at the onset of a symptom, two nasal mucus specimens (one from each nostril) were collected at a depth of 3-4 cm using flocked nasal swabs (503cs01, copan flock technologies, brescia, italy). one specimen was used immediately for poct and the other was refrigerated in a dry storage tube (553c, copan flock technologies, brescia, italy) in the team's medical room. swabs were also taken from subjects exposed to a patient with the common cold. specimens for poct were collected as part of the medical care of the team members.all study-related activities were conducted according to good clinical practice, which includes the provisions of the declaration of helsinki.the common cold was defined as the acute onset of any of the following symptoms: sore throat, rhinorrhoea, nasal congestion and cough. 8 in addition, fever (an axillary temperature ≥37.8°c), hoarseness and lethargy were recorded on a standardised form in the evening on a four-point severity scale (0=absent, 1=mild, 2=moderate and 3=severe). 17 the total symptom score for the first 5 days of illness was calculated.a fast, automated poct, the cepheid xpert influenza+rsv xpress assay, was used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 16 a nasal swab was suspended into 3 ml of universal transport medium (utm, copan italia, brescia, italy) and 300 µl of suspension was added into the assay cartridge, which was then loaded into the cepheid genexpert ii instrument. after a processing time of 30 min, the test reading was recorded.for laboratory testing, stored specimens were suspended into 1 ml of phosphate-buffered saline. nucleic acids were extracted from 500 µl aliquots of the suspended specimens with the magna pure 96 system using a magna pure 96 dna viral na lv 2.0 kit (roche diagnostics, mannheim, germany) with the pathogen universal 500 3.1 protocol and an elution volume of 50 µl. the extracted nucleic acids were stored at −70°c between analyses. allplex respiratory panels 1-4 (seegene, seoul, south korea) and the cfx96 (bio-rad laboratories, hercules, california, usa) instrument were used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions to detect respiratory syncytial virus a and b, adenovirus, influenza a and b viruses, rhinovirus, parainfluenza type 1-4 viruses, human coronavirus 229e, oc43 and nl63, human bocavirus and human metapneumovirus using 8 µl of each specimen per panel. the allplex respiratory panel also detected the following bacteria: streptococcus pneumoniae, non-typeable haemophilus influenzae, moraxella catarrhalis, bordetella pertussis, chlamydophila pneumoniae and mycoplasma pneumoniae. a laboratory-designed triplex rt-pcr assay for influenza a, a/h1pdm09 and b viruses was performed as described earlier, with the exception that nxtscript dna master (roche diagnostics, mannheim, germany) and mic pcr instrument (bio molecular systems, upper coomera, qld, queensland, australia) were used for the pcr step. 18 in addition, respiratory syncytial virus, rhinoviruses and enteroviruses were detected using a triplex rt-pcr assay as described earlier, with the exception that sensi-fast probe no-rox kit (bioline, luckenwalde, germany), and mic pcr instrument were used for the pcr step. 19 a virus cluster was defined as three detections of the same virus during the median length of 3 weeks. this was considered an unusual aggregation event.the difference between proportions was tested with a binomial standard normal deviation (snd) test and 95% cis were calculated accordingly.forty-two out of 112 team members reported symptoms of respiratory infection during the study period of 10-32 days (median 21 days). there were 20 athletes (45%) and 22 (32%) staff members (p=0.123, 95% ci −5.2 to 31.2). two athletes and two staff members suffered from a febrile illness. the mean duration of the symptoms was 8.3 (sd 7.8) days and 8.7 (sd 8.9) days in the athletes and the staff, respectively. one athlete and one staff member suffered from symptoms throughout their entire stay in the village (figure 2). symptoms were mostly mild, and the mean total severity score was 6.4 (sd 5.9) for the athletes and 7.3 (sd 5.7) for the staff (table 1) . only one athlete lost a competition on 1 day due to a respiratory infection.onsite, the aetiology of respiratory infections was identified in 11 of 42 (26%) symptomatic cases. before the games, two cases of influenza b were detected by local healthcare services using antigen detection. poct in the team's medical room detected one case of influenza a virus, three cases of influenza b virus and five cases of respiratory syncytial virus a. the aetiology of the common cold was identified in six athletes and in five staff members. all six patients with an influenza virus infection were treated with oseltamivir. oseltamivir prophylaxis was given to their 32 contacts (11 athletes). none of them developed a symptomatic infection.the aetiology of the common cold was finally detected in 30 figure 2 ). in five athletes and nine staff members (p=0.117), the pcr cycle threshold values were <27, indicating high viral load (figure 2). in 8 out of 20 virus-positive cases, a previous or later nasal specimen was virus-negative. nasal mucus samples were taken from 34 asymptomatic subjects due to close contact to a symptomatic subject. eight samples were virus-positive (rhinovirus 3, coronavirus 229e 3, coronavirus nl63 2).multiplexed pcr-testing for nasal bacteria identified h. influenzae in seven subjects and s. pneumoniae in two subjects. co-detection with a respiratory virus was found in three out of nine cases. no cases of atypical bacteria were identified. clinically no cases of probable bacterial infections were recorded. n  11  5  5  5  5  5  3  1  1   asymptomatic   n  3  0  0  3  0  2 eleven specimens were not available for retesting in the laboratory. all other poct results were confirmed in the laboratory.four athletes competed with mild symptoms of the common cold. one athlete competed 5 days after the onset of an influenza b infection, another competed 5 days after the onset of a respiratory syncytial virus a infection and two athletes competed five days after the onset of a metapneumovirus infection.one subject reported nasal congestion when departing finland. respiratory syncytial virus a was detected at the olympic village. six days later, the neighbouring team member in the aeroplane developed symptomatic respiratory syncytial virus a -infection. the next respiratory syncytial virus a cases were identified consequently 10, 16 and 17 days after the initial respiratory syncytial virus a detection.one subject developed a febrile influenza b infection during the 9-hour outbound flight. another subject on the same flight (seated one row behind) developed an influenza b infection 1.5 days later. three more subjects were infected with the influenza b virus. these cases were separate and were not known to be in contact with the earlier cases.one subject developed nasal congestion during the 9-hour flight, later detected to be a respiratory syncytial virus b infection. the subject was seated in business class and was isolated for 4 days in the olympic village. no other team member was infected with respiratory syncytial virus b.one subject reported a sore throat and mild lethargy 6 days after the departure. metapneumovirus was detected. metapneumovirus was detected in team members consequently 8, 13, 15 and 18 days after the initial metapneumovirus detection.rhinovirus was detected in two samples from asymptomatic individuals 3 days and 4 days after their departure from finland. one subject later arrived in the village with a symptomatic rhinovirus infection. one more subject developed nasal congestion in the village and one asymptomatic subject staying outside the village was predisposed to influenza b infection. in both cases, rhinovirus infection was later laboratory-confirmed. according to the incubation time and known contacts, the rhinovirus infections in the team were considered separate.coronavirus 229e was detected in two subjects on february 13. the following cases were identified consequently 7, 8 (2 cases), 9 (4 cases) and 10 (2 cases) days after the initial detections. three of these infections were asymptomatic. coronavirus oc43 was identified in one subject 1 day after the subject departed helsinki. two further cases were identified 2 and 4 days after the initial case. two asymptomatic coronavirus nl63 cases were identified on february 12. two and one symptomatic subjects were detected 5 and 13 days later.altogether seven virus clusters were identified. four clusters (respiratory syncytial virus a, metapneumovirus, coronaviruses 229e and nl63) occurred within the same sport discipline (table 2) . inter-disciplinary transmission was rare (data not shown).we discuss three main findings from this prospective observational study. first, 45% of the elite athletes and 32% of the staff members suffered from the symptoms of the common cold during the median stay of 3 weeks at the winter olympic games. second, poct multiplex pcr diagnostics rapidly detected influenza a and b virus, and respiratory syncytial virus infections. third, the probable aetiology of the common cold could be detected in 75% of the athletes and 68% of the staff members. coronaviruses were the most common causative agents. unexpectedly, clusters of seven respiratory viruses were found within the team.two previous studies by the ioc reported 2% and 4% incidences of respiratory infections in elite athletes during the vancouver 2010 and the sochi 2014 olympic winter games, respectively. 20 21 our observation (45%) contrasts those observations. the ioc's reporting system may not be reliable because it is based on voluntary reporting by team physicians, who may not be properly informed within the team. at the onset of the games, in our study, the team physician informed all team members about the monitoring of the common cold. she stayed in the same building as the team which allowed for daily encounters with the majority of team members. even one symptom or mild symptoms were reported. 22 in agreement with our observations, 48% of 44 norwegian cross-country skiers self-reported becoming ill during or 10 days immediately after the tour de ski. 23our study is the first to detect the aetiology of respiratory infections in elite athletes using molecular poct at a major event. all available poct virus diagnoses (positive and negative) were later confirmed at a laboratory. diagnostics had clinical implications in the treatment and prevention of influenza a and b infections. in addition to early treatment with oseltamivir, poct enabled effective post-contact oseltamivir prophylaxis for close contacts, for example, those living in the same accommodation or travelling on the same flight or in the same vehicle. 14 the isolation of infected team members was initiated after the onset of symptoms and continued for 3-4 days (ie, the most infectious period). [24] [25] [26] [27] we detected the probable causative virus in 75% of the elite athletes with the common cold. causality is supported by a 4%-6% occurrence of respiratory viruses in asymptomatic adults. 28 29 only two earlier studies carried out in australia in warm climate conditions have investigated the viral aetiology of acute respiratory symptoms in summer sport elite athletes. in one study the recovery rate was 29% and in the other it was 27%. 30 31 these low detection rates led to the commonly cited conclusion that in the majority of cases the symptoms could be due to non-infectious airway inflammation. our observations in winter sport athletes do not support that conclusion. the virus recovery rate of 75% in elite athletes is as high as in other aetiological studies in adults. 9 10 a higher viral recovery rate in adults may not be obtained because pcr tests may detect only 50%-90% of serologically diagnosed respiratory virus infections. 13 32 the occurrence of respiratory infections tended to be more common in elite athletes than in other team members. the difference may be explained by higher physical and psychological stress in elite athletes. it is of interest that the severity of illness among the athletes did not differ from that among the staff (table 1) . before and during the winter games, influenza and respiratory syncytial virus epidemics were occurring in finland and influenza and coronavirus epidemics were under way in south korea. the prevailing virus epidemics obviously contributed to the transmission of the infections.in three subjects, the symptoms of the common cold-one caused by influenza b virus and the others by respiratory syncytial virus a and b-developed during the 9-hour flight from helsinki to seoul. two patients seemed to transmit the illness to another team member during the flight. long-haul air travel is a wellknown risk factor for the transmission of contagious diseases. one person with influenza can transmit the infection to 5-10 people during an intercontinental flight. 33 two cases of coronavirus oc43 infection were most probably travelling during the incubation period of the infection (3.5 days) and developed the illness within 2-3 days after arrival in the olympic village. 27 34 in addition, the first cases of rhinovirus and metapneumovirus infections were detected during the first week, suggesting that these infections also originated in finland. 34 in addition to direct or indirect contact and droplets, respiratory viruses can spread via exhaled aerosols, even while talking. 35 36 viruses may stay infectious on a surface for hours or days. the most commonly detected coronavirus 229e, stays infectious on common surfaces for at least 7 days. 37 interestingly, it was recently shown that viruses can also spread through toilet flushing. 38 all subjects with influenza and close contact with individuals with influenza were treated with oseltamivir. ► in the laboratory the aetiology of the common cold was detected in 75% of the elite athletes. these athletes did not suffer from 'non-infectious airway inflammation in athletes'. ► nine different respiratory viruses were detected, causing seven clusters of respiratory infections within the team. coronaviruses were the most common viruses. most viruses probably originated in finland.► poct diagnostics for a comprehensive range of respiratory viruses should be made available at major sport events. poct will improve the proper treatment, for example, targeted treatment of influenza, decrease unnecessary antibiotic treatment and enhance timely isolation to decrease viral transmission. ► the incidence of influenza virus infection reinforces the need for influenza vaccination in sport teams. ► at major sport events, healthcare providers should share information concerning detected respiratory virus infections to all teams to prevent an epidemics of respiratory viruses.housing with other athletes and the sport discipline (table 1) . competition venues may be a favourable environment for virus transmission. rigorous hand washing, the use of hand sanitisers, enhanced disinfection and strict patient isolation were likely to prevent the spread of viruses within the team but were apparently not very effective ( figure 2 ). this is due to the multifactorial transmission mechanisms of viral infections. 39the number of subjects was small. nasal swabs were planned to be taken from symptomatic subjects as part of normal healthcare. the prevalence and clinical significance of asymptomatic infections (eg, most coronavirus and influenza infections are asymptomatic) and prolonged virus shedding (ie, infectiousness) remains unclear. the poct diagnostics detected only three respiratory viruses. 16 the 2018 influenza and respiratory syncytial virus epidemics were prominent, which may have increased our detection rate and affected the generalisability of the findings. our study did not answer the question concerning the impact of a symptomatic or asymptomatic respiratory virus infection on an elite athlete's performance.molecular poct diagnostics proved clinically valuable. the aetiology of the common cold was identified in the majority of cases. the viruses were readily transmitted within the team. we believe comprehensive viral poct is useful at major sporting events.t he 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) spread rapidly across china and even other countries, leading to a global panic. recent studies showed that typical computed tomography (ct) findings included bilateral pulmonary parenchymal ground glass and consolidative pulmonary opacities, with a peripheral lung distribution. [1] [2] [3] however, the clinical and radiological characteristics of pediatric patients have not been well known. herein, we demonstrate change in the course of disease over time on highresolution chest ct scan of 5 pediatric patients. this study was approved by the institutional review board (certification number chictr2000029952). written informed consent was obtained for each patient.a 5-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital with fever and dry cough for 3 days and diarrhea for 2 days. on admission, his body temperature was elevated (38.0°c). his blood routine test was normal. real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) of the patient's throat swab was positive for covid-19 nucleic acid. unenhanced chest high-resolution ct (hrct) showed subpleural ground glass opacities (ggo) with consolidation in the left lower lobe (fig. 1a) . after 5 days of treatment with ribavirin and interferon, the patient's temperature decreased to normal and repeat chest ct showed healing of the lesion (fig. 1b) . after 13 days after admission, repeat throat swab rt-pcr turned negative, and chest ct showed complete resolution (fig. 1c ).a 2-year-old asymptomatic boy was admitted to the fever clinic of our hospital because his grandpa was confirmed with covid-19 infection. at admission, he was positive for covid-19 rt-pcr. the initial hrct and blood routine test were both normal. however, 6 days after admission, repeat hrct showed subpleural ggo in bilateral upper lobes (fig. 2 ). repeat covid-19 nucleic acid was still positive. after 3 days of treatment with ribavirin and interferon, covid-19 rt-pcr was finally negative, and the follow-up ct scan showed complete resolution.a 7-month-old girl was admitted to the hospital with dry cough for 2 days and fever for 1 day. her mother was diagnosed with covid-19 6 days ago. her body temperature was slightly elevated (37.8°c). the initial rt-pcr was negative, but hrct showed ggo in the upper lobe of the right lung. repeat rt-pcr was positive on the third day of hospitalization. she was treated with interferon afterward. the ggo was healed 5 days after admission, but rt-pcr was still positive. thirteen days after admission, throat swab rt-pcr turned negative.a 9-year-old male asymptomatic boy was admitted to the hospital because his father was confirmed with covid-19 infection. his covid-19 rt-pcr was positive and hrct showed ggo in the right lower lobe (fig. 3 ). after 7 days of treatment with ribavirin and interferon, both covid-19 rt-pcr and hrct turned negative.a 13-year-old male asymptomatic boy was admitted to the hospital because his grandma was confirmed with covid-19 infection. he was positive for initial covid-19 rt-pcr but negative for hrct. three days later, his covid-19 rt-pcr turned negative.the clinical and hrct features of all the 5 previously mentioned cases are summarized in table 1 .the 2019 novel coronavirus mainly affects mid-age and elderly people, 4 so little is known about the clinical and hrct characteristics of pediatric patients. to the best of our knowledge, the present study is the first report of the hrct and clinical features of pediatric patients with covid-19 in the english literature. two patients (case 1 and 3) in our study were symptomatic, both of them had fever and dry cough, and one of them had diarrhea in addition. thus, fever and dry cough are 2 core symptoms of pediatric patients, which is in line with the adults. 4 however, up to 60% of the patients (case 2, 4, and 5) in the present study were asymptomatic, so the asymptomatic children with wuhan contact (lived or traveled to wuhan or had close contact with any confirmed patients) are recommended to do a covid-19 rt-pcr screening. besides, we noted that up to 66.7% asymptomatic patients (case 2 and 4) had pulmonary ggo, so asymptomatic pediatric patients may be positive for hrct, and thus, hrct is recommended in the screening of suspected pediatric patients.we note that there are many differences between the radiological findings of adult and pediatric patients with covid-19. it is reported that up to 44% adult patients had all 5 lobes affected, 1 whereas only 1 patient (case 2) in the present study affected bilaterally, and 3 patients just affected 1 lobe. the hrct manifestations of adult patients with covid-19 were reported to be very diverse 1-3 : most appeared as pure ggo, ggo with consolidation, interlobular septal thickening, bronchiolar wall thickening, and crazy paving pattern, whereas rare manifestations included halo sign, pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, and lymphadenopathy. in our series of pediatric patients, only ggo and consolidative ggo were found. pan et al 5 studied the time course of lung changes of adult covid-19 patients and concluded that lung lesions would gradually be absorbed in 2 weeks. on the contrary, most lesions in our study were fully resolved in a week. furthermore, song et al 3 divided the adult patients with covid-19 to younger (<50 years) and elder group (>50 years) and found that elder group tended to have more areas of lung involvement and more consolidation. taking their evidence together, we speculate that the pediatric patients generally have milder ct findings than adults.in conclusion, we demonstrated 5 cases of pediatric patients with covid-19, and we had the following three findings: (1) fever and dry cough are 2 core symptoms of pediatric patients; besides, asymptomatic children with wuhan contact are recommended to do a covid-19 rt-pcr screening; (2) hrct is of great significance in the screening of suspected pediatric patients; and (3) the pediatric patients generally have milder ct findings than adults. the large sample studies are needed in the future.the pandemic of coronavirus infected disease caused by the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov2) [1, 2] has significantly impacted people's daily life and led to a global public health crisis [3] . as of april 14, 2020 two important factors may contribute a second wave of epidemic. first, unlike the 2003 sars epidemic in which mainly symptomatic cases are infectious [4] , asymptomatic infection of the sars-cov2 can transmit disease [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] . studies have detected virus shedding in nasopharyngeal swap samples among asymptomatic cases [10] . a few case reports have shown some cluster of cases initiated by asymptomatic cases [5, 7, 9] . researchers have postulated that asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic cases may play a significant role in sustaining the community transmission [6] .second, government leaders have been pressed to allow people to return to normal work and life to avoid economic recession. after social activities are restored, both international and domestic travel ban will be lifted. imported symptomatic and asymptomatic cases may kindle a second wave of epidemic in the community [6] . for example, despite singapore has implemented possibly the most rigorous contact tracing, personal protection and social distancing measures, an unexpected surge of new cases has been observed, with daily newly confirmed cases doubled from 142 in april 7 to 287 in april 8, and still 334 in april 14 (https://www.gov.sg/article/covid-19-cases-in-singapore). as of this writing, the source of this sudden increase is still under investigation.from the health services perspective, the number of severe cases who require medical care is the most important indicator of the burden of epidemic. heath care providers, hospital beds, and intensive care units (icu) are limited resources. one main purpose of mitigating the epidemic is to alleviate the impact of epidemic on healthcare resources. several reports have shown that about 20% of symptomatic covid-19 cases require hospitalizations, and of them, about 30-50% may require icu [11] [12] [13] (also https://gis.cdc.gov/grasp/covidnet/covid19_3.html). more importantly, old people or people with existing chronic conditions have worse outcome than young people. for example, the mortality rate for age 50 or younger is below 1%, while the mortality rate increases to more than 10% among people aged 80 or above in the us [14] .epidemic model simulation has been used extensively to estimate essential epidemic parameters, evaluate the epidemic progression and provide critical guidance to policy makers. simulation studies based on early epidemic data from wuhan, china and incorporating human travel and migration information have provided more accurate picture of epidemic [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . in addition, based on simulating individual behaviors under realistic societal settings, several key simulation analyses have informed the policy makers about the effectiveness of various intervention strategies to halt the epidemic [20] [21] [22] [23] . another simulation study updates daily about the impact all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 26.20081109 doi: medrxiv preprint of covid-19 epidemic on the use of health care resource and predicts the trend and peaks of health care use in the us [24] (https://covid19.healthdata.org/united-states-of-america).in this study, we will build a modified susceptible-exposed-infectious-removed (seir) model [25] to simulate the covid-19 epidemic and investigate the impact of population structure, asymptomatic cases, case importation, and the number of contacts on the epidemic progression.we will explicitly evaluate the changes of hospitalizations and mortality under various scenarios for young and old people. our analysis will provide theoretical evidence of possible strategies to prepare for a second wave of epidemic.the modified seir model is shown in figure 1 (also see the modeling framework section in supplemental documents for details). briefly, we divide the population into the susceptible population (s), self-quarantined susceptible people (q), exposed but not infectious people (e), infectious compartment which includes those cases from quarantined susceptible (i q ), symptomatic cases (i d ), asymptomatic cases (i u ) (also those with mild symptoms), and the removed compartment which includes those hospitalized (h), recovered (r), and dead (d). the self-quarantined persons are not based on individual contact tracing but rather refer to those who are alert to any possible infection in the community and may avoid contacting with any exposed persons. they are a special susceptible population who will not infect others if they are infected.asymptomatic cases are often undiagnosed or unreported. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 26.20081109 doi: medrxiv preprint we also assume a dynamic population in which the numbers of imported susceptible persons and exposed persons (often have no symptom) are proportional (f 1 and f 2 ) to the size of total population (i.e., larger regions attract more visitors). we further assume the death rate due to other causes is a constant for all populations. for those who are symptomatic, diagnosed with the infection and hospitalized, their deaths are attributed to the infection or complications of the infection. in addition, at the beginning of the simulation, some proportion of the population have past infection (or immunized) (p). therefore, the total population at the time t is n(t) = s(t) + q(t) +e(t) + i d (t) + i u (t) + i q (t) + h(t) + r(t) + p 0 .to account for population heterogeneity, we also apply the basic framework ( figure 1 ) to both young (age < 65) and old (age >=65) populations. the two flowcharts are connected through cross-infection due to mutual contacts. the combined flowcharts can be translated into a set of ordinary differential equations (see supplemental document). the key equations relevant to the drive of epidemic and cross-infection between two age groups are for the change of exposed the model involves many parameters. their definitions, default values, and ranges are listed in the supplemental document (supp. [18, 26, 27] . we adopt the r 0 =2.6 as a conservative estimate [28, 29] . the number of average contacts in the population ranges 2-30 [21, 30] . we assume a moderate 10 contacts for young, 7 contacts for old, and 3 contacts between young and old people in this study. some seniors may have more contacts than the default value due to group living or regular community gathering. they are not considered in this population level modeling. the serial interval is the average duration between the infectious point (often symptom onset) of the index case and the symptom onset (or diagnosis) of secondary cases. reported serial intervals vary significantly across different studies, with an average of 5 days [15, 17, 21, [31] [32] [33] . we adopt a conservative estimate of 6 days for young and 4 days for old people, ranging 3-10 days. finally, we assume an overall hospitalization rate of 10%, as commonly reported in the united states (https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/). hospital stay is 7-21 days, as most all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. . hospitalized people are elderly patients. the in-hospital mortality rate is 5% for young and 20% for old symptomatic patients, and an overall mortality of 1% and 10% for young and old patients, respectively [11, 13, [34] [35] [36] . the recovery duration for those who are not hospitalized is 5-20 days, typical for non-severe pneumonia.the default model is set on a region with 1 million residents, consisting of 20% elderly people and 20% of total population with past infection (or immunized). there is no existing symptomatic or asymptomatic case, and no person in self-quarantine in the region. we assume only one imported young exposed case every two days for 20 days (i.e., 10 imported cases).analyses were performed based on the ranges of parameter estimates. we varied one parameter at a time, holding other factors at their default values. key epidemic measures were presented in tables. multi-parameter analyses with two or more factors varying together were also performed, important findings were discussed in the text. additional outputs were included in the supplemental materials.the r package epimodel was used for simulating the deterministic epidemic models [37] . the r codes for simulating the modified seir epidemic models are available (github address after review).this study is deemed exempt from ethics approval as the research involves no human subjects and we use publicly available data.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. .under the default model setting, all epidemic measures reflect the model parameters satisfactorily (table 2 , also refer to supplemental table 1 ). starting with ten imported infectious persons and assuming 40% asymptomatic cases at the peak of epidemic, the epidemic reaches peak quickly within 73 days and lasts 172 days. it is ten days quicker among old people than among young people ( table 2 ). the epidemic curves for incident cases (symptomatic and asymptomatic), hospitalizations and deaths by age groups are typical (supplemental figure 2 ).the modeling results in an overall hospitalization rate of 14.1%. the in-hospital mortality rate is 5.0% for young and 20.3% for old people, with an overall mortality rate of 1.9%, similar to those empirical measures in the covid-19 epidemic in the us. therefore, the default model represents the current covid-19 epidemic sufficiently well.as summarized in table 3 , the size of region and small percent change of self-quarantined susceptible do not change the epidemic progression except for the total number of cases. a smaller percent of elderly slows down the epidemic, while a much higher percent of elderly does not change the epidemic curve significantly. as expected, when over 60% people have prior infection, the epidemic takes very long to reach the peak and results in substantial fewer cases.the effects are similar in both young and old people (supplemental table 2a & 2b) .both the percent and infectivity of asymptomatic cases were investigated (table 3 ). an increase of the percent of asymptomatic cases from 10% to 30% postpones the epidemic peak by 12 days all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. .due to less infectivity of asymptomatic cases, and results in significantly fewer hospitalizations and deaths. on the other hand, a higher infectivity of asymptomatic cases (e.g., 100% of symptomatic cases) results in a fast developing and narrow epidemic curve which reaches the peak within 60 days. there are more hospitalizations and deaths at the epidemic peak compared with the default model, both assumed 40% asymptomatic cases. in addition, a change of the percent of asymptomatic cases among old people leads to larger changes in hospitalizations and deaths than that of young people (supplemental table 2a & 2b) . for example, comparing 60% with 40% asymptomatic cases, the total hospitalizations are reduced only by half among old people, while it is a two third decrease among young people. furthermore, when the effects of the percent and infectivity of asymptomatic cases are combined, for example, in a low risk epidemic with 60% asymptomatic cases but with a lower (30%) infectivity, the epidemic reaches its peak slower for both young and old people with peak hospitalizations almost half of the default model (40% asymptomatic cases and 50% infectivity) (supplemental figure 3) .this epidemic model is initiated by imported infectious persons (may asymptomatic or presymptomatic cases). a daily arrival of two infectious people speeds up the epidemic by 8 days compared with one case every two days in the default model ( table 3 ). the magnitudes of epidemic are similar between different importation scenarios. in addition, a longer importing duration shifts the epidemic only slightly. finally, if we assume all the imported cases are asymptomatic cases, the epidemic curves are not significantly different from that of default model (supplemental figure 4) .all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. .the number of contacts affect the epidemic curves in a complicate way (figure 2 for young and old people, respectively, all significantly lower than those of default model ( table   2 ). the times to the epidemic peak are also postponed in both curves. when both young and old people reduce contacts to 3 per day, such as under the stay-at-home rule, the epidemic curves on hospitalizations are significantly mitigated in both groups (figure 2d ).finally, we consider two extreme scenarios: 1) high risk scenario: assuming one imported case per day continuously throughout the epidemic, 30% asymptomatic cases at the epidemic peak, and the same infectivity between symptomatic and asymptomatic cases; 2) low risk scenario: assuming one imported case every two days for twenty days, 60% asymptomatic cases, and asymptomatic cases have only 30% infectivity of symptomatic cases. in both scenarios, limiting contacts among old people alone still has significant impact on hospitalizations in both age all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 26.20081109 doi: medrxiv preprint groups, and a larger relative difference in the low risk scenario than high risk scenario ( figure 3 and supplemental figure 7 ).we created a modified seir model and parameterized it with estimates from the current covid-19 epidemic. our scenario analyses suggest that unless the population have reached herd immunity (e.g., over 60% people are immune to the disease, assuming a reproduction number of 2.6 [28, 29] ), a small number of imported cases within a short duration may rekindle the epidemic among the large susceptible pool. despite young imported cases and only 3 contacts between young and old people, infection can quickly transmit into old people. interestingly, our model demonstrates that reducing the number of contacts among old people alone can not only slowdown the epidemic but also reduce the magnitude of the epidemic among both young and old people. this spillover effect implies that interventions targeting high risk groups such as elderly population can have a larger impact on the whole society, without significantly disturbing the working life among young people.our findings are consistent with that of prior simulation studies and real life experience in several asian countries [1, 15, 16, 20, 22, 24] . many countries have implemented more proactive interventions such as school closing and stay at home rules, which have mitigated the epidemic in many regions.one of the most effective strategies to curb an epidemic is to reduce personal interactions through social distancing and prohibiting large gatherings [21, 30, 38] . our simulations have shown that reducing the number of contacts among young people alone does not affect the all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 26.20081109 doi: medrxiv preprint burden of epidemic significantly. on the other hand, reducing the number of contacts among old people alone not only mitigates the impact of epidemic among themselves, but also changes the course of epidemic among young people, despite they still remain very active. old people often have weaker immune system and multiple underlying chronic conditions. if infected with the virus, they are more likely to be symptomatic and more infectious because their bodies are not able to eliminate virus effectively. therefore, during an epidemic such as covid-19, old people are more likely to be hospitalized and die from the complications of infection. thus, protecting old people not only decreases their risk of being infected but also reduces the burden of epidemic in the whole society.with growing availability of detection kits during the covid-19 epidemic, more asymptomatic or mild symptomatic cases are identified. ultimately, an optimal view is asymptomatic cases may account for 60% of infections. however, recent research and case reports have confirmed that asymptomatic or pre-symptomatic cases can shed enough quantify of virus to be infectious [5] [6] [7] [8] 10] . furthermore, if the infectivity of asymptomatic cases is similar to that of symptomatic cases, a faster epidemic will occur. despite more asymptomatic cases at the peak of epidemic, there are also significantly more hospitalizations and deaths, while may overwhelm the health care system. with a lower infectivity (30% infectivity), the epidemic reaches its peak later and results in half of hospitalizations at the peak compared with the default model (supplemental figure 3 ). in addition, a closely related issue is case importation [23] . imported cases are often pre-symptomatic, asymptomatic or with mild symptoms. they seed of a second outbreak, even with just a few cases. therefore, proactively identifying asymptomatic cases and isolating them thereafter will prevent the occurrence of an epidemic [20] . all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. .our study has some strengths. we devised a modified seir model to incorporate both symptomatic and asymptomatic cases. we emphasized population heterogeneity such as age structure in the model. we included a self-quarantined group who will not infect other people if they are infected with the virus. naturally, these settings can be extended to represent other high risk or special groups with revised parameters. in addition, we separated hospitalization from other removed compartments to explicitly estimate the impact of an epidemic on hospitalizations.furthermore, we explored a few key determinants of epidemic explicitly, leading to many insights on epidemic prevention strategies.there are a few limitations in our study. as inherent in all modeling studies, simulation interpretations are heavily dependent on model assumptions and parameter estimations. our epidemic model is a population model. although we take account of population heterogeneity such as age in the current model, our age group is overly broad. a more detained age grouping scheme, including children, young adults, middle age group, and elderly, may reflect the agespecific epidemic more realistically. in addition, we assume random mixing within and between the groups. as a population model, we cannot assess the impact of individual behaviors such as the way of reducing contacts, social distancing and travelling. furthermore, it ignores clustering within the population such as senior group living, community gatherings (e.g., churches, community centers), worksites and schools. these clusters are hotbeds for superspreading events which may lead to a sudden increase of new cases and overwhelm the healthcare system unexpectedly. furthermore, the quarantine compartment in the model is not contact tracing based.modeling contact tracing based quarantine is more relevant to public health interventions [39] .therefore, the goal of our future research is to exploring the effect of these factors with stochastic simulations of individual behavior [22, 40] and network analysis [41] . additionally, our all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04. 26.20081109 doi: medrxiv preprint model is set on a mid-size region with 1 million residents. we did not intend to model pandemic, as all prevention strategies are ultimately local. finally, out study only examines a small subset of scenarios during the epidemic. multi-interventions are more effective in mitigating an epidemic but less sustainable in the long run. after the initial epidemic ends, society will return to normal, and only one or two interventions such as social distancing may be practiced, often partially. thus, one parameter analysis under various scenarios is important for evaluating the probability of a second epidemic.in summary, with a modified seir model, we have demonstrated that simple intervention strategies such as reducing the number of contacts through social distancing, even among high risk population alone, can not only reduce the risk of infection and alleviate disease burden among themselves, but also mitigate the impact of a second epidemic in the whole society. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted may 1, 2020. respiratory viruses in infants hospitalized in the neonatal intensive care unit (nicu) are associated with a variety of clinical presentations ranging from localized upper respiratory tract infection to disseminated disease to death [1, 2] . while asymptomatic carriage of respiratory viruses is well characterized in older children and adults [3, 4] , this entity is not as well described in infants in the nicu. furthermore, few recent studies have assessed the epidemiology of healthcare-associated respiratory viruses in the nicu population during the era of commercially available multiplex reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) assays nor assessed the potential strategies to reduce acquisition and transmission.the objectives of this study were to describe the epidemiology of respiratory viruses in the nicu, as assessed by rt-pcr assays; the clinical impact of respiratory viruses, including the proportion of asymptomatic vs. symptomatic infants; and the infection prevention and control (ip&c) strategies implemented to reduce transmission of respiratory viruses. additionally, we explored whether clinically asymptomatic infants had an increased frequency of subclinical oxygen desaturation events before and after a positive rt-pcr for a respiratory virus by using the "advanced physiological monitoring" system, bed-masterex (excel medical, jupiter, fl), which records and stores all oxygen saturation data from infants' pulse oximeters [5] .this was a retrospective observational cohort study of infants hospitalized in our nicu from may 2012 to may 2017. the nicu is a regional perinatal center, level iv facility that cares for both premature infants and full-term infants with complex congenital cardiac and non-cardiac anomalies. the unit is located on two floors and consists of 58 beds, including shared pods with 2-3 beds each, a ninebed 'step down' open unit, and four single rooms. there were 5240 admissions during the 5-year study period. included infants were those with healthcare-associated respiratory viruses detected after the incubation period for the relevant virus as compared to their date of nicu admission. to avoid misclassification of hospital-associated infections attributed to our nicu, we excluded infants who were transferred to our nicu and had respiratory viruses detected within the incubation period of the relevant virus as compared to their date of nicu transfer. this study was approved by the institutional review board of columbia university irving medical center (cuimc) with a waiver of informed consent.nasal turbinate samples were collected, regardless of the mode of respiratory support. diagnostic testing was performed using a multiplex rt-pcr assay (filmarray, biofire, inc.) that was introduced in our facility in may 2012 without restrictions placed on its use. the assay has been validated on samples from infants in the nicu [6] , and the respiratory viral panel (rvp) detects 17 viruses: adenovirus; four coronavirus types (229e, hku1, nl63, and oc43); human metapneumovirus; rhinovirus/enterovirus (rv/ev); influenza a, ah1, ah3, and b; parainfluenza types 1-4, and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), as well as pertussis, mycoplasma, and chlamydophila [7] . only qualitative results are provided; viral load results are unavailable.infants were classified as symptomatic or asymptomatic based on the review of the infants' electronic medical records. symptomatic infants were those with signs of a respiratory infection, e.g., rhinorrhea, fever, cough, and/or those who had escalation of respiratory and/ or nutritional support, as defined below. asymptomatic infants did not have clinical signs of respiratory infection, nor escalation of respiratory or nutritional support.escalation of respiratory or nutritional support was assessed by comparing the maximum support during the 7 days prior vs. the maximum support during the 7 days after detection of a respiratory virus. escalation of respiratory support was defined as (1) an increase in supplemental oxygen by at least 10% for at least 12 h while maintaining the same mode of respiratory support; (2) an increased amount of non-invasive support, e.g., room air to nasal cannula (nc) or nc to continuous positive airways pressure (cpap) or newly initiated non-invasive positive pressure support; (3) transition from non-invasive to invasive support, e.g., cpap to synchronized intermittent mechanical ventilation (simv); and/or (4) increased invasive support, e.g., increase in mean airway pressure, simv to high-rate intermittent mechanical ventilation to high-frequency oscillatory ventilation, and/or to extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo). escalation of nutritional support was defined as transitioning from (1) full oral feeds to ≥50% enteral tube feeds or (2) ≥50% enteral feeds to only total parenteral nutrition (tpn).to further describe the study population, we collected secondary diagnoses that occurred throughout the infants' nicu stay, including bronchopulmonary dysplasia (bpd), necrotizing enterocolitis (nec), severe retinopathy of prematurity (rop), severe intraventricular hemorrhage (ivh), and hemodynamically significant patent ductus arteriosus (pda). bpd was defined as requiring supplemental oxygen ≥28 days, and bpd severity was categorized based on the amount of respiratory support required at 36 weeks corrected gestational age or discharge, whichever occurred first [8] . nec was defined as modified bell's staging criteria iia or higher [9, 10] . severe rop was defined as stage 3 or higher, based on pediatric ophthalmology exam [11] . severe ivh was defined as grade 3 or higher on any imaging done before day of life 28 [12] . hemodynamically significant pda was defined as lesions requiring medical and/or surgical management.transmission was identified if infants, who were both geographically and temporally linked, had the same virus detected. geographic links were considered as the same pod and/or infants in the neighboring rooms. temporal links were considered those that occurred within the incubation period of the relevant virus. transmission patterns were categorized as dyads (n = 2 infants), clusters (n = 3 infants), or outbreaks (n > 3 infants). transmission events were defined as the number of infants who became infected as a result of transmission, e.g., one transmission event in each dyad and two transmission events in each cluster.infants throughout the study period, rt-pcr testing was performed for symptomatic infants (e.g., fever, cough, and increased secretions). infants with a respiratory virus detected were placed on contact and droplet isolation. personnel from the department of ip&c interviewed the staff to determine if the affected infant had been exposed to ill family members or ill healthcare personnel (hcp). the duration of isolation was considered on a case-bycase basis, but generally, isolation continued for the duration of the relevant viral shedding period or the duration of illness, whichever was greater; two negative rt-pcr tests were required to discontinue isolation. potentially exposed infants (e.g., those sharing the pod with an affected infant) were monitored for signs and symptoms of respiratory infection and tested if symptoms developed.starting in january 2015, in response to an adenovirus outbreak, rt-pcr testing was performed for all potentially exposed asymptomatic infants. infants were considered exposed if they were geographically near a symptomatic virus-positive index case, e.g., the same pod. unexposed infants were not screened. testing was performed at the time of potential exposure and at the end of the relevant incubation period for the virus of the index case. potentially exposed infants were placed on contact and droplet isolation for the duration of the incubation period. isolation for exposed infants was discontinued if rt-pcr testing was negative, the infant remained asymptomatic, and no additional geographically related cases were identified. exposed asymptomatic infants with positive rt-pcr testing were managed as described above for symptomatic infants with positive rt-pcr testing.hcp were instructed not to work while sick. ill hcp were tested by workforce health & safety and obtained clearance to return to work [13] . since the 2013-2014 influenza season, hcp in new york state have been required to have an influenza vaccination or wear a surgical mask when in areas where patients are typically present [13] .from may 2012 to november 2015, written educational material explained that ill visitors were prohibited from entering the nicu. starting in december 2015, visitors younger than 12 years of age were prohibited from visiting the nicu year-round. large signage was posted at the nicu entry detailing visitor restrictions for age or signs and symptoms of illness, e.g., fever and cough. formal screening of visitors was not performed at any time during the study.data were collected from the electronic medical record and included demographic and clinical characteristics of infants, including the indications for rvp testing, respiratory and nutritional support provided in the 7 days before and after detection of a respiratory diagnosis, as well as primary and secondary diagnoses. all secondary diagnoses were collected throughout the nicu stay. additionally, we recorded whether the infants were fed with breast milk in the week before rvp testing and the percentage of maternal breast milk comprising the feeds, if applicable, to assess whether this might protect the infants from developing symptoms associated with respiratory viruses. delayed surgery and delayed discharge associated with detection of a respiratory virus and 30-day crude mortality were also collected.data for transmission events were derived from records maintained by the department of ip&c that also maintained a list of exposed and tested infants, as well as the indications for rvp testing.data from the bedmasterex system were retrieved from the central network and used to corroborate infants as symptomatic vs. asymptomatic. bedmasterex system continuously records the high-resolution waveform data sampled at 240 hz from the bedside ge monitors [5] . for this study, we extracted oxygen saturation (spo 2 ) data as measured by pulse oximeter collected every minute. a custom matlab algorithm was used for removing the artifact, based on how a clinician would interpret the data at the bedside [14] . waveforms that were inconsistent and irregular, based on comparison of hourly trends of minute heart rate and spo 2 , were considered unlikely to translate into accurate and meaningful values for spo 2 , and were removed. the remaining spo 2 data retained for analysis (~95% of raw data) were summarized as the percentage of time every 24 h that an infant's spo 2 was <85%.demographic and clinical characteristics of symptomatic and asymptomatic infants were summarized with frequencies, means, and medians, and were compared using chi-square or fisher's exact test, as appropriate, for categorical variables and two sample t tests and mann-whitney u tests for continuous variables. the association of detection of respiratory viruses with changes in respiratory and nutritional support was categorized as unchanged, increased, or decreased support. breastmilk exposure in the week before a positive rvp was dichotomized as ≥50% enteral feeds being maternal breast milk vs. <50% and no maternal breastmilk exposure (i.e., only formula fed or no enteral feeds) vs. any breastmilk exposure.bedmasterex data for 7 days before and after positive rvp were available for 40 infants (30 symptomatic and ten asymptomatic infants). the percentage of time these infants had spo 2 < 85% (considered a hypoxemic state) for each of the 7 days before and after viral detection were calculated and compared using a mixed model for repeated-measures analysis of variance to account for the missing observations, as well as two sample and paired t tests, as appropriate. infants with physiologic right to left cardiac shunts were excluded from this analysis due to different expectations for their normal spo 2 range.the incidence of respiratory virus transmission event rates per 1000 patient-days was also calculated and compared for the time periods before and after the selected interventions were implemented using poisson regression. all statistical analyses were performed in sas 9.4 (cary, nc).from may 2012 to may 2017, 1494 rvps were sent from the nicu from 727 infants. in all, 83 infants experienced 86 episodes of healthcare-associated respiratory viruses; this represented 1.6% of the overall nicu admissions. one infant had two viruses detected from the same sample and three infants each had two unique episodes with different viruses detected. thirteen infants had 15 (17%) asymptomatic episodes and 70 infants had 71 (83%) symptomatic episodes of viral detection. one infant had both other diagnoses included: meconium aspiration syndrome, neonatal abstinence syndrome, neonatal diabetes, and hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy asymptomatic and symptomatic episodes. thirteen additional infants transferred from other hospitals had a respiratory virus detected within the incubation period of the relevant virus (eight rv/ev, two coronavirus, one rsv, one influenza, and one parainfluenza) and were excluded from further analysis. the demographic and clinical characteristics of symptomatic and asymptomatic infants with healthcareassociated respiratory viruses were similar (table 1) . there was no difference in the proportion of asymptomatic vs. symptomatic infants who received any maternal breastmilk feeds in the week before a positive rvp (31% of asymptomatic infants and 34% of symptomatic, p = 1.00). additionally, the proportion of asymptomatic vs. symptomatic infants whose feeds comprised of ≥50% maternal breast milk in the week before a positive rvp was similar (29% vs. 24%, p = 0.74).infants with healthcare-associated respiratory viruses had a median chronological age of 82 [iqr 58-158] days at viral detection ( table 2 ). the distribution of the types of viruses detected was similar in symptomatic and asymptomatic infants ( table 2 ). the most common viruses were rv/ev (n = 60, 71%), followed by adenovirus (n = 7, 8%), parainfluenza (n = 6, 7%), and coronavirus (n = 6, 7%). the relative proportion of rv/ev detection remained similar over time (quarterly mean 65%, range 50-84%, p = 0.14). ten (67%) of 15 asymptomatic episodes were associated with rv/ev, two with adenovirus (14%), and one each with coronavirus hk, rsv, and influenza.the most common indications for viral diagnostic testing among symptomatic infants were suspected upper respiratory tract infections (67%), increased respiratory support (29%), and/or cough (26%). most symptomatic episodes were not managed with increased respiratory support (62%) and/or nutritional support (79%). however, 17 (24%) symptomatic episodes were associated with only escalations of respiratory support, five (7%) with only escalations of nutritional support, and ten (14%) with both. the escalations in respiratory support included: (1) three episodes associated with ≥10% increase in fio 2 support while maintaining the same mode of respiratory support; (2) 11 with increased non-invasive support, most common escalation from room air to cpap; (3) seven with progression from non-invasive to invasive support, all of which included mechanical ventilation and one with progression to ecmo; and (4) six with increased invasive support. the escalation in nutritional support included: (1) three episodes associated with changing from full oral feeds to ≥50% enteral tube feeds and (2) 12 changing from ≥50% enteral feeds to full tpn support. the percentage of time the asymptomatic and symptomatic infants had spo 2 < 85% during the 7 days before and after their positive rvp is shown in fig. 1 . during the 7 days before and after the detection of a respiratory virus, the asymptomatic infants spent significantly less time with spo 2 < 85%, compared with the symptomatic infants (mean daily range 1.3-2.7% vs. 4.0-7.6%, respectively, p = 0.03, fig. 1 ). the daily percentage of time the asymptomatic infants spent with spo 2 < 85% did not significantly change throughout the 7 days before and after the viral detection (p = 0.91). the daily percentage of time the symptomatic infants spent with spo 2 < 85% did not significantly change throughout the 7 days before and after the viral detection (p = 0.23) four (5%) symptomatic infants had delayed surgery, three (4%) had delayed discharge, and one (1%) was readmitted one day after nicu discharge with respiratory symptoms due to parainfluenza previously detected in his hospitalized twin. six infants (7%) died within 30 days of detection of a respiratory virus; at the time of death, mortality was considered attributable to a respiratory viral infection in two infants (2%) (one with parainfluenza and one with human metapneumovirus), as ascertained by the nicu team and/or supported by the autopsy findings.ten episodes of viral detection were associated with ill family members, and no ill hcp were identified. six dyad transmission events, four clusters, and two outbreaks were identified (fig. 2a) ; nine (75%) of these 12 transmission events involved rv/ev. adenovirus (n = 5 infants) and rv/ev (n = 7 infants) each caused an outbreak. following the introduction of the ip&c strategy in january 2015 to screen the exposed infants, 82 infants were potentially exposed to 21 case infants, and seven (9%) of the 82 exposed infants were positive for a respiratory virus. in all, from january 2015 to may 2017, seven (15%) of 48 episodes of viral detection were identified by screening the exposed infants. since december 2015, only one transmission event (a dyad of rv/ev in september 2016) occurred; the remaining cases were sporadic. transmission event incidence per 1000 patient-days is shown in fig. 2b and decreased significantly from 0.27 per 1000 patient-days before children <12 years of age were prohibited from visiting the nicu to 0.03 per 1000 patient-days during the 16 months after children <12 years of age were prohibited from visiting the nicu (p = 0.003). no transmission events were identified from the 13 transferred infants admitted to the nicu with respiratory viruses.in this 5-year study, we describe the epidemiology and clinical impact of healthcare-associated respiratory viruses in the nicu population; both sporadic infections and outbreaks occurred. respiratory viruses were detected in approximately 1.6% of the overall admissions, but it is somewhat fig. 1 mean daily percent time with spo 2 < 85% for symptomatic vs. asymptomatic infants in the 7 days before and after the detection of a respiratory virus. mean percent time (±standard error) of spo 2 < 85% in the 7 days before and after the respiratory viral panel testing for selected symptomatic (n = 30) and asymptomatic infants (n = 10) as recorded in the bedmasterex database. significant differences are indicated by * for p < 0.05 and ** for p < 0.005. spo 2 oxygen saturation difficult to find comparable data in previous publications, in which multiplex rt-pcr assays were used during routine clinical care. others have described clinical surveillance or weekly surveillance for respiratory viruses and demonstrated detection rates ranging from <1 to 52% [15] [16] [17] [18] . different methodologies, patient populations, surveillance strategies, and potentially unidentified outbreaks likely contributed to the wide range of rates reported.we noted great variability in the symptoms associated with the detection of respiratory viruses, including infants who remained asymptomatic. we also found that most clinically symptomatic infants did not have increased respiratory and/ or nutritional support. however, some infants did experience substantial morbidity; seven infants progressed from non-invasive to invasive respiratory support, one of whom progressed to ecmo. others have reported that increases in respiratory support associated with respiratory viruses were associated with an increased length of hospitalization [19] [20] [21] .we could not find previous reports of the impact of respiratory viruses on nutritional support, but in the current study, 12 (14%) of 83 infants required escalation to full defined as the number of infants who became infected as a result of transmission, e.g., one transmission event in each dyad and two transmission events in each cluster. hmpv human metapneumovirus, rv/ev rhinovirus/ enterovirus, rsv respiratory syncytial virus tpn, which likely increased their length of hospitalization. ten infants had increases in both nutritional and respiratory support. while respiratory viruses do not generally physiologically impact the gastrointestinal tract, concurrent increases in nutritional and respiratory support may have been attributable to feeding intolerance or to providers' concerns for the risk of aspiration and/or hemodynamic instability that could compromise intestinal perfusion. regardless of the reasons infants received increased nutritional support, these findings provide further evidence of the impact of respiratory viruses in the nicu population.in the current study, six infants died within 30 days of viral detection, including two infants with attributable mortality. analysis of a worldwide database found that the mortality rate in nicus associated with rsv, adenovirus, influenza, and parainfluenza viruses outbreaks was 13.5%, 35.4%, 6.9%, and 9.0%, respectively, with an overall virusassociated mortality of 6.1%, although this report included gastrointestinal viruses as well [22, 23] . however, attributable mortality was not ascertained. these findings further support the need to gather additional data on the clinical impact, including mortality, associated with non-congenital healthcare-associated respiratory viruses.we also found that 17% of episodes of healthcareassociated respiratory viruses (including two with adenovirus) remained asymptomatic, suggesting that some infants were asymptomatic carriers. others have also examined asymptomatic infants identified during active surveillance or outbreaks. caserta et al. [2] performed weekly surveillance for respiratory viruses in 93 hospitalized preterm infants; four had a virus detected including 2 (2%) who were asymptomatic (rhinovirus and influenza b). bennet et al. [21] performed weekly surveillance in 50 preterm infants and detected a respiratory virus in 26 infants (52%); eight (9%) infants did not have clinical deterioration. during one year of active surveillance, smit et al. [18] found that 22 (7.5%) of 295 infants without respiratory symptoms had a respiratory virus detected. during an influenza a outbreak, cunney et al. [24] found that 13 (68%) of 19 infants remained asymptomatic. detection of asymptomatic infants has infection control implications; as such infants may transmit a respiratory virus to other infants and/or to hcp.we were unable to identify a demographic or clinical characteristic associated with asymptomatic infants. however, it is feasible that asymptomatic infants had a lower viral load than symptomatic infants, as has been suggested by others. jansen et al. [3] found that hospitalized infants less than 1 year of age admitted for an acute respiratory infection had a higher viral load than asymptomatic agematched controls seen in an outpatient clinic (median viral load 63,045 vs. 2856 copies/ml, respectively, p = 0.02). similarly, smit et al. [18] found that infants with a cycle threshold value (ct) < 35 were more likely to have respiratory symptoms than those with a ct value > 35. however, we could not explore this factor as viral load measurements are not reported by the biofire rvp assay.in a subset of infants, the bedmasterex's data supported our categorization of asymptomatic and symptomatic infants. during both the 7 days before and after the viral detection, when compared with symptomatic infants, asymptomatic infants spent significantly less time with spo 2 < 85%. however, during the 7 days pre-viral and postviral detection, the daily time spent with spo 2 < 85% remained similar within the asymptomatic group. similarly, the daily time spent with spo 2 < 85% remained similar over time within the symptomatic group. there are several possible explanations for these findings. symptomatic infants may have had worse baseline lung disease prior to viral detection and thus were at increased risk of becoming symptomatic with the viral infection. symptomatic infants may have been hypoxemic due to a respiratory viral infection several days prior to being tested. asymptomatic infants may have had undiagnosed respiratory viral infections previously, and positive tests may have reflected nonviable viruses or viral shedding. nonetheless, the clinical utility of bedmasterex data should be further examined in a larger sample of infants to determine if subclinical viral illness can be predicted, thereby prompting earlier testing and potentially reducing transmission.our findings suggest that preventing the acquisition and transmission of respiratory viruses in the nicu should be an ip&c priority. as support for the importance of this priority, during this same time period, 46 central line-associated bloodstream infections occurred in our nicu compared with the 86 episodes of respiratory viral detection described in this study. however, optimal ip&c strategies for respiratory viruses in the nicu population are unknown and highly variable as demonstrated in a nationwide study conducted in the united kingdom [25] . our data suggest that a combination of ip&c strategies including excluding family members with illnesses, excluding visitors less than 12 years of age year-round, and screening asymptomatic infants in close proximity to an infant with a respiratory virus decreases the transmission event rates, although our sample may have been too small to assess the sustained effect of the interventions over time. excluding sibling visitors and screeningexposed infants are practices that have been implemented in some nicus in the u.k [25] and others have shown that restricting sibling visitors reduced rsv [26] . while these interventions were associated with reducing transmission events in our nicu, they did not eliminate respiratory viruses. there are likely multiple 'portals of entry' for respiratory viruses, including unrecognized ill visitors and hcp, adults who are infectious prior to the onset of symptoms, and/or asymptomatic adult or infant carriers shedding viruses [4, 27] .this was a single center observational study which limits its generalizability. it was conducted in a nicu consisting of an open pod design with only four single rooms. furthermore, our nicu admits full-term infants with congenital anomalies as well as older infants for rop and bpd management; these admission patterns help to elucidate the relatively older chronologic age of our study population. the overall sample size was small and we could not demonstrate factors associated with being symptomatic vs. asymptomatic, including the distribution of different viruses. the frequency of asymptomatic infants was likely underestimated because the practice for testing exposed infants was not conducted throughout the 5-year study period and we did not test unexposed, asymptomatic infants. it is also possible that unknown confounders or unexamined variables, such as viral load or patterns of care by specific hcp may be responsible for the observed clinical courses of infants in this study. we may have misclassified rv/ev transmission as the biofire rvp does not distinguish specific virus types nor were the viruses sequenced. we also acknowledge that our strategy to discontinue transmission precautions if an infant has two negative tests does not consider intermittent viral shedding. finally, we did not measure the impact of culture change in the nicu; following the adenovirus outbreak, staff had increased awareness of the clinical impact of respiratory viruses resulting in increased responsibility and accountability among staff to not work while ill themselves and to ask peers with respiratory symptoms to be evaluated by wh&s.in conclusion, reducing the incidence of healthcareassociated respiratory viruses in the nicu population is an important patient safety goal. infants in the nicu with respiratory viruses can exhibit a wide range of symptoms including being asymptomatic, as demonstrated by both clinical and physiological data. remarkably, we found that most symptomatic infants did not receive escalation of respiratory or nutritional support. while the evidence supporting effective infection prevention and control measures is still evolving, we found that screening asymptomatic infants after exposure and prohibiting visitors less than 12 years of age from visiting the nicu were associated with a reduction in incidence and transmission events of respiratory viruses. however, multicenter investigations are needed to assess the generalizability of our findings to identify factors associated with asymptomatic infants and to determine the most cost-effective ip&c strategies to reduce respiratory viruses in the nicu.the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has evolved as a global public health 2 emergency affecting 212 countries and territories around the world as of may 12, 2020 3 worldometer, (2020). covid-19 is one kind of respiratory disease by the novel coro- since the outbreak of the virus, incorporating travel between major cities in china, 42 li et al., (2020) proposed an seir-model incorporating a metapopulation structure for 43 both reported and unreported infections. it has been discovered in their studies that 44 around 86% of all cases went undetected in wuhan before travel restrictions imposed 45 on january 23, 2020. according to their estimation, on an individual basis, around 46 55% asymptomatic spreaders were contagious who were responsible for 79% of new infected cases. other studies ferguson (2020) and peter turchin, (2020) independently apply modified sird models, in which 56 parameters change overtime following specific function forms. parameters govern these 57 functions are estimated by minimizing the sum-of-square-error. however, using the 58 sum-of-square method causes over-fitting and always favors a complex model, therefore 59 it is not suitable to access policy effectiveness. moreover, fitting the sird model in 60 the early stage of infection is questionable as well.in the light of above shortcomings of several established mathematical models, 62 a more refined deterministic system of nonlinear differential equations, considering 63 all possible interactions, a susceptible-exposed-symptomatic infectious-asymptomatic this paper is organized as follows. in section 2, the mathematical model is described • births and natural deaths in the population are not considered.• the susceptible population are exposed to a latent class . carriers and move to exposed (e) class. the relative infectiousness capacity of asymp-132 tomatic spreaders is λ (related to symptomatic infectious individuals). susceptible 133 individuals can be quarantined with contact tracing procedure and the rate of getting 134 home-quarantined or self-quarantined of s is q, whereas κ is the rate of progression 135 of symptoms of covid-19 (hence 1 κ is the mean incubation period of covid-19).detected symptomatic infected individuals are generated at a progression rate σ 1 and 137 undetected asymptomatic infectious cases are generated at a rate σ 2 from the exposed 138 class. in addition, individuals who are exposed to virus can be quarantined with contact 139 tracing procedure at a rate (1−σ 1 −σ 2 ). γ is the rate of confirmation and isolation after the disease-free equilibrium (dfe) of (1) can be obtained easily by setting s = 179therefore the dfe of (1) is : the associated basic reproduction number, denoted by r 0 is then given by,, where ρ is the spectral radius of fv −1 . it follows that,thus, by theorem 2 of lasalle (1976), the following result is established. is the initial set of parameters of the proposed model and sei d i u qhrd(.) represents 209 our proposed model. the "trr algorithm" also necessitates an initial guess for each 210 parameter which is described as "trr input" in the following section. projection results for russia from early february to late august are shown in figure 2 225 and 3. we collected real data from february 01 to may 08, 2020 to calibrate the model 226 parameters.as we can see the results from the proposed model match the real data very well.based on the proposed model, we want to project that from figure 3, table 5 : necessary parameters for trust-region-reflective algorithm and for the figure 9 calibrated response our analysis that the uks case-fatality rate is at 17.2%, which is the worst among our progresses, the estimated error declines and is hovering around 10% for the cumula-332 tive cases and daily new cases according to our calculated daily projected mean error.the estimated case-fatality rate in bangladesh is at 2.7% which is kind of satisfactory, 334 however without massive scale testing this rate could rise sharply incoming days. more-335 over, the country's estimated recovery rate is at 24% which again complements the real 336 statistics precisely. importantly, without an aggressive level mass-testing program it 337 is impossible to portray the real outbreak scenario in bangladesh. importantly, we have got startling yet realistic results from our sensitivity analysis.as we can see from figure 12 , we found nearly the same qualitative and significant viral respiratory tract infections (vrti) are an important cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with hematologic malignancies, particularly in allogeneic haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (hsct) recipients [1] [2] [3] . in immunocompromised patients, vrti are usually more severe, with an increased risk of progression from upper to lower respiratory tract infections and more frequent presence of bacterial or fungal co-pathogens than in immunocompetent patients [4] [5] [6] [7] . moreover, long-term sequelae of vrti, such as restrictive or obstructive airway disease, have been reported [8, 9] . during the last decade, rapid and highly sensitive molecular tests have been developed and made available, with the most recent multiplex polymerase chain reaction (pcr) platform that can detect multiple viral pathogens [10] [11] [12] . based on data from observational studies, it is believed that most vrti in patients with haematological malignancies present with fever and/or upper respiratory tract symptoms, while less is known about the asymptomatic circulation of respiratory viruses, even though prolonged viral shedding has been observed [4, [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] .for influenza infection, the management strategy based on the presence of influenza-like illness syndrome (ili) has been successfully used in epidemiological and treatment studies in immunocompetent patients. for hsct recipients who are at an increased risk of developing severe influenza complications, post-exposure and general chemoprophylaxis during an influenza season have been recommended [21] [22] [23] . nevertheless, the efficacy and impact of these strategies, particularly when compared to early diagnosis and treatment, remain unknown.the aims of this study were to prospectively evaluate the incidence, morbidity and severity of vrti in outpatients of an hsct unit during the influenza season of 2011. additionally, the clinical usefulness of the presence of an ili for diagnosing and treating vrti and the possible occurrence of nosocomial transmission or microepidemics were evaluated.patients and study protocol a 3-month prospective study during the seasonal influenza outbreak, i.e. from 1 january 2011 to 31 march 2011, included all adult outpatients seen at least once a month in the hsct unit. most of the subjects were allogeneic hsct recipients, while the other patients either received an autologous hsct or chemotherapy for haematological diseases. the following data were recorded: demographics, type of the underlying disease and the date and type of hsct, including conditioning regimen.informed consent was obtained in accordance with the declaration of helsinki. both the asymptomatic and symptomatic for vrti patients underwent clinical evaluation at every visit to the outpatient unit and were invited to contact their physician if any new symptoms developed. additionally, influenza vaccination status of the patient and household contacts was noted. pharyngeal swabs, which are specimens considered suitable and easily collected by recent who recommendations, were collected for viral testing at the first visit and then only in case of new vrti symptoms [24] . additional swabs were obtained in patients with vrti in order to document the resolution of the infection of prolonged viral shedding but were not included in the analysis. bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) fluid and other clinical respiratory specimens were collected when clinically indicated.the distribution of influenza cases, i.e. the beginning, the peak and the end of epidemic, in this cohort was compared to data available for italy reported weekly by the italian network for influenza surveillance of superior health institute.definitions ili syndrome was defined as the presence of fever plus at least one of the following symptoms: cough, sore throat, rhinorrhoea and/or systemic symptoms as headache, asthenia, malaise and arthromyalgia, in the absence of other documented causes.vrti was considered as detection of a respiratory virus from the upper or lower respiratory tract [25] . similar to the european centre for disease prevention and control (ecdc) definition, in haematology patients, a confirmed case of viral respiratory tract infectious disease was defined as new onset of symptoms, and at least one of the following: cough, coryza, sore throat and shortness of breath, and the clinician's judgment that the illness is due to an infection [25] .a repeated detection of the same virus in a patient was considered as the same infection episode, and only the first positive swab was considered. co-infection was defined as simultaneous detection of more than one virus, while separate infection episodes were diagnosed if a new virus was detected at the onset of new respiratory symptoms. asymptomatic infection was defined as detectable virus in the patient's upper respiratory tract sample without symptoms of respiratory illness. upper vrti was defined as a respiratory viral isolation from a pharyngeal swab and included both symptomatic and asymptomatic infections. upper vrti symptoms included sore throat, cough, rhinorrhoea or nasal congestion. lower vrti was defined as a clinically and radiologically confirmed pneumonia with detection of virus from the lower respiratory tract (bal fluid). a direct contact for a period of at least 1 h with a patient with an upper or lower vrti was regarded as an exposition to vrti case.molecular assay was performed by the regional reference laboratory operating from monday to friday. all specimens were transported in universal transport medium (copan italia s.p.a., brescia, italy), collected and subjected to rna extraction. according to the manufacturer's instructions, viral rna was extracted by spin columns (qiaamp viral rna mini kit, qiagen, valencia, ca, usa), converted to random hexamer-primed cdna by the revertaid system (fermentas, york, uk), and then stored at −20°c until use. each cdna preparation was subjected to the seeplex rv12 ace detection pcr kit procedure (seegene, seoul, south korea). the multiplex pcr assay allowed the simultaneous detection of 12 respiratory viruses: influenza a/b, human adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) a/b, human metapneumovirus virus, human parainfluenza virus 1/2/3, human rhinovirus a/ b, human coronavirus 229e/nl63-oc43/hku1. samples positive only for the m gene of flu a by the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) were typed using the real-time rt-pcr-based kit, established by the cdc, specific for detecting and characterizing a/ h1n1p. given the higher sensitivity of the cdc rt-pcr system than the seeplex kit for detecting a/h1n1p and influenza a viruses in general, throughout this paper, all results pertaining to influenza a virus should be considered to have been obtained by the former method. a small number of influenza a virus positive samples were untypeable because of low viral loads. the performance of this multiplex assay has been determined elsewhere [26] .at the outpatient unit, all patients, visitors and healthcare workers are required to use a surgical mask and to wash their hands before and after all patient contact. routinely, the outpatients received intravenous treatment in three-patient or five-patient rooms. in order to reduce the possibility of nosocomial transmission and to facilitate the evaluation of potential microepidemics, the patients were always placed in the same room, unless vrti was detected. patients with vrti were placed in individual rooms until they were asymptomatic and, if feasible, negative for respiratory viruses. yearly influenza vaccination of patients, hospital staff and family members was recommended [21, 27] .the differences between the groups were assessed by means of the chi-square test for heterogeneity or fisher's exact test when appropriate. all p values are two-sided; a p value of ≤0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. the analyses were performed using the spss version 13.0 statistical package (spss, inc., chicago, il, usa).a total of 193 patients were screened and 264 pharyngeal swabs were performed. among them, 136 patients had 1 swab performed, 45 had 2, 11 had 3 and 1 had 5. fifty-six percent of patients were male, and the majority (68 %, 132 out of 193) received hsct (127 allogeneic and 7 autologous), at a median of 306 days before entry in the study (range, 30-7, 712 days). in particular, 26 % (35 out of 132) received transplant within 90 days, 14 % (18 out of 132) within 90-180 days and 60 % (79 out of 132) within 180 days or more.among 264 pharyngeal swabs, 162 (61 %) came from symptomatic patients and 102 (39 %) from asymptomatic patients. a total of 58 (22 %) swabs positive for 61 viruses were recovered. in case of symptoms, the virological documentation of infection was significantly more frequent: 30 % (49 out of 162) of swabs performed during symptoms were positive, compared to 9 % (9 out of 102) of swabs in asymptomatic subjects (p <0.0001). the main viruses detected were influenza (20 out of 58 samples, 34 %), rsv (21 out of 58, 36 %) and rhinovirus (12 out of 58, 21 %), and influenza and rsv infections were significantly more frequent in symptomatic subjects ( table 1 ). the symptoms of vrti were divided into three main categories, and the rate of positive virological results was as follows: ili 38 % (25 out of 65), fever only 30 % (9 out of 30) and upper vrti symptoms 22 % (15 out of 67) (fig. 1) six patients had pneumonia; thus, bal was performed and four viruses were detected (co-pathogens are reported in table 2 ): one influenza a, two rsv and one coronavirus. in two cases (influenza and rsv), progression from upper to . these three patients with influenza and rsv pneumonia were successfully treated with oseltamivir and ribavirin, respectively. the other two patients were diagnosed with pneumonia due to other pathogens.weekly incidence and distribution of vrti due to different viruses weekly incidence of all vrti was 3.11 per 100 patient-weeks, of influenza was 1.13 per 100 patient-weeks and of rsv was 1.07 per 100 patient-weeks. the analysis of weekly distribution of diagnosed vrti documented that the peak activity for the main two viruses (influenza and rsv) was detected in the same period. the circulation of influenza virus in this cohort was detected later (detection from weeks 2 to 10, with peak activity in weeks 6 and 7), as compared to the general population (detection from week 50 of 2010 to week 9 of 2011, with peak activity from weeks 2 to 6). a similar delayed circulation was detected for rsv: in the study population in table 2 . in particular, approximately half of the patients with either of the following infections: influenza, rsv and rhinovirus, presented with ili syndrome (11 out of 20, 55 %; 9 out of 19, 47 %; and 5 out of 12, 42 %, respectively).the standard prevention measures that included facial masks and hand hygiene were applied to all the patients with vrti. for influenza infection, the possibility of giving pharmacological prophylaxis with oseltamivir was evaluated for all the contacts of patients with a documented influenza infection. among 20 influenza infections, 19 were treated with the full dose of oseltamivir and 1 patient was not treated because the positive result was available after 72 h and the patient was asymptomatic, vaccinated, with no previous allogeneic hsct and well-controlled underlying disease.overall, 56 contacts of 20 cases were identified among outpatients: 6 were symptomatic and received oseltamivir treatment pending the results of viral testing, whereas 50 were asymptomatic. among them, 19 received oseltamivir prophylaxis within 72 h of exposure to a contact patient, while the remaining 31 patients were closely monitored for the development of signs and symptoms of influenza infection, but no prophylaxis was given. the decision to withhold prophylaxis despite the high number of patients exposed to influenza, no nosocomial outbreak was detected. a cluster of influenza infection was observed in week 7 (five patients in 4 days), but the identified types of viruses were different (three type a h3n2, one type a h1n1 and one type b) and there was no evidence of any nosocomial contact with a patient infected with type a h3n2 4 days before. transmission from healthcare workers or visitors could not be assessed as no swabs were performed among them, but no healthcare worker attending the outpatients unit had respiratory symptoms or fever during the study period and visitors do not have access to outpatient therapy rooms.rsv peak activity was observed from weeks 6 to 8 (seven infections). the equal circulation of the a (four) and b (three) subtypes and no contact between the patients involved make unlikely patient-to-patient transmission and large epidemic outbreak.overall, 45 (23 %) patients were vaccinated with the seasonal strains, while among 148 non-vaccinated patients, 52 (35 %) reported that all or some household contacts had been vaccinated. there was no statistically significant difference in the in the group of hsct recipients, vaccination rate was 0 % (0 out of 53) within 6 months after transplant and 34 % (27 out of 79) among those over 6 months from transplant. among seven autologous transplant recipients, one was vaccinated and none developed influenza. the incidence of influenza was 11 % (6 out of 53) among patient with <6 months from transplant, 7 % (2 out of 28) among those >6 months from transplant and vaccinated and 8 % (4 out of 52) among those >6 months from transplant and not vaccinated.this prospective study confirms that vrti are a very common cause of morbidity, affecting during the observation period of 3 months almost one third of outpatients in an hsct unit. asymptomatic vrti was not infrequent (9 %), but none of them developed a clinically significant disease. symptoms of influenza, rsv and rhinovirus infection were similar and classic symptoms have low ppv for influenza (17 %) . thus, rapid and reliable diagnosis is crucial. fortunately, no large outbreak was detected, and low rate of progression from upper to lower respiratory tract infection and no vrti-related mortality were observed.the presence of any symptom was significantly associated with a confirmed vrti, but in this population, classic ili had low ppv for any vrti (38 %), including influenza (17 %). similar results were reported in another prospective observational study, where 25 % of patients had a vrti, and respiratory viruses were detected more frequently in the presence of symptoms, but symptoms in case of influenza and other vrti were similar [20] . ecdc definition adapted for the haematology population was even less specific than ili. in immunocompetent individuals, ili presentation is considered rather specific for influenza during the epidemic season. in fact, in generally healthy older adolescents and adults living in areas with confirmed influenza virus circulation, estimates of ppv, a simple clinical definition of influenza (acute onset of cough and fever), have been reported to be approximately 80-90 % and empirical anti-influenza treatment was recommended in such conditions [28] [29] [30] [31] . however, even in an immunocompetent population, the accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of influenza on the basis of symptoms alone is being questioned (reported incidence of ili in patients with influenza, 44-51 %) and is now considered limited because symptoms from illness caused by other pathogens can overlap considerably with influenza [29] . in immunocompromised patients, the association between ili and influenza is even less pronounced, as systemic symptoms, such as fever or myalgia, are frequently lacking [32] . therefore, considering the co-circulation of influenza, rsv and rhinoviruses in the same period and the similar clinical presentation of these infections, early use of rapid molecular testing to identify a specific virus, instead of universal empirical treatment with fig. 2 the distribution of different vrti anti-influenza drugs in patients with ili, should be pursued. initiating antiviral treatment at the onset of symptoms and then discontinuing it after diagnostic tests result negative for influenza is another feasible management strategy.for influenza, vaccination from 6 months after transplant is recommended for hsct recipients [21, 27] . in this study, the incidence of influenza was similar in vaccinated and nonvaccinated patients. however, the only two patients with asymptomatic influenza infection had been vaccinated, suggesting that active immunization might significantly attenuate the course of infection, even if it is not prevented.the role of chemoprophylaxis of influenza during the peak season remains controversial, even though it is universally recommended in case of nosocomial outbreaks and for the first 2 weeks after vaccination in case of community or nosocomial outbreak [21, 27] . however, in this population of immunocompromised patients, of whom <25 % was vaccinated, the incidence of influenza during the epidemic season was only 10 %. such a low incidence might be a result of a strict isolation policy with daily use of surgical masks and particular attention to hand hygiene, together with a virusspecific attack rate that may vary annually. additionally, a low progression rate to lower respiratory tract infection and low mortality in all vrti was observed (approximately 5 %), possibly due to a rapid diagnosis and an early start of an antiviral therapy-usually 24-48 h after the onset of symptoms. therefore, in a population with low incidence and mortality and in consideration of the possibility of acquiring resistance to antivirals, as reported during the 2009 h1n1 epidemics [33, 34] , an early diagnosis and post-exposure prophylaxis for close contacts seem preferable to a general chemoprophylactic strategy.molecular assays are particularly convenient for the diagnosis of vrti in immunocompromised patients because they are rapid, sensitive and may detect multiple pathogens, although there are always some viruses not included in the assay [26] . however, they may also detect viral genetic material from a resolved or subclinical infection, and the optimal management of these cases remains unclear. in this cohort, nine asymptomatic subjects had vrti and isolation measures were applied in all cases, but only one patient was treated for influenza. it has been reported that, in asymptomatic patients, lower quantities of virus might be present [20, 35] and transmission might be improbable, as demonstrated by on observation that no transmission to household contacts occurred in asymptomatic immunocompetent subjects with rhinovirus [36] . also, in this study, asymptomatic patients did not subsequently develop any clinical symptoms.the strengths of this study include a prospective standardized diagnostic approach for all the outpatients, regardless of respiratory symptoms and the use of a very sensitive diagnostic method. the limitations are a single-centre experience and a short observation period, which did not include the last weeks of 2010 when some infections could occur. thus, data on the incidence cannot be extrapolated to other populations or seasons. additionally, the sensitivity of detection of respiratory viruses may vary for oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal specimens [37] . although, nasopharyngeal aspirates may be the most sensitive, especially for conventional diagnostic methods, less invasive specimen collection techniques are also acceptable given the very high sensitivity of new molecular diagnostic methods [37] , while recent guidelines recommend combined intranasal sampling using flocked swabs and the pharyngeal swabs in one virus transport medium [25] . finally, other centres with different management strategies for outpatients, including different contact prevention measures, might experience different rates of nosocomial transmission or morbidity.in conclusion, vrti are frequent in patients with haematological malignancies and may occur both in the presence of classic symptoms and in those with fever only. there was a significant overlapping in both symptoms and circulation period for influenza, rsv and rhinovirus. thus, empirical treatment of influenza in the presence of ili might be reserved for severely ill patients. rapid virological diagnosis and treatment only in case of a documented infection have been found feasible and successful in this setting of high-risk haematology outpatients.over 1,600,000 cases of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection have been confirmed globally and had resulted in up to 99,000 deaths by april 10, 2020. in early january 2020, the outbreak rapidly escalated, with hundreds of cases now confirmed within household clusters (1) . like influenza viruses, sars-cov-2 spreads primarily via respiratory droplets and causes infection by invading mucosa of the eyes, nose, or mouth (2) . the underlying health status of the patient has been found to play a critical role in overall susceptibility in the sars-cov-2 outbreak (3). indeed, novel coronavirus pneumonia infection within adult patients has been shown to cause rapid progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and septic shock, commonly followed by multiple organ failure. according to the china centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) report, there have also been rare severe or fatal cases in sars-cov-2-infected children (4) . in nine initial cases of hospitalized infants, the infants were vulnerable to the novel coronavirus but had mild illnesses (5) . however, with a relatively small sample size and a limited pediatric age group, many critical issues for the formulation of measures to quarantine and treat children infected with sars-cov-2 still remain unclear. therefore, in this research, a retrospective case study was conducted on 74 children in family clusters with confirmed covid-19 infection in wuhan children's hospital. the study provides the first delineation of the characteristics of children with covid-19 infection in family clusters and meets the need to give much medical attention to covid-19-infected children under the current viral crisis.a retrospective case study was performed in one hospital designated for children with covid-19 infection, wuhan children's hospital. this study was approved by the ethics committee of wuhan children's hospital of tongji medical college, huazhong university of science and technology. the requirement for informed patient consent was waived by the ethics committee due to it being a retrospective case study and the emergency nature of the covid-19 infection outbreak. all the hospitalized covid-9-infected children were identified between january 28, 2020, and march 3, 2020. the children diagnosed with covid-19 through laboratory confirmation of sars-cov-2 infection by real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) abbreviations: covid-19, coronavirus infection of 2019; sars-cov-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; ards, acute respiratory distress syndrome; rt-pcr, reverse real-time polymerase chain reaction; iqr, interquartile range; ci, confidence interval; ggo, ground-glass opacity; sars-cov, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus; mers-cov, middle east respiratory syndrome coronary virus. assay of nasal and pharyngeal swab specimens were enrolled in this study.during hospitalization, nasopharyngeal and anal swabs were collected and tested for sars-cov-2 rna through reverse real-time polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) as described previously (6) . the diagnostic criteria for covid-19 were based on the recommendations in the diagnosis and treatment protocol for the novel coronavirus pneumonia issued by the national health commission of the people's republic of china. infection was defined as the occurrence of at least one positive rt-pcr test result.clinical data were retrospectively retrieved from the medical records. the date of disease onset was defined as the day when a symptom was first noticed. information on the symptoms, laboratory, chest ct, and treatment during the hospital were also collected. ards was defined according to the berlin definition (7) .for descriptive analysis, continuous variables were presented as mean ± sd or as median with interquartile range (iqr) whenever appropriate. categorical variables were presented as a number and percentage the shapiro-wilk test was used to test the normality of data distribution. the kaplan-meier method was used on time-to-event data to estimate the median time and its corresponding 95% confidence interval (ci). all statistical analysis was performed using ibm spss statistics for windows version 26.0.the demographic and epidemic characteristics of the 74 covid-19-infected children with confirmed sars-cov-2 infection are shown in table 1 . there were 38 male patients and 36 female patients, aged between 2 months and 15.3 years; the median age was 5.8 years, and 36 (48.7%) of the patients were over 6 years old, while 26 (35.1%) of the patients were younger than 3 years old. fourteen (18.9%) of the children had a medical history of at least one previous condition (i.e., asthma, gastrointestinal ulcer, epilepsy, hepatolenticular degeneration, or acute lymphocytic leukemia). seven (9.5%) of the covid-19-infected children had previously been infected with other respiratory diseases.out of the 74 patients, two children came from the same family, while the others came from different families. twentynine (39.2%) families had 3 patients, and 25 (33.8%) families had 2 patients. in these infected family members, in nearly 35 (46.7%) grandfathers and in 32 (42.7%) grandmothers were infected first in the family, while in only 21 (28.4%) were fathers and in 15 (20.3%) were mothers infected first. they were all infected before the children. the mean time between the first positive rt-pcr finding and the initial suspected child case in the family was 14.2 ± 6.1 days. twenty-two of the 74 (29.7%) patients had no earlier symptoms, but they were hospitalized because they had had previous contact with infected relatives within their families or they were hospitalized for other reasons and were later diagnosed with covid-19 through rt-pcr positive tests. in these asymptomatic patients, 3 of the 22 (13.6%) children were aged between 1 month to 3 years, 7 (31.8%) were aged between 3 and 6 years, and 12 (54.5%) were aged above 6 years.the clinic characteristics at admission time are listed in table 1 .the major clinical features of sars-cov-2 in children on initial presentation included: fever (51.4%), cough (55.4%), sputum (29.8%), and diarrhea (13.5%). poor appetite, fatigue, vomiting, abdominal pain, and myalgia were present, but on rare occasions. in addition, 22 (29.7%) infected children had neither symptoms nor laboratory indications nor ct evidence for lesions. these asymptomatic patients only showed sars-cov-2 rna positive. there were no differences between the children with symptoms and asymptomatic children in terms of median age, sex ratio, or the status of comorbidities ( table 1) .the laboratory indices and microbiologic findings on admission are shown in table 2 . no lymphopenia or thrombocytopenia was observed on admission in this study. fourteen (18.9%) children demonstrated elevated levels of highsensitivity c-reactive protein. the aspartate aminotransferase level on admission was elevated in 17 patients (23.0%), and the alanine aminotransferase level was elevated in three patients (4.1%). kidney and heart function were regular in all cases. in the studied 74 patients, 28 (37.8%) were positive for mycoplasma, two were positive for eb-igm, and one was positive for cmv-igm. of all of the nasopharyngeal aspirates collected, all patients were negative for influenza virus a and b. the differences in laboratory findings between the children with symptoms and asymptomatic children are listed in table 2 . compared to patients without symptoms, the patients with symptoms showed higher levels of procalcitonin (pct), lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), alanine aminotransferase (alt), aspartate aminotransferase (ast), and creatinine (cr). table 1) .all of the children had at least one positive result in the rt-pcr test for viral rna performed on nasopharyngeal swabs upon their admission to the hospital. based on the respiratory and digestive symptoms and typical manifestations of viral pneumonia in chest ct, the children were divided into four groups ( figure 1c) . the infected children were under medical observation and quarantine. all of them received inhaled interferon with 2-4 µg/kg in 2 ml sterile water nebulization two times per day for 5-7 days. by march 3, 2020, the body temperature returned to normal, and symptoms significantly improved in all of the infected children. the median time for release of fever was 3.0 (iqr of 1.0-4.0), and for all, the symptoms improved in 97.3% children with symptoms from the onset of the illness.rt-pcr test results for viral rna from anal swabs were available from 46 patients (62.2%). the anal swabs and nasopharyngeal swabs were taken and tested co-currently for each patient. figure 2 shows the temporal pattern in the percentage of negative rt-pcr results for the nasopharyngeal or anal swabs of the 46 patients who had both their nasopharyngeal and anal swabs tested. the median time for nucleic acid tests to turn negative was 9.0 days (iqr of 7.0-13.0) for nasopharyngeal swabs and 10.0 days (iqr of 7.0-17.0) for anal swabs. the nasopharyngeal nucleic acid tests of 91.3% of children turned negative within 28 days from admission time. in comparison, fewer anal swab nucleic acid tests (65.2%) turned negative than did nasopharyngeal swab tests in 28 days (hr 1.718, 95% ci 1.040-2.839, p = 0.0346, figure 1) . additionally, the median time for nucleic acid tests to turn negative was 9.0 days (iqr of 7.0-13.0) for nasopharyngeal swabs and 10.0 days (iqr of 7.0-17.0) for anal swabs.we described the epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 74 children patients with confirmed covid-19 infection by family cluster. most children with covid-19 infection were toddlers and schoolchildren without any gender susceptibility. the average internal time between the diagnosis of the children with a positive nucleic acid test and the initial case in their families was 14.2 ± 6.1 days. in most cases, it was a grandparent that was infected before the child. cough, fever, and sputum occurred in most of the patients. compared to nasopharyngeal swab, which turned negative after a median time of 9.0 (iqr of 7.0-13.0) days, it took a median time of 10.0 (iqr of 7.0-17.0) days for anal swab to turn negative. these mismatched results indicate that the body took longer to clear the virus from the digestive tract than from the respiratory tract. regular lymphocytes and neutrophils, normal kidney and heart function, fewer severe cases, and a lower fatality rate were observed in the children. apart from the typical ct images, half of the negative ct scans were from children with covid-19 infection that presented some clinical symptoms. furthermore, 29.7% of the children were asymptomatic carriers with positive sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing results due to previous exposure to covid-19-infected family members. this indicated that asymptomatic children with covid-19 infection can be significant transmitters of the virus and can increase the number of cases of infection.since the large-scale outbreak of the covid-19 virus infection in wuhan, cases in the initial clusters reported that wild animals were the likely source, and an animal-to-human route was probably the main mode of transmission for those initially reported cases (8) . recently, nine sars-cov-2-infected infants were identified by dr. zhang and it was found that family clustering occurred for all of the infected infants (9) . similarly, in our cohort, covid-19 in all of the 74 children was attributed to the family cluster (10) . sars-cov-2 was transmitted to these children by infected adult relatives such as parents or grandparents, by close exposure. incredibly, one family had seven covid-19 patients. they were passively screened for sars-cov-2 nucleic acid due to exposure to an infected relative or sought medical treatment for other reasons. just as the transmission pattern of mers-cov involves transmission within families (11), sars-cov-2 was also transmitted in family clusters. in our present study, all of the child patients had been infected by a family member. it was mostly a grandfather or grandmother that was infected first in the family. these data indicated that elderly relatives were still an important source of infection of sars-cov-2 in family clusters in china. traditionally, family groups in china are large, with children living with their parents and grandparents. however, niccolò et al. reported that 55% of child patients were exposed to sars-cov-2 from unknown sources or from sources outside the child's family in italy (12) . the longest interval between the diagnosis of a child via positive nucleic acid test and the initial case in his or her family was over 1 month (42 days). furthermore, 29.7% of children had no symptoms or signs, which might lead to a delay in medical treatment, which might cause transmission to more people.in the present study, most of the covid-19-infected children were younger than 3 years and older than 6 years. similar to sars and mers cases, there is a lot of variability in the clinical presentation, including mild or asymptomatic cases that may never be presented to healthcare services (4, 13), compared with adult cases, most of the children with covid-19 exhibited mild or moderate symptoms. the main clinic signs of covid-19 in children are fever and cough. however, child patients manifested sputum instead of the adult dry cough (14) ( table 1 ). in addition, a few child patients suffered from diarrhea, which was uncommon in adults. diarrhea was also reported to be associated with middle east respiratory syndrome coronary virus (mers-cov) infection (15, 16) . this suggests the possibility of direct viral involvement of the alimentary canals. compared to adults with covid-19, in whom the virus mainly acted to reduce lymphocytes, none of the children with covid-19 had lymphopenia ( table 2) . these might indicate a lack of an over-activated immune response in children with covid-19. in contrast, adults infected by sars-cov-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), or mers-cov were reported to have increased concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines, which were associated with pulmonary inflammation and extensive lung damage in patients (17, 18) . this difference might explain the mild symptoms in children with covid-19. recently, toubiana reported that sars-cov-2 infected children and adolescents might related to the ongoing outbreak of kawasakilike multisystem inflammatory syndrome among children and adolescents in the paris area. however, we did not find that the patients manifested the same clinical signs as kawasaki disease (19) . children are susceptible to general respiratory diseases. in our present study, none of the covid-19-positive children were co-infected with other bacteria or a/b flu. while few patients were co-infected with cytomegalovirus or eb virus, 37.8% of the children with covid-19 were co-infected with mycoplasma (mp), especially patients over 6 years old. mp pneumoniae is one of the most common causes of childhood community-acquired pneumonia (9) . our data showed mp igm positive results, which indicates recent infection with mp. it is not possible to determine which infected came first, mp or sars-cov-2 or whether mp-infected children might be more susceptible to sars-cov-2.of the 74 covid-19-infected children, 54.1% of patients had positive ct images, which was lower than for covid-19-infected adult patients, in whom there are 75% positive chest ct findings (20) . compared to the group without symptoms, more patients showed positive ct in the group with symptoms. this indicated that lung injury accompanied the symptoms in children. typical ct manifestations of the viral pneumonia are mainly multifocal ground-glass changes. the manifestations of lung ct scans in adult patients were bilateral, subpleural, ground-glass opacities with air bronchograms, illdefined margins, and a slight predominance in the right lower lobe (21) . partly similar to adult patients lung injure entexisted in unilateral lung and a single lung lobe in child patients. in adults, covid-19 pneumonia manifests with chest ct imaging abnormalities, even in asymptomatic patients infected with sars-cov-2. however, 23.0% of covid-19positive children were classified as asymptomatic carriers who had neither symptoms nor radiological findings. this accords with a publication that reported that 20.9% of adult patients have isolated sars-cov-2 infection before or without the development of viral pneumonia. however, ct might not always be necessary but could be performed upon clinical suspicion, and lung ultrasound can be a useful tool (22, 23) . furthermore, there were significant differences in laboratory results between the asymptomatic group and symptomatic group. compared to the patients without symptoms, there were higher levels of ldh, alt, ast, and cr in the patients with symptoms. these data indicate that the patients suffered mild organ damage, particularly of the heart, liver, and kidney. most child cases missed by screening are fundamentally undetectable because they have not yet developed symptoms and are unaware that they were exposed (14) . these findings indicate that not all children with covid-19 suffer lung damage and also advocate for shifting the focus in sars-cov-2 screening to children once a family member is confirmed to have covid-19.sars-cov-2-positive detection from nasopharyngeal swabs by pcr is the basis for diagnosis of covid-19 in our present study. in contrast to negative results from nasopharyngeal swab, 34% of anal swabs continued to show positive. simultaneously, diarrhea was also presented in children covid-19. studies have demonstrated that patients with a positive stool test did not experience gastrointestinal and respiratory symptoms (24) . sars-cov-2 infection through transmission through stool should then be considered, and a fecal-oral route could be a potential transmission pathway. therefore, we should strengthen stool management and be alert to fecal-oral spread when caring for children.the study indicates that asymptomatic children within a family cluster are potentially a little-known source of covid-19, and this warrants an urgent reassessment of the transmission dynamics of the current outbreak. moreover, pediatric experts have suggested that imaging should not be used routinely for child patients with covid-19 who are asymptomatic or have mild symptoms (22, 25) . to really understand the real burden of pediatric covid-19, particularly in children exposed to adults with covid-19, serologic studies of these children might be important (26) . it is also recommended that both nasopharyngeal and anal swabs should be confirmed negative as a standard for release. such a situation makes the control and management efforts for the spread and transmission of the viral infection much more challenging, hence increasing the chances of infection via transmission, a situation that could be the reason for the spread of covid-19 infection to other parts of the world. therefore, there is still a need for much effort on early identification and timely treatment, especially of asymptomatic cases in children, as this is crucial in fighting the pandemic, not only in china but the world over.the raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.the studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by ethics committee of wuhan children's hospital of tongji medical college of huazhong university of science and technology. written informed consent to participate in this study was provided by the participants' legal guardian/next of kin.written informed consent was obtained from the individual(s), and minor(s)' legal guardian/next of kin, for the publication of any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article.testing, as the first and crucial step in the "four early" measures, plays a key role to achieve great control effect. "four early" measure (early detection, early report, early isolation, early treatment), an important means for the prevention and control of infectious diseases, has been adopted since the very beginning of the coronavirus outbreak. the improvement of detection capacity needs to be accelerated and nucleic acid testing should be carried out to contain the progress of the epidemic on a regular basis, restraining the alarming spread of the outbreak from the very first step. nucleic acid testing enables a rapid response to the covid-19 outbreak by identifying suspected cases, confirming releasement of recovered patients, screening close contacts and high-risk groups.the diagnostic criteria of covid-19 are defined as suspected cases with one of the following [6] :(1) positive nucleic acid results by rt-pcr;(2) highly homologous sequencing of virus gene to sars-cov-2;(3) positive serum igm and igg results; and the incubation lasts 1 to 14 days, therefore, the quarantine requisite involves a period of 14 days' isolation observation at home, isolation medical observation at home or centralized isolation medical observation.the large-scale nucleic acid testing should cover targeted population, units and venues where people gather amid work and production resumption, especially the population who are at high risks. based on the data released by chinese authorities [7, 8] , the key populations include: this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.(1) confirmed covid-19 cases and close contacts;(2) imported cases and close contacts;(3) asymptomatic cases and close contacts;(4) patients with fever;(5) patients in need of hospitalization;(6) personnel returning from business trip, especially from regions of high risks;(7) personnel returning to school or work;(8) staff of medical institutions, port quarantine inspection, public security and judicial supervision, social welfare and pension institutions, maternal and child service institutions and other key places.for some key places and areas, the measure covers everyone, such as the whole population's nucleic acid testing in wuhan city starting from may 15, 2020.compared to some drive-through screening center [9] , the testing in china is officially organized and taken in designated hospitals and institutions, with sample collected by professional healthcare personnel and examined in specialized laboratory. furthermore, chinese authorities declared to speed up the improvement of rapid detection capability, especially to promote the production of nucleic acid rapid detection equipment with results in shortened time and no need for laboratory [10] .it must be ensured that all confirmed and suspected cases, asymptomatic cases and close contacts are traced, to block the channels of the spread of the virus and fill the loopholes in covid-19 prevention. great importance should be attached to prevent clustered epidemics, especially hospital infections. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.(1) make sure of adequate supply of nucleic acid testing kits with the covid-19 pandemic continuing to ravage the world, fears of a massive demand for coronavirus test kits ignited a major concern worldwide, including countries such as the u.s, italy, iran and so on [11] , especially at the early stage.globally, the number of daily covid-19 tests per thousand people has gradually increasing. as for china, the nucleic acid detection capacity has reached 1.5 million per day by the end of may 17, 2020 and will be further improved [12] .the timeline of coronavirus testing (figure 1 ) showed that the authorities had invested a lot on the testing and the detection capacity had been greatly improved.however, with the decision of national large-scale nucleic testing, further improved detection capability will be required, therefore, sustained and steady growth of testing kits should be ensured to meet the demand.(2) keep a close watch on imported cases and asymptomatic patients after three months' stringent measures against the virus, china has entered into the phase of mitigation, however, it is still faced with the high risk of rebounding due to not only the imported cases but also asymptomatic patients. studies [13, 14] have indicated that asymptomatic patients are infectious and can potentially transmit covid-19, which deserves close attention and proper handling. based on the daily reports from the national health commission of the people's republic of china from april 1, 2020 to april 25, 2020, the number of imported cases and asymptomatic cases exceeded that of local cases by a great deal [15] ( figure 2 ). up to april 25, 2020, there were a total of 694 imported confirmed cases and 1,000 asymptomatic cases with covid-19, including 151 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.asymptomatic imported cases. imported cases and asymptomatic patients, as two groups of the key targeted populations, accounted for a big proportion of the whole infected cases. the current interventions for them and their close contacts are 14 days of centralized quarantine and observation, with the releasing requirement of two consecutive negative nucleic acid tests. for more thorough inspection of the targeted populations, improved mechanism of joint regional defense and deepened international cooperation at borders or customs will be demanded to facilitate the pandemic control management.during the period of large scale nucleic acid testing, as hard as it is, the active cooperation of the whole society has been witnessed, which guarantes the positive invention effect. however, the pandemic keeps in a dynamic and rapidly evolving stage, so there is still a long way to go in the battle against the covid-19, where constant vigilance is needed. since the first case of the coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19) was found in wuhan, china in december 2019, the disease has rapidly spread in the city of wuhan, then to hubei province, china, and subsequently, across the world. 1 on 11 march 2020, the world health organization (who) declared covid-19 to be a pandemic. patients is important for disease surveillance. to determine how deadly the covid-19 is, it is fundamental to evaluate the case fatality rate which is calculated as the ratio of the number of deaths from to the number of infected cases.since the outbreak of the disease, a large body of research on covid-19 has been done and many articles have been published in scientific journals or shared on platforms such as biorxir and medrxir. moreover, covid-19 data contain substantial errors in that the number of confirmed cases is considerably under-reported, which is attributed to two primary reasons. insufficient test kits do not allow every potential patient with covid-19-like symptoms to be tested, and there has been a good portion of asymptomatic covid-19 carriers who would never be tested and counted as confirmed cases. it is useful to understand the asymptomatic infection rate, defined as the ratio of the number of asymptomatic infections to the number of all infected cases.to address these issues, we carry out a meta-analysis to synthesize the reported estimates of the basic reproduction number, the average incubation time, and the case fatality rate as well as the asymptomatic rate in a rigorous way by factoring out the variabilities associated with the relevant studies. to accommodate the effects of missing asymptomatic infections on calculating the case fatality rate, we further perform a sensitivity analysis for the estimation of the case fatality rate. our table 1 , were identified by the first author (wh) to be included in the analysis, together with serra 3 and day, 4 which were found on april 2.the inclusion criteria are the availability of both point estimates and 95% confidence intervals (95% cis) (or equivalently, standard deviations) for the basic transmission number, the average incubation time, the asymptomatic rate, or the case fatality rate. table 1 presents the summary information of the selected articles together with the descriptions of the data used in those articles. we extract the results for the basic reproduction number from 2,5-8,10,11 and the results for the average incubation time from. 5, 6, 9, 13, 16 the results from 3, 4, 20, [21] [22] [23] are extracted for estimation of the asymptomatic infection rate. the estimates for the case fatality rate together with their 95% cis are taken from. 11, 12, 14, 15, [17] [18] [19] in the articles, 6,7,9 the reported 95% cis were asymmetric which we suspect were caused by employing a transformation (such as the exponential transformation) to the initial cis for the reparameterized effective size; for example, some authors may apply the logarithm to reparameterize the basic reproduction number or the average incubation time before performing the analysis.using the inverse transformation, we convert the reported asymmetric cis and work out the associated standard deviations which are used in determining the weights for the meta-analysis.as shown in the top panel of figures 1-4 , estimates of the basic reproduction number, the mean incubation time, the asymptomatic infection rate, and the case fatality rate are quite different from study to study. to obtain synthetic results, we perform a meta-analysis to aggregate the information from multiple studies with the same estimand (or effect size of interest) yet different features including the differences in the data collection, the sample size, and the conditions. suppose k studies report an estimate and the associate standard deviation for an effect size of interest. for the ith study with i = 1, …, k, let y i denote the effect size of interest and let σ i 2 represent its associated variance estimate. in our analysis here, y i is taken as the basic reproduction number, the average incubation time, the asymptomatic infection rate, and the case fatality rate, respectively. we calculate a weighted average of the results from those k studies under either the fixed effect model or the random effects model. 24 under the fixed effect model, the meta mean effect size is given byand the associated standard deviation iswhere w i = 1/σ i 2 is the weight for the ith study.with the random effects model, the meta mean effect size, denoted y meta,r , and its standard deviation, denoted sd(y meta,r ), are determined by the same expression as equations (1) and (2) except the top panel of figure 1 shows the results for the basic production number reported in the seven studies. the i 2 index for those studies is 97.8%, suggesting that the random effect model should be considered in conducting the meta-analysis. this result agrees with the perception that the basic reproduction number is time-dependent and varies from place to place.the bottom panel of figure 1 includes the meta-analysis results. days. this estimated average incubation time is about 2 days shorter than the mean incubation time of 7 days announced by ecdc. 27 we point out that our estimate is obtained by combining the information from those studies before 24 february 2020 with study subjects in wuhan city or other places in china.in the top panel of figure 3 , we display the estimates of the asymptomatic infection rate reported by. 3 finally, we are interested in estimating the case fatality rate which measures how deadly covid-19 is for the infected people. the meta-analysis results derived from seven studies available in the literature, shown in the top panel of figure 4 , are reported at the bottom panel of figure 4 , where we assume the random effect models because the i 2 index is 99.5%. the estimated case fatality rate is 3.34%, slightly smaller than 3.4%, the estimate reported on 3 march 2020 by the who. 28 the 95% ci suggests that the average case fatality rate can be as small as 2.18% and as large as 4.49%.these results are obtained from the data up to 21 march 2020 which contain five studies with subjects in china and two studies with worldwide subjects.we comment that the true average case fatality rate is ex- to better understand what the true case fatality rate may be, we further conduct two sensitivity studies. in the first study, we repeat the meta-analysis of the case fatality rate in section 3.5 by further including the results calculated from the data of the princess diamond cruise. 29 this analysis is driven by the consideration that the case fatality rate derived from the cohort of the cruise passengers is highly likely to be accurate, because the number of confirmed cases from the cruise is very likely to be close to the true number of infections. the bottom of figure 5 reports the meta-analysis results in our second sensitivity analysis, we revise the results in let p r = d/c r be the reported case fatality rate and let p t = d/c be the true case fatality rate. if we assume that c = c r + c a , then the reported case fatality rate and the true case fatality differ by the factor 1 − r a :estimates of the case fatality rate that have been reported in the current literature are merely directed to p r rather than p t .to sensibly estimate the true case fatality, we use equation (3) to adjust the reported results of the seven studies listed at the top panel of figure 4 . specifically, we may multiply the factor 1 − r a with an estimate for the reported rate p r as well as its standard deviation for each study and then run a meta-analysis. however, the exact value of the asymptomatic infection rate is unavailable, and we only have its estimates from various studies displayed at the top panel of figure 3 .to assess how the uncertainty of not knowing the true value of r a , we use two ways to set a value for r a to modify the reported fatality rates for the studies listed at the top panel of figure 4 for running a new meta-analysis.first, taking r a as one of seven reported estimates listed at the top panel of figure 3 , we modify the reported results provided by each study listed at the top panel of figure 4 using equation (3), and report the meta-analysis results at the top panels of figure 6 . in the second analysis, we take r a as the synthesized estimate reported in figure 3 , that is, r a is set as 46%, and then run the meta-analysis for these adjusted case fatality rates under the random effects model.we report the results at the bottom panel of figure 6 , which shows that the estimate of the case fatality rate is 1.8% with the 95% ci ranging from 1.18% to 2.43%.we carry out a meta-analysis and sensitivity study for estimating the basic reproduction number, the average incubation time, the asymptomatic infection rate, and the case fatality rate for covid-19.examining the published results between 24 january 2020 and asymptomatic transmission of the coronavirus disease 2019 is an important topic. a recent 24 study in china showed that transmissibility of the asymptomatic cases is comparable to that 25 of symptomatic cases. here we showed that the conclusion may depend on how we interpret 26 the data. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first time the relative transmissibility of 27 asymptomatic covid-19 cases is quantified. 28 29 keywords: covid-19; asymptomatic cases; relative transmissibility 30 31 32 33 main text 35 nishiura et al (nishiura et al, 2020 ) estimated the asymptomatic ratio of covid-19 was 41.6% 36 (5 out of 12 confirmed cases) among 565 japanese individuals evacuated from wuhan, china. 37mao et al (mao et al, 2020) reported that 2 out of 78 confirmed cases are asymptomatic. one 38 of the two cases showed rt-pct positivity 15 th days after first diagnosis. mizumoto et al 39 estimated that the 17.9% of cases on the diamond princess cruise ship were asymptomatic 40 case during the outbreak in february 2020 (mizumoto et al, 2020) . however, the 41 transmissibility of asymptomatic case is unclear, and the positive rt-pct results only imply 42 the potential infectivity. it is important to study the pattern of viral shedding and live virus 43 isolation. wölfel et al studied 9 hospitalized cases and found that live virus was isolated from 44 throat and lung-derived samples between 3 and 8 days after symptom onset (wölfel et al, 45 2020) . when the rna concentration is above 10 6 copies per ml (or equivalent ct-value lower 46 than 24), but not from stool samples, despite of high virus rna concentration. above the 47 threshold, high rna concentration yields high probability of live virus isolation. this 'dose-48 response' association highlights a patient's rt-pcr level should be higher than a threshold 49 to be effectively infectious. however, the mean infectious period (γ −1 ) of a symptomatic case may be longer than that of 102 an asymptomatic case hypothetically. therefore, the combined effects of ρ and γ −1 probably 103 lead to a higher reproduction number in the symptomatic group. 104 105 additionally, chen et al (chen et al, 2020) showed that asymptomatic cases are more likely 106 to produce asymptomatic cases relatively speaking, since the 6 secondary cases from 107 asymptomatic primary cases consist 3 asymptomatic cases (50%). whereas, 19 out of 126 108 (15%) are asymptomatic from symptomatic primary cases. the odds ratio (or) is estimated 109 in summary, we conclude that the relatively transmissibility of asymptomatic case could be 127 significantly smaller than that of the symptomatic cases. the main contribution of (chen et al, 128 2020) is that they raise the alarm of the existence of the transmissibility of the asymptomatic 129 cases. we remark that how efficient of the transmissibility of asymptomatic cases comparing 130 to symptomatic cases warrants more study. 131 132 133 here we showed that the conclusion may depend on how we interpret the data. 287 288 we also reported the asymptomatic case ratio in hong kong over time due to a large number 289 of young imported case. 290 291to the best of our knowledge, this is the first time the relative transmissibility of 292 asymptomatic covid-19 cases is quantified. 293 294 295the first case of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was reported on december 8, 2019, in wuhan, hubeiprovince. 1, 2 the chinese public health, clinical, and scientific communities promptly responded in timely recognition of the new virus and shared the viral gene sequence to the world. 3, 4 the world health organization (who) termed the disease covid-19 in january 2020. 2 the pandemic is the third coronavirus outbreak in the last 20 years, with severe acute respiratory syndrome caused by sars-cov and the middle east respiratory syndrome by mers-cov. 5 as of may 17, 2020, covid-19 infections occurred globally at more than 4,657,000 human cases and resulted in more than 312,000 human deaths according to the johns hopkins university. 6 the clinical symptoms of sars-cov-2 infection vary from mild to the onset of severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. many patients can be asymptomatic, greatly increasing the uncertainty of diagnosis. 7 a timely and accurate diagnosis of covid-19 is crucial for limiting further spread of the virus, particularly in people who are asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic, who can be responsible for community transmissions. 8 as wuhan accepted the timely prevention strategies of lockdown and curbing population flow, it controlled the spread of the pandemic effectively. nonetheless, there is still a risk of a second outbreak. therefore, knowing the situation of sars-cov-2 infection in the general population is necessary. this knowledge has a meaning for the control and prevention of covid-19 and epidemiological investigations, the determination of postdisease immunity and the use of future vaccine strategies.quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-qpcr) analysis for sars-cov-2 is the gold standard for covid-19 diagnosis. [9] [10] it is time-consuming and requires special equipment with skilled laboratory technicians and has the weakness that easily leads to false negatives for sars-cov-2. [9] [10] [11] we know sars-cov-2-specific antibodies appear around 3-10 days after infection, with igm appearing first and igg following around 14 days after infection. 12 even after the symptoms of infection disappear, igg can still show seropositivity. 13 therefore, sars-cov-2 serological assays are a good supplementary method for nucleic acid detection. 14 additionally, serological assays allow studying the immune response(s) to sars-cov-2 in a dynamic qualitative and quantitative manner. in addition, serological antibody assays can determine the precise rate of infection in an affected area or a certain population, estimate the cumulative incidence and infection fatality rate, and provide parameters for epidemiological models to assess the possible impact of specific interventions, thus guiding public health decision-making. furthermore, serological assays can be used to elucidate the geographic spread of the virus and identify subgroups of individuals who are more vulnerable to infection. last, the degree of protection of antibodies against sars-cov-2 infection or reinfection can be determined by serological assays. 15,16 therefore, testing for antibodies specific to sars-cov-2 protein could be an alternative method for rapid laboratory diagnosis with high sensitivity. 12 who recommends monitoring changes of seroprevalence over time, which is crucial at the beginning of an epidemic to anticipate and plan an adequate public health response. 9 at present, relatively few domestic and foreign reports exist on the diagnosis of patients with covid-19 using serological tests. thus, we conducted a retrospective study analyzing 18,391 medical all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. hubei province including igm and igg tests for   sars-cov-2 antibody, nucleic acid tests from march 26 to april 28, 2020 among people aged 16-64   years who went back to work.   current methods for measuring serum igm and igg mainly include enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, chemiluminescence enzyme immunoassays, lateral flow immunoassays (lfias), and fluorescence immunoassays. lfia specificity can reach about 99% with sensitivity from 80% to 86%.combined igg and igm tests seem to be better choices for sensitivity than measuring either antibody type alone. 17 in our study, the lfia method had a similar sensitivity and specificity for detecting sars-cov-2-specific antibodies. this study provides a reference for estimating the number of asymptomatic examples of covid-19, the transmission patterns of the virus, and pandemic prevention strategies.this was a cross-sectional, retrospective study to investigate seroprevalence in asymptomatic covid- a total of 17,608 people received nucleic acid tests, with one suspected as nucleic acid-positive, and positive for igg antibodies and negative for igm antibodies. among the 783 people without nucleic acid tests, 10 (1· 28%) were positive by antibody tests and the rest were negative (98· 7%).a total of 18,391 people met the inclusion criteria with a median age of 40·0 years with 11,177 (60· 8%) males with median age 42·0 years and 7,214 (39·2%) females with median age 37·0 years. clinical data were collected from march 26 to april 28, 2020, including serum igg positivity and igm positivity or negative results for sars-cov-2 antibodies, nucleic acid testing, clinical symptoms, previous medical history, and chest ct. sars-cov-2 antibody detection kits (colloidal gold method) were provided by innovita (tangshan, registration certificate for the medical devices of peoples republic of china: 20203400177). 18 all enrolled medical examiners collected 2 ml peripheral venous blood. after centrifugation, serum was taken for sars-cov-2-specific antibody igg and igm detection within 2 hours. nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs used for sars-cov-2 nucleic acid testing were collected by trained and qualified medical staff for performing nucleic acid tests within 2 hours. the automatic nucleic acid extraction instrument was provided by the hangzhou allsheng instruments co. ltd.(allsheng). the abi-7500 fluorescence pcr instrument was from thermo fisher scientific inc. all operations were carried out according to kit instructions. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. percentile) was used for non-normal distribution data. p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.to correct for the effects of gender and age structure, the seroprevalence of igm positivity, igg positivity, and igm and/or igg positivity were standardized according to the gender and age-specific population of wuhan in 2017 (attachment 2). 19 to correct for effects from accuracy of the serum antibody test, seroprevalence was corrected according to the sensitivity and specificity of the colloidal gold test in previous studies 13 following the rogan gladen methods. 20this study was approved by the ethics committee of the hubei provincial hospital of integrated chinese & western medicine. this was a retrospective and observational study and informed consent was obtained. table 1 shows the unadjusted and adjusted seroprevalence for igg and igm against sars-cov-2 in asymptomatic people aged 16 to 64 by gender. the unadjusted seroprevalence of igg in females was higher than in males and was significantly different (x 2 = 6·218, p < 0·05). the unadjusted seroprevalence of igm in females was slightly higher than in males, but was not significantly different (x 2 = 0·207, p > 0·05). when igg and igm positivity were analyzed together, the unadjusted seroprevalence of igg positivity and /or igm positivity in females was higher than in males and was significantly different (x 2 = 6·865, p < 0·01).after standardization according to the numbers of people of different ages and genders in the population of wuhan from the national census of 2017, the age-and gender-adjusted seroprevalence of igg was all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.16.20132423 doi: medrxiv preprint higher in females than in males and the differences were significant (x 2 = 2,060·3, p < 0·01). after adjusting for ages and genders, and assay sensitivity and specificity, including ci, the overall adjusted seroprevalence of igg was higher in females than in males. the difference between genders was significant (x 2 = 5,871·0, p < 0·01).the age-and gender-adjusted seroprevalence of igg positivity and /or igm positivity was higher in females than in males, and the difference was significant (x 2 = 979·26, p < 0·01).after adjusting for ages and genders, and assay type, the overall adjusted serum rate for igg and /or igm antibodies was 2·80 (95% ci: 2·56-3·04%) with 2·40 (95% ci: 2·11-2·68) for males and 3·23 (95% ci:2·82-3·64) for females. numbers were higher for females than males, and the difference was significant table 2 . a significant difference was seen in seroprevalence of igg among people from different units (x 2 = 198·44, p < 0·01), with no significant difference for igm (x 2 =28·124, p>0·05), and a significant difference for igg positivity and /or igm positivity (x 2 = 200·21, p < 0·01). among the tested individuals, the seroprevalence of igg was highest for those who voluntarily came for examinations, followed by those reinforced by their work units, including real estate property companies, urban construction companies, telecommunications companies, banks, securities and insurance companies, law firms, and procuratorates. a significant difference was seen in seroprevalence of igg by urban area (x 2 = all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.16.20132423 doi: medrxiv preprint 43·660, p < 0· 01), with no significant difference for igm (x 2 = 14·783, p > 0·05), and a significant difference for igg and/or igm (x 2 = 45·110, p < 0·01). the wuchang and jianghan districts had higher seroprevalences of igg than other urban areas.detection of asymptomatic or subclinical novel human coronavirus sars-cov-2 infections is critical for understanding the overall prevalence and infection potential of covid-19 21 according to a study in denmark, 9,496 blood donors (17-69 years old) who gave blood during april 6-17, 2020 were tested for sars-cov-2 igm and igg antibodies using a commercial lateral flow test. the seroprevalence adjusted for assay sensitivity and specificity was 1·7% (ci: 0·9-2·3%), and differed by region. 22 a similar cross-sectional study conducted in japan had an igg seroprevalence of 3·3% (95% ci: 2·3-4·6%) using 1,000 samples from patients at outpatient settings. after adjusting for ages and genders, the igg seroprevalence was 2·7% (95% ci: 1·8-3·9%), and the estimated number of infections was 396 to 858 times the number of confirmed cases at the time. 23 the seroprevalence estimated in our study was adjusted by age and gender, and then for assay sensitivity and specificity, which was comparable to the studies in japan and denmark, but lower than preliminary findings for iran of 22%, new york city of around 14%, italy of 10%, and germany of 14%. [24] [25] [26] [27] all these studies indicated that the number of asymptomatic infections was much higher than the number of confirmed cases reported based on pcr results.our study found that the number of new infections was reduced by 64· 8% to a relatively lower level of 1·46 (95% ci: 0·93-1·98%) of the igg seroprevalence among the urban population aged 16-64 years on (attachment 2). of note, the officially reported number included people under age 16 and over age 64, yet was lower than the calculated number in this study, implicating underestimation due to omitted detection of asymptomatic infections. data from a detailed surveillance study from the chinese center for disease control and prevention indicates that 80% of confirmed cases were mild, and a number of patients can remain asymptomatic with very low symptomatology. 28 thus, epidemiological studies of asymptomatic infections should receive sufficient attention. some studies find an average level of igg antibodies that is higher in females than in males. 29 in our all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.16.20132423 doi: medrxiv preprint study, the igg seroprevalence was higher in females than in males, indicating that women were more likely to have asymptomatic infections.people living or working in the wuchang and jianghan districts had a higher igg seroprevalence of 4·60 (95% ci:3·21-5·99) and 4·18 (95% ci:3·80-4·56) respectively than people from other districts of wuhan in our study. based on the cumulative number of reported cases of covid-19 and the number of residents in each district in wuhan on march 25 and april 28, we estimated an average incidence rate per 100,000 people of 2·98 (95% ci: 2·97-2·99) during this period. incidence rates were higher in the jianghan and wuchang districts, at 8·09 (95% ci: 8·02-8·15) and 7·25 (95% ci: 7·20-7·29) per 100,000 people, respectively, which were the same as our regional distribution analyses (attachment 2).our study found significant differences in igg seroprevalence among people going back to work by types of jobs, with the highest seroprevalence in volunteer medical examinees who came for tests without a mandate from their job supervisors. these self-motivated individuals had close contacts with covid-19 patients, and therefore, had a higher risk of infection. other individuals with high igg seroprevalence were easy to identify due to the nature of their jobs. they undertook substantial voluntary work in response to government calls during the covid-19 pandemic, to assist in, for instance, administering in the local residential communities, transporting covid-19 patients, and screening the general population for epidemic incidence. thus, they faced a greater chance of contacting infected people during their work, and were more likely to be infected, even with personal protection.this study had a few limitations. first, this study had selection bias since the analyzed medical records were based on examinees directed by their work units. most of the examinees came from governmentowned institutions and agencies instead of private businesses. therefore, the sample was incompletely randomized and insufficiently representative, compromising the assessment accuracy of the prevalence of asymptomatic infections in wuhan. second, as the examinees were only from the back-to-work population, people under age 16 and over age 64 were not covered in analyses. therefore, we could not estimate covid-19 in these two groups. our study provides information to herd immunity investigation to help design targeted strategies for prevention. research on serological antibodies has great value for covid-19 prevention. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. previous studies following the rogan gladen methods, to correct for effects from accuracy of the serum antibody test. according to the rogan gladen methods, p=(t + β -1)/(α + β -1), in which p is adjusted seroprevalence, α is sensitivity of the antibody test (colloidal gold method ), β is specificity of the antibody test by colloidal gold method, t is age-and gender-adjusted seroprevalence or positive test frequency. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. n is the total number of individuals, n1 is the number of igg-positive individuals, n2 is the number of igm-positive individuals, n3 is the number of iggpositive or igm-positive. real estate includes real estate agencies, residential property management firms, and urban construction corporations.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 19, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.16.20132423 doi: medrxiv preprintthe severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov2) epidemic, which causes the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , was first reported in december 2019 in wuhan,china [1] , and it has since been declared a pandemic by the world health organization. the ongoing outbreak is a global threat to human health. quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-qpcr) analysis for sars-cov2 is considered the gold standard for diagnosing . rt-qpcr has been used to analyze specimens from the upper and lower respiratory tracts for clinical diagnosis during outbreaks of other diseases, but it has not been performed widely in the clinical setting because it requires special equipment, a time-consuming protocol, and highly skilled laboratory technicians. in addition, because rt-qpcr requires samples from the upper and lower respiratory tracts, the process of collecting samples and extracting rna increases the risk of exposure to viral droplets. therefore, an alternative diagnostic test to rt-qpcr is desirable for the clinical management of covid- 19. in studies conducted in china, chest computed tomography (ct) scans were widely utilized as a diagnostic tool for covid-19 [2] [3] [4] . lung involvement can be detected in patients with covid-19 on a ct scan in advance of the symptoms typical for pneumonia [5] and a positive result on rt-qpcr [6, 7] . the common radiological characteristics of covid-19 pneumonia on chest ct have a diagnostic sensitivity of 73%-93% and a specificity of 24%-100% in distinguishing covid-19 from other forms of viral pneumonia [2, 8] . an immunochromatographic (ic) assay for igm and igg antibodies against the virus is widely accepted as a point-of-care test because it is an easy-to-perform, rapid, and high-throughput method for diagnosing viral infections. recently, several commercial ic assays that detect igm/igg antibodies against sars-cov2 have become available for use in the clinical setting. however, their clinical usefulness has yet to be thoroughly evaluated.here, we describe the clinical performance of an ic assay in comparison with that of chest ct.patients with covid-19 and their clinical specimens j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f patients with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 who were referred to the self-defense forces central hospital and saitama medical university hospital in japan from february 11 to march 31, 2020 were enrolled in this study. all patients were examined by rt-qpcr for sars-cov2 using pharyngeal and nasopharyngeal swabs collected at public health institutes or hospitals in accordance with the nationally recommended method in japan [9] . chest ct was performed on the day of admission. serum specimens were collected on the day of admission and during hospitalization. clinical information was collected from the medical records. the ct findings were evaluated by a radiologist to determine the specific features caused by covid-19 [2] .to evaluate the analytical specificity of the ic assay, we used serum samples collected from patients at saitama medical university hospital, japan, from april to october 2019, before sars-cov2 was first reported in china. clinical information was collected from the medical records, and all serum samples were stored at −80°c before use in the ic assay.asymptomatic cases were defined as patients with no history of clinical signs or symptoms. symptomatic cases were defined as patients showing the clinical symptoms of covid-19: fever, cough, nasal discharge, diarrhea, malaise, dyspnea, tachypnea, peripheral capillary oxygen saturation <93%, and need for oxygen therapy. the day of onset was defined as the first day of symptoms caused by covid-19 in the symptomatic patients or the day of the first positive rt-qpcr result for upper respiratory specimens in the asymptomatic patients. the study design and protocol were reviewed and approved by the institutional review igm and igg antibodies for sars-cov2 could be detected by the ic assay. in total, 139 serum samples were collected from 112 patients with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 and were used as positive controls for the ic assay in this study. the medium period from onset to serum collection was 6 days (interquartile range [iqr], 3-13 days). the results of the ic assay for serum specimens are shown in table 1 in ic assays of the 48 non-covid-19 serum specimens collected before the emergence of sars-cov2 infection, 1 specimen from a patient with sjogren's syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis showed a false-positive result for igm antibody. thus, the specificity of the ic assay was calculated to be 98.0%.clinical background of the 112 patients hospitalized due to covid-19 in this study are shown in table 2 table 3 shows the results of the ic assay and chest ct for the patients on admission. when the sensitivity of the ic assay was 17.0% (9/53) within 1 week, 33.3% (4/12) within 1-2 weeks, and 100.0% (9/9) within >2 weeks after onset. of the 74 symptomatic patients, chest ct detected the radiographical patterns of covid-19 in 55 (74.3%) patients on admission. the corresponding sensitivity of chest ct was 73.3% (39/53 patients), 66.7% (8/12), and 88.9% (8/9). when the combination of ic assay and chest ct was used for diagnosis in symptomatic covid-19 patients, the corresponding sensitivity was 81.1% (43/53 patients), 75.0% (9/12), and 100% (9/9).here, we presented the analytical results of a commercial ic assay and findings of chest ct scans for patients with covid-19. although the ic assay showed high sensitivity for samples collected >2 weeks after symptom onset, it was less sensitive for patients who developed symptomatic covid-19 within 1 week. chest ct showed higher sensitivity than the ic assay for the diagnosis of covid-19, but it did not show the specific radiological features of covid-19 in 18.3% of symptomatic patients. nevertheless, the combination of ic assay and chest ct slightly increased the diagnostic sensitivity for covid-19.based on previous enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) results for igm and igg antibodies, only 38.3% of patients were positive for igm antibody within the first week after onset.the detection of igm and igg antibodies increased rapidly from day 15 after onset (igm = 94.3%and igg = 79.8%) [10] . our ic assay results support these previous findings that seroconversion mainly occurred >2 weeks after onset [10] . the clinical usefulness of serological tests for covid-19 remains controversial due to the time lag between the onset of symptoms and the appearance of igm and igg antibodies in serum. in china and the united states, the sensitivity and specificity of serological tests for samples initially collected from hospitalized patients were 38.3%-85.4% and 100% [10] [11] [12] for elisa and 18.4%-88.7% and 90.6%-91.7% for ic assay [13, 14] , respectively. this contradiction probably reflects differences in the timing of sampling because the clinical setting j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f varies in each country. in the clinical setting, patients are usually diagnosed with covid-19 within 2 weeks because they develop dyspnea and pneumonia at a median of 8 days (iqr, 5.0-13.0 days) after symptom onset [1] . in this study, the median time from onset to hospitalization was 5 days (iqr, 2-7 days), which is shorter than in previous studies (median 7-15 days) [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . additionally, only 29.7% of patients were diagnosed using ic assay alone, supporting the cassaniti et al.'s conclusion that the sensitivity of ic assays remains insufficient for their use as a clinical diagnostic tool [14] .therefore, unfortunately, the ic assay alone cannot replace rt-qpcr as an acute diagnostic protocol for covid-19, at least in the clinical setting in japan. however, the ic assay can be used for epidemiological studies of the seroprevalence of igm and igg antibodies against sars-cov2.previous studies have shown that the sensitivity of ct among symptomatic patients was high (73%-97%), although specificity differed widely (24%-100%) [7, 8, 15, 16] . the clinical performance of ct may vary according to differences in patient populations, disease severity, and accessibility to chest ct scans in each country. in the present study, chest ct showed higher sensitivity than the ic assay, but sensitivity was only 73.3% among the symptomatic patients who tested positive for sars-cov2 according to rt-qpcr. bernheim et al. reported that the sensitivity of chest ct was low (44%) in the acute phase (0-2 days after onset) but high (91%) in the intermediate phase (3-5 days) [16] . the low sensitivity of chest ct may reflect the short period of time between symptom onset to hospitalization in the symptomatic patients examined in this study.the diagnostic sensitivity was improved by combining the ic assay and chest ct (81.3%). in the present study, we did not evaluate the specificity of chest ct, but taking the high specificity of the ic assay into consideration, combining the ic assay and chest ct was considered to improve the diagnostic specificity as well. when rt-qpcr is not available or practical, the combination may be useful for diagnosing covid-19.the identification of asymptomatic patients with covid-19 is important to prevent nosocomial infection. the average incubation period of covid-19 is 5.2 days [17] but ranges from j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 0 to 24 days [15] . it has also been reported that patients hospitalized with other diseases who did not show respiratory symptoms developed symptomatic covid-19 and they spread sars-cov2 to other patients and medical workers [18] . also, the transmission of sars-cov2 from patients without respiratory symptoms has been reported in several countries [19] [20] [21] . in the present study, chest ct showed higher sensitivity than the ic assay (57.9% vs. 39.5%, respectively), but it is not practical to perform chest ct for all hospitalized patients because of radiation exposure risk and limited medical resources [22] . although the ic assay alone may not be useful as a screening test for asymptomatic covid-19 due to its low sensitivity, it may contribute to the prevention of nosocomial infection.a major limitation of this study was the low number of patients. in addition, only one commercial ic kit was evaluated. the commercial ic assay verified to have the best performance in the clinical setting should be chosen for further studies. multicenter, multi-national, prospective studies are warranted to determine the usefulness of ic assays and chest ct for diagnosing covid-19.the sensitivity of the ic assay was low during the early phase in asymptomatic and symptomatic patients. therefore, ic assay alone is not recommended for initial diagnostic testing for covid-19. when rt-qpcr cannot be used, the combination of chest ct and ic assay may be useful for diagnosing covid-19.the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interests.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f within healthy subjects, the upper respiratory tract fosters a complex, commensal microbiome. 1, 2 however, introduction of a foreign bacterial or viral organism into the microbiologic community may disrupt normal intercellular relationships resulting in an imbalanced ecosystem. [1] [2] [3] the detailed mechanisms that drive these complex interactions are largely unknown; consequently, it is difficult to predict the behavior of this highly nonlinear system. downstream consequences can be influenced by activities of other organisms, use of antimicrobials, or the host's immune response. 1 in immunocompromised subjects, such as neonates, elderly adults, and patients undergoing chemotherapy, the addition of an unfamiliar pathogen can offset the delicate equilibrium and increase the likelihood of pathogenic invasion. 2 in individuals with functional immune systems, internalized microbes are eliminated, whereas noninternalized pathogens can thrive within the respiratory microbiome, thereby using their hosts as vectors. however, these asymptomatic individuals can still pose a threat of transmitting the potentially pathogenic agent to at-risk subjects.target enriched multiplex polymerase chain reaction (tem-pcr; diatherix laboratories, huntsville, al) simultaneously detects 22 viral serotypes and 19 bacterial species that often inhabit the upper respiratory tract. this multiplex assay is performed from a single patient specimen and has high levels of specificity and sensitivity (table 1) . little is known about the colonization rates of respiratory pathogens in asymptomatic adult subjects, especially for viruses. here, we describe the frequency and seasonal variation of bacterial and viral detections in asymptomatic health care professionals (hcps) during the winter and summer months of 2014. seasonal variation of infectious disease rates is a common phenomenon that is clearly manifested when temperatures are at extremes; consequently, there may be seasonality of colonization levels and commensal relationships of pathogens in asymptomatic individuals. 4 by elucidating changes in pathogen colonization rates in asymptomatic hcps during different time periods in the year, health care organizations can monitor which potentially pathogenic agents are most prevalent in carriers in a health care setting and observe correlations with infection levels in at-risk hospitalized patients. 5 new mechanisms of pathogen transmission can be hypothesized and tested, which could be potentially important in a clinical setting and have a positive effect on infection control practices.two hundred hcps, consisting of 100 during the winter and 100 during the summer, from huntsville hospital (huntsville, al) were tested for the presence of respiratory pathogens via tem-pcr. hcp categories included medical students, nurses (intensive care unit and general patient care), physicians, and residents. pertinent histories, including recent upper respiratory symptoms and antibiotic use, were obtained. all 200 hcps were asymptomatic for a minimum of 4 weeks before samples were taken. each hcp completed a questionnaire that evaluated their respiratory status. questionnaires were reviewed by physicians at huntsville hospital, and it was determined that none of the subjects likely had current infections during specimen collection intervals. none of the physicians who participated in the study reviewed the surveys. eligibility criteria required hcps be free of respiratory symptoms for at least 4 weeks prior to specimen collection and agree to provide a nasopharyngeal specimen for testing. nasopharyngeal specimens were collected in 2014 during january-february and june-july, representing the winter and summer observations, respectively. specimens were sent via courier to diatherix laboratories. results were sent to the study coordinator at huntsville hospital within 24 hours of sample receipt, and study participants were notified of the results.nucleic acid extraction for tem-pcr was performed using a kingfisher system (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma). the amplification steps were completed using a geneamp pcr system 9700 thermal cycler (applied biosystems, thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma). probe fluorescence was read using a sensospot flair system (sensovation, radolfzell am bodensee, germany). a more detailed description of specimen collection and transport conditions, tem-pcr technology, and analytical validation of the assay are included in the supplemental data.all tem-pcr results were organized and extracted from a reporting database at diatherix laboratories using microsoft sql .the 100 hcps tested during the 2014 winter months consisted of 18 medical students, 33 nurses, 6 physicians, and 43 residents. the 100 hcps tested during the 2014 summer months consisted of 16 medical students, 47 nurses, 5 physicians, and 32 residents. the 2 sample groups were nonoverlapping. prior to the 4-week asymptomatic period, 34 of the 200 subjects had symptoms of a respiratory illness, and 14 of the 200 received antibiotic treatment. a more detailed description of the subject sample is shown in table 2 . figure 2 displays a summary of the respiratory pathogen detection percentage partitioned by profession and season. in the winter, residents represented the subset of hcps with the largest frequency of colonization because 26 (60.5%) of the 43 were positive for at least 1 bacterial or nonbacterial pathogen. however, the highest proportion of viruses was seen in nurses because 7 (21.2%) of the 33 tested were detected with coronavirus. in the summer, as in winter, residents had the highest frequency of detection because 14 (43.8%) of the 32 tested were positive for at least 1 pathogen. nurses exhibited a slightly lower level of colonization because 19 (46.3%) of the 41 had at least 1 pathogen detection. figure 3 characterizes all of the hcps in both seasons that had a codetection for 2 genetic targets. a larger number of subjects exhibited codetections during the winter because 12 (25.5%) of the 47 subjects were detected with 2 genetic targets. of the 19 positive detections for mrsa, 4 (21.1%) were positive for the panton-valentine leukocidin (pvl) cytotoxin gene, which represented the highest frequency of simultaneously detected genetic targets. eight (30.8%) of the 26 residents had >1 detection. in the summer, 1 resident had 3 bacterial detections, whereas no hcps in the winter exhibited >2 detections.supplemental figures s1 and s2 display the detection percentage aggregated by sex and season and age groups and season, respectively. men had a marginally higher frequency of detection because 16 (51.6%) of 31 in the winter and 19 (52.8%) of 36 in the summer had at least 1 pathogen detection. in the winter, the 30-40 years age bracket had the highest percentage of detection because 16 (55.2%) of the 29 hcps tested were positive for at least 1 bacterium or virus. in the summer, 19 (52.8%) of 36 subjects in the 20-30 years age bracket had the largest percentage of pathogen detection. figure 2 and supplemental figures s1 and s2 present data as a percentage of positive detection out of total tests given to a specific profession, sex, or age during each season. supplemental tables s1-s3 display the number of positive detections and number of tests given.during the winter, hcov was detected in 11 of the 100 asymptomatic hcps. one study reported results comparable with the 11% hcov detection frequency found in hcps at huntsville hospital. 6 taiwan and found that 25 (11.5%) were colonized with sars-cov. 6 the nosocomial spread of sars-cov in large hospitals was a major epidemic feature during early stages of the outbreak, but this problem was resolved after hospitals isolated all symptomatic patients and asymptomatic hcps detected with sars-cov. 7 all 11 detections for hcov at huntsville hospital also came from frontline asymptomatic hcps, predominantly nurses. observations from this study and the ho et al study suggest that coronavirus could possibly be spread from infected patients to frontline hcps through close contact or via contaminated droplets, but further studies are needed to substantiate this hypothesis. m catarrhalis exhibited seasonal variation because 11 hcps tested in the winter were positive, but all subjects were negative in the summer. the presence of m catarrhalis was unexpected because colonization usually only occurs in children, and only 3% of healthy adults are colonized. 8 the high winter detection frequency of m catarrhalis observed could be a result of the temperaturedependent characteristics of the organism. at lower temperatures, the speed of transcription and abundance of mrna transcripts increases, m catarrhalis grows and divides at a more rapid rate, and the organism's pathogenic behavior has a higher probability of being activated. 9,10 m catarrhalis can live commensally for extended periods; therefore, the incubation time of this organism is not well defined. however, m catarrhalis can become pathogenic in subjects with compromised immune systems or in subjects that have experienced nasopharyngeal stress, such as patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 11 as a result, it may be valuable to determine which hcps are colonized with m catarrhalis and determine whether there is a correlation with infection rates in at-risk patients. 12 s aureus and mrsa were frequently detected in both winter and summer. the high prevalence of healthy subjects colonized with s aureus and mrsa has been well described. 13 commonly, s aureus and mrsa act as commensals of the upper respiratory tract, but if a patient is immunocompromised, a potentially fatal infection can develop. as a result, many hospitals implement s aureus and mrsa infection reduction protocols and use active surveillance programs to decolonize patients before admission or surgery. 14 s aureus and mrsa also attack the lower respiratory tract where organisms are often parasitic and cause bacterial pneumonia. 15 in this study, 4 hcps in the winter and 1 hcp in the summer were colonized by pvl-positive mrsa. pvl is a potent cytotoxin produced by s aureus that causes necrotizing pneumonia with a high mortality rate. 16 many hospitals have already implemented decolonization procedures for patients colonized with s aureus and mrsa, but future studies could support the decolonization of asymptomatic hcps.k pneumoniae was the only organism that demonstrated a substantially higher frequency of colonization in the summer. summer detection was anticipated because the prevalence of k pneumoniae infections, especially bloodstream infections, increases during the summer. 17, 18 the seasonal variation in k pneumoniae colonization is not well understood. it has been reported that higher rates of k pneumoniae colonization are primarily related to the use of antibiotics. here, only 1 (14.3%) of the 7 hcps that were colonized with k pneumoniae recently received antibiotics. 19 k pneumoniae can be easily and rapidly transmitted to immunocompromised patients from the hands of contaminated hcps. 5 similar to pvl-positive s aureus and mrsa, k pneumoniae can also infect to the lower respiratory tract causing abnormalities such as bulging interlobar fissures, cavitary abscesses, and necrotizing pneumonia. 20, 21 as a result, detecting and decolonizing the carriers of k pneumoniae could have a positive impact on reducing high-risk transmission and hospital-acquired infections during the summer, particularly in patients with comorbidities.there are only a small number of studies reporting the detection frequency of viruses, particularly in asymptomatic adults, which makes it difficult to compare our results with other findings. five different viruses, including adenovirus, coronavirus, rhinovirus, coxsackievirus-echovirus, and pandemic influenza a h1n1-09, were detected at least once in either or both seasons. there are few studies that investigate the effects of viral colonization or coinfections in the upper respiratory tract. previous reports show that the prevalence of viral pathogens may increase bacterial colonization and risk of infection in the nasopharynx. 22 in addition, 1 study proposed a colonization-competition model for rna viruses and predicted that low-virulence strains initially colonize human cells and then competitive, high-virulence strains prime the nasopharynx for infection. 23 multiplex polymerase chain reaction technology can help add to these models and better define the unknown mechanisms of colonization and infection of viral pathogens.one property of tem-pcr is that it amplifies dna or rna of both viable and nonviable organisms. presumably, many of the hcps in this study had respiratory diseases long before this study and could be conveying nucleic acid remnants that were detected by tem-pcr. the 4-week clearance period (as previously described in the methods section) was intended to reduce the likelihood of this possible false detection; however, the half-life of nucleic acid fragments in this setting is not known. it is almost certain that rna remnants degrade more quickly than dna. 24 in the winter, a larger proportion of hcps had prior respiratory symptoms, which may have been responsible for the higher frequency of pathogens detected in this season. further testing methods, such as culture, would need to be conducted to discriminate between nucleic acid remnants and viable microorganisms. it is also possible that the high sensitivity of multiplex polymerase chain reaction detected recent invader cells that would later cause disease in the hcp. however, for the purposes of this study, we do not discriminate between long-standing colonies and recent invader cells because both scenarios can plausibly spread pathogens to at-risk patients.this study examined a moderately sized sample, and the proportions of professions, sexes, and ages varied during each season. in addition, medical students, physicians, and residents worked in diverse sections of the hospital, but nurses only worked in either the intensive care unit or the general population. a larger proportion of nurses tested during both seasons worked in the intensive care unit (26 [78.8%] in the winter, 29 [61.7%] in the summer), which could have been the reason for moderately high pathogen detection frequency in this subset. information was unavailable to determine the proportion of time each hcp treated patients while wearing a mask. not wearing masks would increase the likelihood of transmission from patient to hcp and vice versa. even though this study focuses on hcp colonization, the identification and management of all possible pathogen reservoirs, such as health care surfaces, equipment, and colonized visitors, are also important for preventing the spread of infection in a clinical setting. 5 nevertheless, the utilization of a sensitive and specific multiplexing nucleic acid assay is valuable because the assay detects multiple viral and bacterial pathogens simultaneously in asymptomatic subjects. colonization of viral pathogens needs substantially greater understanding, and defining the unknown colonization and infection potential of these upper respiratory organisms is important. this preliminary observational study explores the prevalence of colonization of various pathogens at 2 different points in the year, and if validated with larger follow-up studies, this information could be ultimately relevant in the clinic. determining correlations between levels of hcp colonization and at-risk patient infection rates could assist in defining novel transmission pathways. in turn, hospital protocols could be altered so that colonized hcps and at-risk patient interactions could be managed, threat of transmission could be minimized, and infection control protocols could be optimized.since 2012, the epidemiology of cases of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) infection reported to the world health organization (who) has been characterized largely by recurrent zoonotic spillover from the known animal reservoir-dromedary camels-and human-to-human transmission in health-care settings (1) . outbreaks in health-care settings on occasion have resulted in large outbreaks (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) . of the 2,260 cases (including 803 deaths) reported to who, 83% of cases have been reported in the kingdom of saudi arabia (10) .the clinical presentation of mers-cov infection ranges from asymptomatic to severe respiratory illness, with approximately 35.5% of cases resulting in death (1) . the role of asymptomatic or subclinical infections in human-tohuman transmission of mers-cov is not well understood, but there is evidence that laboratory-confirmed mers-cov infection in patients who are reported as asymptomatic may be transmitted to other individuals (11) .for many novel infectious pathogens, surveillance initially focuses on individuals with disease who seek care at health-care facilities, which undoubtedly underestimates the true prevalence of infection, because it will not account for mild or asymptomatic infections not requiring medical care. detailed outbreak investigations often include laboratory testing of close contacts and of health-care workers (hcws), regardless of symptoms, and specialized serological investigations will include individuals thought to be at higher risk of infection, such as hcws or those with occupational exposure to animal reservoirs. estimates of the true prevalence of infection of high-risk pathogens are important to understand the populations required for vaccine candidates or specific therapeutic treatments as and when they become available. in addition, the role of subclinical or asymptomatic infection is critical in understanding chains of transmission missed by surveillance systems. for mers-cov, asymptomatic infection has been reported to who, but the possibility of transmission prior to symptom onset is critical for recommending effective infection prevention and control measures and for reducing secondary mers-cov transmission.the role of asymptomatic infections in transmission of other respiratory viruses has been investigated previously. highly pathogenic avian influenza h5n1 rna, for example, has been detected by polymerase chain reaction (pcr) from asymptomatic family contacts of ill patients, suggesting the possibility for onward transmission, even in the absence of symptoms (12) (13) (14) (15) . for severe acute respiratory syndrome cov, limited transmission to close contacts before symptom onset or hospitalization has been found in transmissionrisk studies outside health-care settings, whereas human-tohuman transmission within health-care settings was higher, likely due to higher viral load in hospitalized patients and more frequent exposure to the virus among hcws (16) (17) (18) .here, we have reviewed available evidence of the extent of subclinical and asymptomatic infection of mers-cov stratified by evaluating studies in which infection within and outside of health-care settings has been measured, and the potential role of onward human-to-human transmission from asymptomatic cases.we conducted a literature search in pubmed and embase databases for observational epidemiologic studies of laboratory-confirmed mers-cov infection using the following search terms: "mers-cov" or "mers" and "seroprevalence" or "prevalence" or "serological" or "infection" or "asymptomatic." additional studies were identified through consultation with the who mers technical network and in the bibliography of a related recently published review (19) . publications in english dated before november 15, 2019, were considered, with no additional restrictions on year of publication. we assessed the titles and abstracts of identified studies to determine their eligibility for inclusion in the study. we stratified our analyses to evaluate subclinical and/or asymptomatic infection identified inside and outside health-care facilities. for descriptive analysis of who case-based data, we used the ggplot2 in r, version 3.4.2.0 (r foundation for statistical computing, vienna, austria.).for mers-cov infections studied outside health-care settings, we included studies in which evidence of mers-cov infection was reported, using molecular and/or serolog-ical methods in either individuals with occupational exposure to dromedary camels; familial, occupational, or social contacts of patients with confirmed mers outside of healthcare settings; the general population; or through national mers surveillance records, when published. eligible studies included reporting of the number of individuals tested and the number with molecular or serological evidence of mers-cov infection.to evaluate mers-cov infections studied within healthcare settings, we included studies in which the authors reported evidence of mers-cov infection, using molecular and/or serological methods among hcw and among non-hcw contacts (e.g., family contacts) of confirmed mers cases treated in health care settings.for each eligible study, we extracted information on the year of publication, the year biological samples were collected, the country in which the study was conducted, the number of individuals tested, characteristics of the individuals tested, and the total number of confirmed mers-cov infections by molecular or serological assay. asymptomatic mers-cov infection was considered a laboratoryconfirmed infection with no reported symptoms at the time of sampling.in addition, we evaluated the symptomatic profile and place of reporting among laboratory-confirmed mers-cov infections reported to who from september 2012 to november 27, 2018. within who databases, cases are classified as primary cases if they were reported as such by the reporting member state; if direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels or dromedary products was reported in the case; and/or the exposures were under investigation without known contact with a patient with probable or confirmed mers. cases were classified as secondary cases due to human-to-human transmission if the patient reported recent direct contact with a patient known to have mers-cov infection and/or were identified as a household, occupational, or hcw contact of a patient known to have mers-cov infection.in total, we identified 43 studies in which mers-cov infections measured by serology and/or molecular testing were reported; 23 focused on individuals with exposures outside of health-care settings (4, 7, 11, (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) , and 20 focused on individuals with exposures inside health-care facilities (5, 7, 29, 32, (40) (41) (42) (43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) . the selection of identified and included studies is shown in figure 1 .the 23 studies in which mers-cov infections were measured by serology and/or molecular testing outside of health-care settings are described in table 1 . the majority of studies focused on measuring seroprevalence of mers-cov in individuals with occupational exposure to dromedaries in the middle east and africa (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) .in the largest seroprevalence study conducted to date, 0.1% seroprevalence was calculated among general population samples collected in 2012-2013, 2% seroprevalence among shepherds of dromedaries, and 4% seroprevalence among slaughterhouse workers (37) . additional estimates of seroprevalence among occupational high-risk populations ranged from 0% to 67%, with seropositivity being detected in kingdom of saudi arabia, qatar, and kenya, and from 0% to 54% among contacts of patients with confirmed mers in household settings largely in countries of the middle east. within these studies, the majority of infections detected by serology appeared to be asymptomatic. within these studies, a high proportion of seropositive camel workers reported no symptoms (80%-100% among seropositive individuals).the 20 studies in which mers-cov infections were measured by serology and/or molecular testing within health-care settings are listed in table 2 and include studies of hcws and close contacts of patients with confirmed infection. the largest molecular and serological studies among hcws were conducted among 1,695 and 1,169 hcws in kingdom of saudi arabia (32) and the republic of korea (40), respectively; the authors reported evidence of infection of 1% and 1.5%, respectively. infection was more frequent among hcws who did not use personal protective equipment when in contact with a patient with mers (40) .since 2012, 298 of the 2,274 laboratory-confirmed cases (13.1%) reported to who have been reported as asymptomatic at the time of reporting, 164 of these patients were hcws. the demographic characteristics and clinical presentation of primary and secondary cases of mers-cov infection are listed in table 3 . there were significantly more asymptomatic cases reported among secondary cases (n = 266 of 1,094; 24.3%) than among primary cases (n = 9 of 642 (1.4%); p < 0.001). overall, no deaths were reported among patients with asymptomatic infections. figure 2 shows the epidemic curve of mers-cov infections reported to who stratified by hcws and non-hcws. of the 414 mers-cov infections among hcws that were reported to who, 164 (39.6%) were reported to be asymptomatic.we found 4 studies that documented the duration of viral shedding from asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic individuals (55) (56) (57) (58) . among asymptomatic, pcr-positive mers-cov infections, positive reverse transcriptase (rt)-pcr results were reported from the day of initial testing for as long as 28-42 days (55-58).we found 1 study in which molecular and serological evidence of possible secondary transmission from asymptomatic individuals was reported (11) . the study was conducted as part of an investigation of 12 household contacts, in whom upper respiratory tract samples from 7 were pcr positive and an additional 5 samples were seropositive using recombinant immunofluorescence or plaque reduction neutralization test (11) . eleven of these 12 individuals reported no symptoms at the time of sampling; this information, combined with epidemiologic data, indicated these people could have been involved in asymptomatic transmission within households. we found 9 studies that described molecular evidence of mers-cov infection among asymptomatic individuals in health-care settings (7, 32, 42, 43, 45, 46, 50, 51, 53) . infectivity of an asymptomatic hcw infected with mers-cov was investigated in 1 study, but no evidence was found of secondary transmission to 82 hcws with contact to the hcw with mers-cov infection (44) .in this review, we found 43 studies in which molecular and/or serological evidence of mers-cov infection was reported. outside of health-care settings, the evidence of mers-cov infection has largely been focused on individuals with occupational exposure to dromedaries. the results to date are heterogenous, and although attempts have been made to evaluate mers-cov genetic diversity (59, 60) , the differences in seroprevalence results to date likely reflect differences in the selection and characteristics of dromedary herds and humans tested. the available evidence of the mers-cov epidemiologic and genetic characteristics does not suggest there are differences in the virus's ability to infect humans. evidence supports that individuals with occupational exposure to dromedaries have higher rates of seroprevalence compared with household contacts of patients with confirmed mers-cov infection, likely reflecting more intense, unprotected exposures to mers-cov through dromedary secretions (61) . that these individuals have subclinical infection and do not develop disease is likely because those with occupational exposure tend to be younger and healthier, without underlying high-risk conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and renal failure. variations in the seroprevalence rates by study are also likely due to variations in methodologies, including the timing of sample collection, serologic assays used, and interpretation of assay results.although the majority of human mers-cov infections have been reported to who from countries in the arabian peninsula, particularly kingdom of saudi arabia, there is increasing evidence of infection in dromedary camels in herds throughout africa and south asia (62) . additional serological and molecular epidemiology studies at the dromedary-human interface using a standardized approach and consistent methodology, in the arabian peninsula and in africa and south asia, are needed to further understand this observed heterogeneity-that is, whether the observed differences in evidence of infection outside health-care settings may be attributable to genetic variation of the virus across different geographic regions and/or to factors and behaviors in human populations in these regions, which may change the susceptibility to infection. who is currently supporting studies underway in several countries in the middle east, africa, and south asia in which the extent of infection in occupationally exposed persons is being evaluated . the results of such studies can contribute to better understanding the geographic reach of mers-cov in dromedaries and humans.within health-care settings, the detection of asymptomatic, pcr-positive infection has been reported to who from affected member states and also documented in 10 health published studies. although onward transmission was not investigated in those studies, the researchers did capture evidence of rna shedding, which suggests human-tohuman transmission is possible from individuals with no signs or symptoms of infection. this is supported by evidence documenting duration of viral shedding beyond 3 weeks in patients with subclinical mers-cov infection (55) (56) (57) (58) . at the same time, the evidence for acute, asymptomatic mers-cov infection described in this review does not represent the full extent of subclinical infection. asymptomatic contacts clear the virus more quickly than do symptomatic patients (58) and antibody titers in the former are likely to be lower, if they seroconvert at all, than in infected patients exhibiting symptoms (63) . timely and repeated biological specimen collection is needed to capture viral shedding and antibody kinetics of symptomatic and asymptomatic contacts (11) . this can be achieved if all high-risk contacts of patients with confirmed mers-cov infection are identified during an outbreak and then tested using molecular and serologic laboratory assays, regardless of whether the individual exhibits symptoms. in outbreak settings, without the inclusion of testing of all contacts, the identification of chains of transmission may be incomplete.indeed, the latest who surveillance guidelines recommend that all contacts of patients with laboratoryconfirmed mers outside of health care facilities should be placed under active surveillance for 14 days after the last exposure to the confirmed case and that any contacts with symptoms of respiratory illness should be tested for mers-cov infection (64) . if feasible, we recommend that follow-up should include molecular testing, regardless of the development of symptoms. in addition, studies conducted of high-risk workers, which have typically only included serologic testing, should also include molecular testing of upper respiratory samples in an attempt to capture viral carriage.despite these limitations in our current knowledge, the findings of our review reinforce the evidence that hcws are more likely to be at risk of mers-cov infection due to close unprotected contact with patients with mers patients prior to their diagnosis, particularly when aerosolizing procedures are performed. because hcws tend to be younger and healthier than patients in whom severe mers develops, hcws have fewer symptoms, if any, and present a silent risk of human-to-human transmission to others. among hcw contacts, detailed studies of viral shedding and immune response of asymptomatic, pcr-positive mers-cov infections are urgently needed and should be conducted when outbreaks occur and enhanced surveillance is put in place by government and hospital officials.surveillance and testing for mers-cov have improved substantially since the virus was first discovered in 2012. in affected countries, visual respiratory triage systems before a patient enters the emergency department have been introduced; some emergency departments in affected countries have been restructured for enhanced triage of patients with respiratory symptoms; trainings specific to infection prevention and control of respiratory pathogens have been introduced and reintroduced in high-risk areas and hospitals with high turnover of hcws; and audits of hospitals for compliance to specific infection prevention and control measures are regularly performed (6) . in addition, the systematic testing of hcws, extending beyond nurses and doctors to include reception staff, cleaners, technicians, and so forth, regardless of the development of symptoms, as required by the latest infection prevention and control guidelines for hcws by who and kingdom of saudi arabia, for example, has detected subclinical and asymptomatic infections that likely would have gone undetected in past outbreaks. asymptomatic infections may have played a role in extensive secondary transmission in health-care settings before the latest guidelines were introduced, and the impact of such policies may be reflected in the lower peaks on the global mers-cov epidemic curve since 2016. without this level of contact follow-up in community settings, the extent of asymptomatic infections in the community will remain unknown.screening of hcws with exposure to patients infected with mers-cov may be feasible for preventing human-tohuman transmission in health-care settings, and appears to be effective in kingdom of saudi arabia and other affected countries in which this infection prevention and control measure has been introduced. screening of non-hcw contacts in health-care settings should also be encouraged. outside health-care settings, the feasibility of screening may be reduced, particularly given the difficulty in detecting asymptomatic infections. therefore, transmission of mers-cov outside health-care settings should be expected to continue until zoonotic spillover from dromedaries can be interrupted.since 2012, the epidemiology of cases of middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) infection reported to the world health organization (who) has been characterized largely by recurrent zoonotic spillover from the known animal reservoir-dromedary camels-and human-to-human transmission in health-care settings (1) . outbreaks in health-care settings on occasion have resulted in large outbreaks (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) . of the 2,260 cases (including 803 deaths) reported to who, 83% of cases have been reported in the kingdom of saudi arabia (10) .the clinical presentation of mers-cov infection ranges from asymptomatic to severe respiratory illness, with approximately 35.5% of cases resulting in death (1) . the role of asymptomatic or subclinical infections in human-tohuman transmission of mers-cov is not well understood, but there is evidence that laboratory-confirmed mers-cov infection in patients who are reported as asymptomatic may be transmitted to other individuals (11) .for many novel infectious pathogens, surveillance initially focuses on individuals with disease who seek care at health-care facilities, which undoubtedly underestimates the true prevalence of infection, because it will not account 70 grant et al. for mild or asymptomatic infections not requiring medical care. detailed outbreak investigations often include laboratory testing of close contacts and of health-care workers (hcws), regardless of symptoms, and specialized serological investigations will include individuals thought to be at higher risk of infection, such as hcws or those with occupational exposure to animal reservoirs. estimates of the true prevalence of infection of high-risk pathogens are important to understand the populations required for vaccine candidates or specific therapeutic treatments as and when they become available. in addition, the role of subclinical or asymptomatic infection is critical in understanding chains of transmission missed by surveillance systems. for mers-cov, asymptomatic infection has been reported to who, but the possibility of transmission prior to symptom onset is critical for recommending effective infection prevention and control measures and for reducing secondary mers-cov transmission.the role of asymptomatic infections in transmission of other respiratory viruses has been investigated previously. highly pathogenic avian influenza h5n1 rna, for example, has been detected by polymerase chain reaction (pcr) from asymptomatic family contacts of ill patients, suggesting the possibility for onward transmission, even in the absence of symptoms (12) (13) (14) (15) . for severe acute respiratory syndrome cov, limited transmission to close contacts before symptom onset or hospitalization has been found in transmissionrisk studies outside health-care settings, whereas human-tohuman transmission within health-care settings was higher, likely due to higher viral load in hospitalized patients and more frequent exposure to the virus among hcws (16) (17) (18) .here, we have reviewed available evidence of the extent of subclinical and asymptomatic infection of mers-cov stratified by evaluating studies in which infection within and outside of health-care settings has been measured, and the potential role of onward human-to-human transmission from asymptomatic cases.we conducted a literature search in pubmed and embase databases for observational epidemiologic studies of laboratory-confirmed mers-cov infection using the following search terms: "mers-cov" or "mers" and "seroprevalence" or "prevalence" or "serological" or "infection" or "asymptomatic." additional studies were identified through consultation with the who mers technical network and in the bibliography of a related recently published review (19) . publications in english dated before november 15, 2019, were considered, with no additional restrictions on year of publication. we assessed the titles and abstracts of identified studies to determine their eligibility for inclusion in the study. we stratified our analyses to evaluate subclinical and/or asymptomatic infection identified inside and outside health-care facilities. for descriptive analysis of who case-based data, we used the ggplot2 in r, version 3.4.2.0 (r foundation for statistical computing, vienna, austria.).for mers-cov infections studied outside health-care settings, we included studies in which evidence of mers-cov infection was reported, using molecular and/or serolog-ical methods in either individuals with occupational exposure to dromedary camels; familial, occupational, or social contacts of patients with confirmed mers outside of healthcare settings; the general population; or through national mers surveillance records, when published. eligible studies included reporting of the number of individuals tested and the number with molecular or serological evidence of mers-cov infection.to evaluate mers-cov infections studied within healthcare settings, we included studies in which the authors reported evidence of mers-cov infection, using molecular and/or serological methods among hcw and among non-hcw contacts (e.g., family contacts) of confirmed mers cases treated in health care settings.for each eligible study, we extracted information on the year of publication, the year biological samples were collected, the country in which the study was conducted, the number of individuals tested, characteristics of the individuals tested, and the total number of confirmed mers-cov infections by molecular or serological assay. asymptomatic mers-cov infection was considered a laboratoryconfirmed infection with no reported symptoms at the time of sampling.in addition, we evaluated the symptomatic profile and place of reporting among laboratory-confirmed mers-cov infections reported to who from september 2012 to november 27, 2018. within who databases, cases are classified as primary cases if they were reported as such by the reporting member state; if direct or indirect contact with dromedary camels or dromedary products was reported in the case; and/or the exposures were under investigation without known contact with a patient with probable or confirmed mers. cases were classified as secondary cases due to human-to-human transmission if the patient reported recent direct contact with a patient known to have mers-cov infection and/or were identified as a household, occupational, or hcw contact of a patient known to have mers-cov infection.in total, we identified 43 studies in which mers-cov infections measured by serology and/or molecular testing were reported; 23 focused on individuals with exposures outside of health-care settings (4, 7, 11, (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) (39) , and 20 focused on individuals with exposures inside health-care facilities (5, 7, 29, 32, (40) (41) (42) (43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) . the selection of identified and included studies is shown in figure 1 .the 23 studies in which mers-cov infections were measured by serology and/or molecular testing outside of health-care settings are described in table 1 . the majority of studies focused on measuring seroprevalence of mers-cov in individuals with occupational exposure to dromedaries in the middle east and africa (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27) (28) .in the largest seroprevalence study conducted to date, 0.1% seroprevalence was calculated among general population samples collected in 2012-2013, 2% seroprevalence among shepherds of dromedaries, and 4% seroprevalence among slaughterhouse workers (37) . additional estimates of seroprevalence among occupational high-risk populations ranged from 0% to 67%, with seropositivity being detected in kingdom of saudi arabia, qatar, and kenya, and from 0% to 54% among contacts of patients with confirmed mers in household settings largely in countries of the middle east. within these studies, the majority of infections detected by serology appeared to be asymptomatic. within these studies, a high proportion of seropositive camel workers reported no symptoms (80%-100% among seropositive individuals).the 20 studies in which mers-cov infections were measured by serology and/or molecular testing within health-care settings are listed in table 2 and include studies of hcws and close contacts of patients with confirmed infection. the largest molecular and serological studies among hcws were conducted among 1,695 and 1,169 hcws in kingdom of saudi arabia (32) and the republic of korea (40), respectively; the authors reported evidence of infection of 1% and 1.5%, respectively. infection was more frequent among hcws who did not use personal protective equipment when in contact with a patient with mers (40) .since 2012, 298 of the 2,274 laboratory-confirmed cases (13.1%) reported to who have been reported as asymptomatic at the time of reporting, 164 of these patients were hcws. the demographic characteristics and clinical presentation of primary and secondary cases of mers-cov infection are listed in table 3 . there were significantly more asymptomatic cases reported among secondary cases (n = 266 of 1,094; 24.3%) than among primary cases (n = 9 of 642 (1.4%); p < 0.001). overall, no deaths were reported among patients with asymptomatic infections. figure 2 shows the epidemic curve of mers-cov infections reported to who stratified by hcws and non-hcws. of the 414 mers-cov infections among hcws that were reported to who, 164 (39.6%) were reported to be asymptomatic.we found 4 studies that documented the duration of viral shedding from asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic individuals (55) (56) (57) (58) . among asymptomatic, pcr-positive mers-cov infections, positive reverse transcriptase (rt)-pcr results were reported from the day of initial testing for as long as 28-42 days (55-58).we found 1 study in which molecular and serological evidence of possible secondary transmission from asymptomatic individuals was reported (11) . the study was conducted as part of an investigation of 12 household contacts, in whom upper respiratory tract samples from 7 were pcr positive and an additional 5 samples were seropositive using recombinant immunofluorescence or plaque reduction neutralization test (11) . eleven of these 12 individuals reported no symptoms at the time of sampling; this information, combined with epidemiologic data, indicated these people could have been involved in asymptomatic transmission within households. we found 9 studies that described molecular evidence of mers-cov infection among asymptomatic individuals in health-care settings (7, 32, 42, 43, 45, 46, 50, 51, 53) . infectivity of an asymptomatic hcw infected with mers-cov was investigated in 1 study, but no evidence was found of secondary transmission to 82 hcws with contact to the hcw with mers-cov infection (44) .in this review, we found 43 studies in which molecular and/or serological evidence of mers-cov infection was reported. outside of health-care settings, the evidence of mers-cov infection has largely been focused on individuals with occupational exposure to dromedaries. the results to date are heterogenous, and although attempts have been made to evaluate mers-cov genetic diversity (59, 60) , the differences in seroprevalence results to date likely reflect differences in the selection and characteristics of dromedary herds and humans tested. the available evidence of the mers-cov epidemiologic and genetic characteristics does not suggest there are differences in the virus's ability to infect humans. evidence supports that individuals with occupational exposure to dromedaries have higher rates of seroprevalence compared with household contacts of patients with confirmed mers-cov infection, likely reflecting more intense, unprotected exposures to mers-cov through dromedary secretions (61) . that these individuals have subclinical infection and do not develop disease is likely because those with occupational exposure tend to be younger and healthier, without underlying high-risk conditions such as hypertension, diabetes, and renal failure. variations in the seroprevalence rates by study are also likely due to variations in methodologies, including the timing of sample collection, serologic assays used, and interpretation of assay results.although the majority of human mers-cov infections have been reported to who from countries in the arabian peninsula, particularly kingdom of saudi arabia, there is increasing evidence of infection in dromedary camels in herds throughout africa and south asia (62) . additional serological and molecular epidemiology studies at the dromedary-human interface using a standardized approach and consistent methodology, in the arabian peninsula and in africa and south asia, are needed to further understand this observed heterogeneity-that is, whether the observed differences in evidence of infection outside health-care settings may be attributable to genetic variation of the virus across different geographic regions and/or to factors and behaviors in human populations in these regions, which may change the susceptibility to infection. who is currently supporting studies underway in several countries in the middle east, africa, and south asia in which the extent of infection in occupationally exposed persons is being evaluated . the results of such studies can contribute to better understanding the geographic reach of mers-cov in dromedaries and humans.within health-care settings, the detection of asymptomatic, pcr-positive infection has been reported to who from affected member states and also documented in 10 health published studies. although onward transmission was not investigated in those studies, the researchers did capture evidence of rna shedding, which suggests human-tohuman transmission is possible from individuals with no signs or symptoms of infection. this is supported by evidence documenting duration of viral shedding beyond 3 weeks in patients with subclinical mers-cov infection (55) (56) (57) (58) . at the same time, the evidence for acute, asymptomatic mers-cov infection described in this review does not represent the full extent of subclinical infection. asymptomatic contacts clear the virus more quickly than do symptomatic patients (58) and antibody titers in the former are likely to be lower, if they seroconvert at all, than in infected patients exhibiting symptoms (63) . timely and repeated biological specimen collection is needed to capture viral shedding and antibody kinetics of symptomatic and asymptomatic contacts (11) . this can be achieved if all high-risk contacts of patients with confirmed mers-cov infection are identified during an outbreak and then tested using molecular and serologic laboratory assays, regardless of whether the individual exhibits symptoms. in outbreak settings, without the inclusion of testing of all contacts, the identification of chains of transmission may be incomplete.indeed, the latest who surveillance guidelines recommend that all contacts of patients with laboratoryconfirmed mers outside of health care facilities should be placed under active surveillance for 14 days after the last exposure to the confirmed case and that any contacts with symptoms of respiratory illness should be tested for mers-cov infection (64) . if feasible, we recommend that follow-up should include molecular testing, regardless of the development of symptoms. in addition, studies conducted of high-risk workers, which have typically only included serologic testing, should also include molecular testing of upper respiratory samples in an attempt to capture viral carriage.despite these limitations in our current knowledge, the findings of our review reinforce the evidence that hcws are more likely to be at risk of mers-cov infection due to close unprotected contact with patients with mers patients prior to their diagnosis, particularly when aerosolizing procedures are performed. because hcws tend to be younger and healthier than patients in whom severe mers develops, hcws have fewer symptoms, if any, and present a silent risk of human-to-human transmission to others. among hcw contacts, detailed studies of viral shedding and immune response of asymptomatic, pcr-positive mers-cov infections are urgently needed and should be conducted when outbreaks occur and enhanced surveillance is put in place by government and hospital officials.surveillance and testing for mers-cov have improved substantially since the virus was first discovered in 2012. in affected countries, visual respiratory triage systems before a patient enters the emergency department have been introduced; some emergency departments in affected countries have been restructured for enhanced triage of patients with respiratory symptoms; trainings specific to infection prevention and control of respiratory pathogens have been introduced and reintroduced in high-risk areas and hospitals with high turnover of hcws; and audits of hospitals for compliance to specific infection prevention and control measures are regularly performed (6) . in addition, the systematic testing of hcws, extending beyond nurses and doctors to include reception staff, cleaners, technicians, and so forth, regardless of the development of symptoms, as required by the latest infection prevention and control guidelines for hcws by who and kingdom of saudi arabia, for example, has detected subclinical and asymptomatic infections that likely would have gone undetected in past outbreaks. asymptomatic infections may have played a role in extensive secondary transmission in health-care settings before the latest guidelines were introduced, and the impact of such policies may be reflected in the lower peaks on the global mers-cov epidemic curve since 2016. without this level of contact follow-up in community settings, the extent of asymptomatic infections in the community will remain unknown.screening of hcws with exposure to patients infected with mers-cov may be feasible for preventing human-tohuman transmission in health-care settings, and appears to be effective in kingdom of saudi arabia and other affected countries in which this infection prevention and control measure has been introduced. screening of non-hcw contacts in health-care settings should also be encouraged. outside health-care settings, the feasibility of screening may be reduced, particularly given the difficulty in detecting asymptomatic infections. therefore, transmission of mers-cov outside health-care settings should be expected to continue until zoonotic spillover from dromedaries can be interrupted.features for the prevention and control of the covid-19 outbreak. in most of the developed countries, such as the united states, europe, japan, and south korea, there is a well-established infectious disease prevention and quarantine policy even in the early stages of disease spread. however, the international travels of sars-cov-2-infected patients have threatened public health in other countries. furthermore, it is worthwhile to measure the potential risk of sars-cov-2 transmission outside china when the quarantining of symptomatic infected individuals is delayed.in this study, we used stochastic simulations to estimate the expected number of covid-19 patients and epidemic duration in various scenarios of quarantine and reduction in the transmission rate. the potential size of the epidemic outside of china, especially in developed countries with a well-established public health infrastructure, is estimated by assuming similar transmission probabilities in the early disease stages as that in hubei province, as well as by considering the potential impact of various social and personal nonpharmaceutical interventions.data were obtained from the 2019-ncov global cases by the johns hopkins center for systems science and engineering [4] and novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) situation reports issued by the who [5] (last retrieved on february 7, 2020). all reported data were from confirmed covid-19 cases.we constructed a dynamic model of sars-cov-2 transmission on the basis of a deterministic compartment model. the population was classified into six classes: susceptible (s), exposed (e), symptomatic infectious (i), asymptomatic infectious (a), quarantined (q), and removed individuals (r). susceptible individuals are exposed to the sars-cov-2 on close contact with infectious individuals or respiratory droplets that are generated when a patient coughs [6] . after the incubation period, the exposed individuals develop either symptomatic or asymptomatic infections. asymptomatic individuals recover after the infectious period. however, symptomatic individuals who are infected are quarantined, and patients who are quarantined will recover or die. figure 1 describes a schematic diagram of the transmission dynamics of sars-cov-2:the transmission dynamics of sars-cov-2 acute respiratory disease are described by six ordinary differential equations (odes) as follows:the parameter β represents the transmission rate. in recent studies, the who and chinese public health authorities have reported the possibility of transmission from exposed and asymptomatic infectious individuals. because exposed and asymptomatic individuals do not have symptoms, they have lower transmissibility than that of symptomatic infectious individuals. the transmission-reduction factors of exposed and asymptomatic individuals are denoted by q and δ, respectively. as there is inadequate epidemiological evidence, such as the proportion of asymptomatic infections and transmissibility of exposed and asymptomatic infectious individuals, it is assumed that transmission of exposed and asymptomatic infectious individuals can be ignored. the parameter κ indicates the rate of progression from exposed to infectious individuals, and 1/κ represents the average incubation period. a proportion p (0 ≤ p ≤ 1) of newly infectious individuals become asymptomatic; thus 1 − p represents the proportion of individuals with symptomatic infectious. the parameter α represents the quarantine rate of symptomatic infectious individuals and 1/ α indicates the average duration from symptom onset to quarantine. the parameter γ a represents the recovery rate of asymptomatic individuals and 1/γ a is the average recovery period of asymptomatic individuals. thesymptomatic infectious exposed quarantined recovered or death asymptomatic infectious parameter γ q indicates the removal rate of quarantined individuals and 1/γ q represents the average duration from quarantine to recovery or death.the parametric values used in our model are listed in table 1 .the reproductive number, denoted by r , represents the average number of secondary cases generated by a single primary patient over its infectious period. in our model, the reproductive number, r; can be derived as follows by using the next generation method introduced by van den driessche [9] .the reproductive number indicates the threshold for disease spread. if r exceeds 1, an infectious individual transmits the disease to more than one individual and, eventually, the number of cases keeps increasing. on the other hand, if r is less than 1, the number of cases continues to decrease, and the disease will die out. using this property, we can identify an intervention strategy, which can reduce the reproductive number to less than 1.the transmission rate was estimated from the number of cases that was confirmed per day in hubei province from january 11 to february 6, 2020, and then bestfitted to the model by using the least squares method. all confirmed cases were assumed to be quarantined and incapable of spreading the disease. our model was programmed in matlab 2018b. the least squares fitting optimization tool, lsqcurvefit, was used to estimate the best-fitted transmission rate. for uncertainty analysis, the transmission rate was estimated by using the data generated from the poisson distributions, with the mean equal to the observed data. mean, standard deviation, and 95% confidence intervals (ci) were calculated from 1,000 sample datasets. in addition, we conducted a sensitivity analysis by varying the parameters over a range of possible values to establish which of the parameters had the greatest effect on the reproductive number.stochastic simulation was implemented to estimate the risk of an covid-19 outbreak in a country outside china, due to the arrival of an exposed individual. according to the various scenarios of transmission reduction and the duration from symptom onset to quarantine, we calculated the average number of local transmission cases, the probability of an outbreak, and the epidemic duration. the gillespie algorithm, which is an affordable method to observe individual random events, was adapted as the stochastic simulation method [10] . table 2 lists the possible individual level events in stochastic simulation and their propensities, which emerge from the mathematical model. in the gillespie algorithm, the probability of the event occurrence is proportional to its propensity, whereas the time interval between a prior and posterior event is proportional to the sum of every propensity in the prior event.the rate of transmission in hubei province is estimated to be 0.8238 (95% ci: 0.8095-0.8382) and the reproductive number was calculated as 4.1192 (95% ci: 4.0473-4.1912). figure 2 presents the data-fitted results from december 29, 2019 to february 6, 2020. the red circles indicate the daily reported data of confirmed cases in hubei province, and the black curve represents the bestfitted model curve. our model initially comprised four symptomatic infectious individuals [7] ; furthermore, confirmed cases reported from january 11, 2020 were used for data-fitting.the covid-19 outbreak in wuhan has spread in china as well as to other countries. the risk of outbreak is investigated as the entry of an exposed individual to a country outside of china. we assumed there would be a transmission reduction factor for exposed individuals 1 assumed δ transmission reduction factor for asymptomatic infectious individuals 1 assumed κ progression rate from exposed to infectious individuals 1/5.2 [7] p proportion of exposed individuals who become asymptomatic infectious 0 assumed table 1 , including the number of individuals with local transmissions, the epidemic duration, the maximum prevalence, and the probability of the estimated total cases from 2,000 realizations. table 3 lists the results for three reductions in transmission (0, 30, and 60%). we defined prevalence as the total number of exposed, infectious, quarantined hosts, and the epidemic duration as the interval from symptom onset of the index case to quarantine onset of the last case. every result, except for probabilities, is presented as the mean, lower bound (2.5th percentile), and upper bound (97.5th percentile) values of the trials, respectively. the results from the simulation of other cases of reduction in the rate of transmission are provided in the supplementary table. we found a high deviation in the number of local transmission cases of infection (maximum prevalence) among the trials, as the upper bound was approximately more than five times larger than the mean in every scenario. figure 3 depicts the probability (%) of a certain number of local transmission cases being exceeded in relation to the reduction in the rate of transmission and duration from symptom onset to quarantine. when quarantine can be instituted within 24 h, the probability that the number of local transmission cases exceed 40 is 3.2% (scenario with a 0% reduction in the rate of transmission).we aimed to present an initial perception of the transmission dynamics of sars-cov-2 in hubei province, china, and to enable a quantification of the potential risk of sars-cov-2 transmission outside china, especially when an infected patient from china arrives in developed countries. we used confirmed data from the clusters of covid-19 cases that occurred from january 11 to february 6, 2020 in hubei province, china.many researchers have warned the possibility of outbreak outside of china. thompson calculated the potential transmission when the patients arrived in other countries [11] . the risk of outbreak according to the imported cases, the connectivity of the country with china, and the efficacy of control measures is estimated [12] . in addition, studies have been conducted on the impact of international travel and border control measures on the spread outside china (global spread) [13, 14] . in this study, we used mathematical modeling and stochastic simulation to estimate the reproductive number and analyze interventional measures. the reproductive number for sars-cov-2 transmission dynamics is estimated approximately as 4, which is significantly higher compared to that of the previous sars epidemic in china [15] . this table 2 propensity of individual events event propensity implies that human-to-human transmission is significant in hubei province. unless additional interventional strategies are implemented, there will be a significant increase in the daily incidence of new cases. however, several control policies are being implemented in china, such as public education on disease prevention and environmental hygiene. it is possible that the transmission rate and reproductive number have been decreased such that the number of new cases will be less than the number in the model prediction.the reproductive number derived in this work facilitates the evaluation of control measures, such as quarantine or transmission-intervention strategy. to reduce the reproductive number to less than 1 with a single intervention measure, we need to either reduce the rate of transmission by more than 75.72% or shorten the duration from infection to quarantine to less than 29.1 h. from january 31, 2020 onward, a real-time confirmatory procedure has been instituted whereby the time to laboratory confirmation can be reduced to 6 h [16] . moreover, a rapid diagnosis test kit has been provisionally approved, and this new diagnostic method has become available since february 7, 2020, which could possibly enable faster diagnosis and quarantine [17] . if two strategies are implemented simultaneously, the requirement for each intervention strategy will be reduced when compared to the requirement for a single-intervention strategy. for example, if the rate of transmission is reduced by 10%, the quarantine from symptom onset needs to be implemented within 32.37 h.in this study, we assumed that the probability of transmission from exposed individuals was zero because of insufficient epidemiological evidence that could be applied in the model. however, if we assume that exposed individuals have a 20% rate of transmission compared to symptomatic individuals, the reproductive number would be reduced to 3.4796. furthermore, our model assumes that quarantined individuals would not transmit the disease. ignoring this assumption would result in a higher reproductive number.this study was conducted with an aim to understand the requirements of sufficient preparedness to counter the spread of sars-cov-2 infection outside china; thus, we assumed the highest rate of transmission. moreover, a stochastic simulation was conducted to measure the probability of an outbreak and its size when a person the who has warned of the possibility of global spread to other countries, and public health authorities in these countries are expected to develop preparedness strategies, such as thorough campaigns for enhancing personal hygiene, screening the national borders, and quarantine of individuals with suspected infection or exposure, to respond to disease spread. in south korea, the first case of covid-19 was reported on january 20, 2020, and a total of 24 confirmed cases, who are mostly individuals who returned from the chinese city of wuhan, have been reported as of february 7, 2020. among these cases, nine were identified as local transmissions (human-to-human transmission) arising from contact with patients from china or with a secondary infectiontransmitted person in south korea [18] . given that the average duration from symptom onset to quarantine is approximately 24 h in south korea, the rate of transmission is considered to be approximately 50% lower than that in hubei province. in the united states, one case of local transmission has been identified from among 11 confirmed cases with the sars-cov-2 infection [19] . the local transmission of infected case per import case is 1/11, and this implies that the rate of transmission is reduced by approximately 90% compared to that in the hubei province, if a patient can be quarantined within 24 h after symptom onset.results from our risk estimation of the covid-19 outbreak outside china accentuate the importance of quarantine control, such as through specific guidelines with regard to visitors who have traveled from china. the results of our stochastic simulation emphasize that rapid quarantine before the rate of community transmission increases is crucial to prevent a covid-19 outbreak outside of china. even if the rate of transmission is assumed to be similar to that in hubei province, the probability of no local transmission is approximately 54.9% with the implementation of a 24-h quarantine strategy. in addition, there is only a 7% chance of seeing more than 20 cases of local transmission. thus, quarantine is implicated as a significantly important measure to minimize community transmission.this study has some limitations. first, our model was developed with limited confirmed data from the hubei province of china; given that the outbreak has not ended, the model dynamics could change as new confirmed cases are added. second, more detailed patient information, particularly the dates of symptom onset and exposure, were unavailable at the time of analysis. third, this study was conducted on the basis of data from confirmed covid-19 patients with symptomatic onset who underwent testing. however, some cases of asymptomatic infection have been identified [20, 21] and, given the availability of options for assessment at present, it is difficult to explicitly estimate the possibility of transmission or the number of asymptomatic infections based on the observational empirical data. nonetheless, even a model with limited data, such as the one in this study, can allow an early assessment of the transmission dynamics of the sars-cov-2 epidemic in the hubei province, china.this study describes an outbreak of the sars-cov-2 that originated in the hubei province and estimates the reproductive number. the epidemic has spread significantly due to failures in early diagnosis and rapid quarantine. in view of the difficulty in controlling this outbreak, our results lead us to strongly recommend that an infected person be quarantined as soon as possible after diagnosis to reduce the possibility of sars-cov-2 transmission outside china.supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10. 1186/s12976-020-00127-6.abbreviations sars-cov-2: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; covid-19: coronavirus disease; ci: confidence interval; pheic: public health emergency of international concern; who: world health organization; ode: ordinary differential equationto the editor,since the outbreak of coronavirus on december 31, 2019 in wuhan, hubei province, people’s republic of china, the number of cases from china that have been imported into other countries is increasing, and the epidemiological map is changing rapidly [1]. in this regard, world health organization (who) on thursday, 30 january 2020, announced a coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19) a public health emergency of international concern (pheic).to curb the spread of covid-19, who has implemented several public health measures including rapid identification, diagnosis and management of the cases, identification and follow-up of contacts, infection prevention and control in health care settings, implementation of health measures for travelers, awareness rising in the population, and risk communication [2].additionally, countries are taking measures to prevent the importation of covid-19, i.e., on january 31, 2020, the president of the usa signed a presidential “proclamation on suspension of entry as immigrants and non-immigrants of persons who pose a risk of transmitting covid-19” [3]. other measures implemented elsewhere include quarantine of travelers coming from risk countries and symptoms-based screening at points of entry [4], which were also employed during ebola outbreaks. in support of this approach, who reported that temperature screening at entry detected the majority of exported cases during the current outbreak with the covid-19 [5].however, 4 people in germany were infected with coronavirus-2019 through contact with an asymptomatic patient [6], although there is a claim that the patient from china who transmitted the virus when she/he was attending the business meeting in germany was symptomatic [7]. but, evidence is still clear that the other 2 patients who never came into contact with the chinese patient contracted the virus from an asymptomatic german patient who attended the meeting with a chinese patient. this added to the ongoing debates about virus transmission, where some of the scientists believe that asymptomatic patients are transmitting the infection. who says “people who cough or sneeze are more likely to spread the virus,…but even if they do, asymptomatic transmission likely plays a minor role in the epidemic overall.” additionally, evidence from germany reported that 2 out of 114 travelers (1.8%) from wuhan, china, who had passed the symptoms-based screening tested positive for covid-19 by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) [8].more interestingly, japanese citizens evacuated from the source of a covid-19 outbreak that have been diagnosed with the infection after initially testing negative, a man in his 50s who returned from the chinese city of wuhan on the first japanese evacuation flight on january 29, 2020, previously twice tested negative for the virus. however, a third test 12 days later found the man—who has been isolated in his hotel room since his return was infected. in addition to that, the number of people in diamond princess testing positive for covid-19 keep on increasing, since it arrived off japan [9].a case from the uk reports on the british businessman who is linked to 11 coronavirus cases that a suspect was advised to attend an isolated room at hospital, despite showing no symptoms and later tested positive for covid-19 [10]. national health service has advised any individual experiencing symptoms, even if mild, after traveling from mainland china, thailand, japan, republic of korea, hong kong, taiwan, singapore, malaysia, or macau, to stay indoors. in africa, egypt is the first country to confirm covid-19 infection and the country’s health ministry says the affected person is a non-egypt citizen (foreigner) who presented with no serious symptoms [11]. the second covid-19 case in africa has been reported to occur in algeria from a foreigner coming from the northern part of italy who arrived in the country on feb 17, 2020. northern italy, home to many algerians, has been the center of an outbreak of the coronavirus with more than 280 cases and 11 deaths [12]. from latin america, brazil is the first country to confirm the case of covid-19 in a 61-year-old who had visited italy [13].lastly, a published study on clinical characteristics of 138 hospitalized patients with covid-19 in wuhan, china, documented that fever was present in 98.6% (136/138) of hospitalized patients, whereas 2 non-intensive care unit patients (1.4%) did not present with fever [14]. in this regard, body temperature might not be an adequate screening as it can potentially miss travelers incubating the disease or travelers concealing fever during travel and contribute to the importation of the virus to the countries of destination. therefore, travel restrictions to and from high risk areas [1] and/or 14-day quarantine [15] of people coming from high risk areas are recommended to prevent possible importation of covid-19. currently, rt-pcr is a reliable test in detecting both symptomatic and asymptomatic covid-19 [6, 8]. lastly, in previous experience from other viral outbreaks, i.e., dengue virus [16] and ebola [17], fever screening especially at airport had a positive effect on partially blocking importation of cases. kuan et al. [16] reported that airport fever screening was successful in identifying 45% (244/542; 95% confidence interval 33.1–57.8%) of imported dengue cases with fever.to the editor,we read with interest the recent article by yu transmission through asymptomatic carriers has been a huge challenge for covid-19 prevention and control. 1 there are two types of asymptomatic carriers: those who never develop symptoms and those who are detected during the incubation period (pre-symptomatic detection) prior to symptom onset. 3 here, we discussed the identification and management of asymptomatic carriers of covid-19 in china.so far, asymptomatic carriers of covid-19 may be found by the following ways. 3 since april 1, 2020, the number of asymptomatic infectors has been reported online by national health commission of the people's republic of china on a daily basis, and the following management measures were required to be carried out to minimize the risk of their transmission in china. 3 first, persons detected as asymptomatic infectors would be isolated for 14 days, which may prevent them from becoming contagion sources. those can be lifted from isolation by negative nucleic acid tests on two consecutive samples at least 24 hours apart. 3 second, epidemiological investigation of asymptomatic infectors would be strengthened, and strict disinfection would be implement in their living places such as homes, medical institutions, isolation wards, transport tools, and medical observation places. third, since early detection of asymptomatic carriers is critical to contain their transmission, current screening methods also need to be strengthened. nucleic acid screening is practical and quick for the population. however, due to specimen collection, testing methods, product stability, false-negative results have been frequently reported, which will hamper case detection and disease control. 8 therefore, multiple screening and monitoring of nucleic acid combining with antigens and antibodies in blood and other body fluids are recommended. 8 at present, persons who are significant epidemiological associations with covid-19 patients (eg, close contacts) will be put under 14-day centralized medical observation in china. 3 as the epidemic enters a new stage, in order to consolidate the previous anti-epidemic achievements and prevent the epidemic from rebounding, we should further strengthen the monitoring of asymptomatic carriers and some special populations who may play a greater role in the spread of covid-19, including front-line medical staff, disease control personnel, street epidemic prevention and control point staff, and delivery personnel. since asymptomatic carriers have no clinical symptoms, they are difficult to identify, diagnose, and isolate. this can lead to loopholes in prevention and control measures, resulting in increased difficulty in controlling the spread of covid-19. 9 the public health education should be strengthened, and formation of good hygiene habits is important. in particular, awareness of self-protection, self-supervision and administration, and pre-service training of above special populations are critical to reducing the spread of asymptomatic infections.in future, further definition of high-risk populations and development of effective screening strategies and programs will support rapid identification and management of asymptomatic carrier transmission of covid-19. 9 further study is needed on asymptomatic carriers including their frequency relative to symptomatic infections, their disease course, and factors associated with having an asymptomatic rather than symptomatic infection. 8 since there can be a gray area between asymptomatic and symptomatic infections, verification: all authors have seen the manuscript and agree to the content. all the authors played a significant role in the paper.respiratory tract infection is a major cause of hospitalization in children. most such infections are of viral origin, but viral infection is often hard to distinguish from bacterial infection [1] . pathogen-specific clinical symptoms are often lacking [1] . specific diagnosis, therefore, relies almost entirely on laboratory investigation [2] .treatment with antibiotics induces the development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria [3] and has a negligible effect on most acute respiratory infections (aris), which are generally of viral origin [4] . nevertheless, antibiotics are frequently prescribed due to a lack of clinically valid diagnostic tests verifying a viral etiology [5] .sensitive methods, such as quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qpcr) analyses on nasopharyngeal samples, for a number of viruses have been introduced in hospitals as a sensitive diagnostic tool among children with respiratory tract infection [6] .investigations using specific pcr for individual viruses (bmonoplex pcr^) are too time consuming and elaborate for the laboratory, and are usually used to detect influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv). when the viruses targeted by monoplex pcr are negative, no specific etiology is identified to help clinical management of the patient and epidemiological monitoring of infections. multiplex pcr methods, on the other hand, enable testing for many pathogens in parallel in a single analysis and are, therefore, increasingly gaining importance [1] .this prospective case-control study was conducted during the period from october 2013 to february 2014 (winter season) at cairo university pediatric hospitals (800 beds) and included all children who were hospitalized in intensive care units (icus) and hospital wards with severe acute respiratory infections (sari) according to the world health organization (who) case definition for sari [7] . a standardized study protocol was developed to record the demographic characteristics and medical history of the patients, clinical features including symptoms and signs, outcome of the illness, hospital course, and laboratory and radiological findings.forty healthy age-matched asymptomatic children with no history of a recent respiratory tract infection during the previous 2 weeks, who were not admitted to the hospital, and who do not have any chronic underlying illness were included as a control group.informed verbal consent was obtained from the parents of all the patients and the controls. the study design conformed to the revised helsinki declaration of bioethics and was approved by the scientific ethics committee of the department of pediatrics, faculty of medicine of cairo university.sampling and sample processing: nasopharyngeal (np) and oropharyngeal (throat) swabs were obtained, transported, and preserved on viral transport media. the swabs inside the 15-ml tube were agitated vigorously for 10 s using a vortex mixer to free cells from the swab tip.viral testing was done by real-time multiplex pcr using anyplex™ ii rv16 detection (v1.1) (cat. no. rv7g01y) supplied by seegene, operated on a cfx96™ real-time pcr detection system (bio-rad), which simultaneously detects 16 respiratory viruses [adenovirus (adv), influenza a virus (flu a), influenza b virus (flu b), parainfluenza viruses 1-4 (piv-1, -2, -3, -4), rhinovirus (hrv), respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), bocavirus (hbov), metapneumovirus (mpv), coronavirus 229e (cov 229e), coronavirus nl63 (cov nl63), coronavirus oc43 (cov oc43), and enterovirus (hev)]. nucleic acid extraction was done automatically using seeprep12™ viral (#spn1004) supplied by nordiag, using the extraction seeprep machine (seegene), as indicated as a nucleic acid extraction option by the manufacturer. protocol viral na was operated using 530 μl from the sample to result in an eluted volume of 60 μl. reverse transcription was done using the cdna synthesis kit for manual set up cdna synthesis premix (sgrt801) from seegene. interpretation of the results was done according to the manufacturer's instructions, in addition to automatic analysis using the seegene viewer software after exporting the run data to it [8] .data were coded and entered using the statistical package spss version 15 (ibm corp., armonk, ny, usa). data were summarized using mean [standard deviation (sd)] or median (range) for quantitative variables, and number and percentage for qualitative variables. comparison between groups was done using the chi-square test for qualitative variables, and the mann-whitney u-test was used for quantitative variables that were not normally distributed. a p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.the turnaround time for multiplex pcr was 6 h, but the test was done in batches three times per week. nucleic acids of respiratory viruses causing sari were detected in 159/177 (89.9 %) patients enrolled in the study.the demographic and clinical characteristics of the patients are shown in table 1 , and the frequency and monthly distribution of pathogens among the patients are shown in table 2 and fig. 1 . the median interval between the onset of symptoms and testing in our study was 3 days.the nucleic acids of more than one virus were detected in 83 patients (46.9 %). dual detections were observed in 64 (36.2 %), triple detections in 17 (9.6 %), and quadruple detections in 2 (1.1 %) of 177 samples. the frequency of co-detection with each of the studied viruses among the patients is shown in table 2 . important combinations included rsv with other viruses in 45 patients. rhinovirus was mostly detected in association with other viruses (64 out of 78 patients positive for hrv). bocavirus was detected in 16 patients. it was the only virus detected in three of them, while it was detected in association with another virus in 13 patients.a large proportion of the patients had received antibiotic therapy prior to hospital admission (121 patients, 68.4 %), and almost all the patients received antibiotic therapy during hospital admission (169 patients, 95.5 %).seventy-eight patients required icu admission, of whom 28 (35.8 %) had co-infection with multiple viruses as follows; 24 had co-infection with two viruses, three had co-infection with three viruses, and one patient had co-infection with four viruses. twenty-one of the patients who were admitted to the icu had rsv in association with other viruses, 14 of whom had co-infection of rsv and rhinovirus.among the 40 healthy asymptomatic children who were included as a control group, no virus was detected in 12 of them, while a viral pathogen was detected in 28 controls. the only viruses that were detected among the control group were adv, hbov, hev, hcov-oc43, and hrv, either as a single detection or as a co-detection (table 3) . a dual detection of these viruses was present in six controls, while triple detections of these viruses were present in four controls. the frequency of detection of these viruses among the patients and the controls is shown in fig. 2 .the following viruses were not detected at all among the control group, either alone or as a co-detection with other viruses: rsv, hmpv, flu a, flu b, hpiv-1-2-3-4, hcov-nl63, hcov-229e. we used multiplex pcr for the detection of respiratory viruses among patients admitted with sari. we also assessed the presence of viral nucleic acids by pcr in healthy asymptomatic children in order to better understand the etiologic role of the tested viruses in respiratory disease. viral nucleic acids were detected in 89.9 % of patients admitted with severe lower respiratory tract infections. this is in keeping with a previous study that reported the detection of a viral pathogen by pcr in 72.3 % of children aged ≤5 years [9] , and with bierbaum et al., who reported viral pathogen detection in children in excess of 80 %, compared to only 20 % in adults presenting with acute respiratory illness [10] .similar to previous reports [10, 11] , the most frequently detected virus in our study was rsv (48 %).flu a was detected in 6.2 % of the samples and flu b was detected in 2.3 % of the samples. these results are similar to those of lam et al., who reported a positive rate of 6.3 % for flu a by pcr and a positive rate of 3.3 % for flu b [2] . some 6-12 % of all children use healthcare services every year because of influenza [12] . additionally, many cases of infection with influenza virus are not diagnosed as such [1] . early confirmation of influenza viruses is helpful because treatment with neuraminidase inhibitors then becomes an option [1] .hpivs are important causes of upper respiratory tract illness and lower respiratory tract illness, especially in children [13, 14] . collectively, the four types of hpivs were detected in 8 % of the patients with sari in the current study.similar to previous studies, multiplex pcr allowed the detection of hrv, hcov-oc43, and hmpv, which were not detectable by conventional cell culture isolation or direct detection using immunofluorescence assay. the improvement in the diagnostic yield by adding hrv was confirmed in our study, and also reported previously by gruteke et al. [15] . [16] . these findings are comparable to previous reports [10, 11] .in view of the fact that respiratory tract infections in children occur in close succession during the winter season, it can be assumed that infections actually overlap. this may provide an explanation for the fact that viral nucleic acids of different viruses in one specimen are found virtually only in childrenfor example, in 8 % of all specimens analyzed by bierbaum et al. [17] and 46.9 % of the samples in our study. co-detections were reported more commonly than single infections in children than older adults (≥65 years; p = 0.01) [16] .co-infection of rsv with other respiratory viruses is common and can increase the severity of the disease [18] . in the current study, co-infection with rsv was present in 52.9 % of the patients who tested positive for rsv. this may have increased the severity of the disease, resulting in hospital admission. moreover, 26.9 % of the patients who were admitted to the icu had rsv in association with other viruses.for a long time, it was assumed that symptomatic infection with respiratory tract viruses was regularly shown by the confirmation of viral nucleic acids in respiratory secretions. however, in recent years, there have been increasing indications that this is not necessarily the case [19] . data are available from only a few case-control studies that examined to what extent specific respiratory viruses cause disease [9, [20] [21] [22] [23] .in the current study, adv, hbov, hrv, hev, and hcov-oc43 were not only detected in patients admitted with sari, but were also detected in asymptomatic children.the clinical importance of bocaviruses remains the subject of controversy. bocavirus dna can be confirmed in the respiratory tract of asymptomatic children; a high concentration of these viruses in respiratory specimens seems to be associated with symptoms [19] . only quantitative monoplex pcr or multiplex pcr can provide information about virus concentration. bocavirus was detected by pcr in nasopharyngeal swabs samples of children suffering from acute respiratory tract infection in saudi arabia [24] . in our study, hbov was detected among symptomatic children admitted with sari, as well as in asymptomatic children.six different human pathogenic coronavirus species (hcov) are known to date [1] . as a rule, they cause benign disorders of the upper respiratory tract [25] . however, after the sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) epidemic in 2003 with the sars cov, hcov-nl63 was described in 2004 and hcovhku1 in 2005 [21] . the middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers) is caused by mers-cov [26] .human corona viruses (hcov-nl63, hcov-oc43, hcov-229e) were detected in seven patients admitted with sari. however, hcov-oc43 was also detected in six asymptomatic children. adenovirus was the third most frequently detected virus in our study population. adenovirus dna is also often found in the respiratory secretions of asymptomatic children [1] , and was detected among patients as well as asymptomatic children in our study.hrvs are frequently found in asymptomatic children [27] , but are also detected in patients with symptoms ranging from mild common colds [28] to serious lower respiratory tract disease [29] . since the development of molecular assays for the detection of hrvs, the detection rate of hrv in patients with respiratory infections has increased to up to 50 % [30] . hrv was only second to rsv in frequency of detection by multiplex pcr in swab samples of children admitted with sari in our study. however, hrv was also detected in 4/40 controls. hrvs are frequently detected in asymptomatic children, making it difficult to interpret the clinical significance of a positive pcr finding [9] . moreover, hrvs could be detected until 2-5 weeks after the onset of symptoms [31] . in spite of these facts, rhedin et al. [9] reported that their data indicate that 39 % [95 % confidence interval (ci): 1 to 62] of acute respiratory infections in their population could be attributed to hrv.the potentially important rate of excreters of viral nucleic acids of specific pathogens that are not directly associated with the acute illness presents a problem. to date, quantitative conclusions are not reliably established, neither for monoplex pcr nor for multiplex pcr [1] . rhedin et al. showed that the nucleic acids of rsv, hmpv, and parainfluenza virus can be confirmed almost exclusively in symptomatic children and very rarely in asymptomatic children. their results indicate that a qpcr finding of rsv, hmpv, or piv is likely to be causative of disease in children with acute respiratory infection, and that detection of several other viruses, such as hbov, hrv, adv, hcov, and hev, must be interpreted with caution, due to the high detection rates among healthy children [9] . the detection of adv, hbov, hrv, hcov-oc43, and hev among asymptomatic children in the current study and the absence of rsv, hmpv, flu a, flu b, hpiv-1-2-3-4, hcov-nl63, and hcov-229e in these children support these findings.whereas the detection of some viruses, such as influenza virus and respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), is clearly predictive for respiratory disease [32] [33] [34] , the clinical significance upon the detection of several other viruses needs further investigation. the interpretation of a viral detection is complicated by the fact that infections with multiple viruses are common in children with acute respiratory infection and that many viruses have lately been reported to be found also in asymptomatic children [20] .most respiratory tract infections in children are of viral origin, especially during the winter season, which, in egypt, is from november to february. almost all the patients in our study received antibiotic therapy during hospital admission. the identification of specific viral pathogens will limit the unnecessary use of antibiotics and will facilitate giving specific antiviral therapy when indicated (e.g., neuraminidase inhibitors in confirmed influenza virus infection).better understanding of how to interpret viral findings by the use of new technologies is important to improve management decisions, which, in turn, will ameliorate patient outcomes and reduce unnecessary use of antibiotics.this study confirms the high rate of detection of viral nucleic acids by multiplex pcr) among hospitalized children admitted with severe acute respiratory infection, as well as the high rate of detection of multiple viruses. adenovirus, hbov, hrv, hev, and hcov-oc43 were also detected in asymptomatic controls, resulting in challenges in clinical interpretation. further studies are required to provide quantitative conclusions that will facilitate clinical interpretation and application of the results in the clinical setting.funding source none.the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.ethical approval informed verbal consent was obtained from the parents of all the patients and the controls. the study design conformed to the revised helsinki declaration of bioethics and was approved by the scientific ethics committee of the department of pediatrics, faculty of medicine of cairo university.prior to the past two decades, the four circulating species of coronaviruses associated with human disease were known to be a significant cause of the common cold and other mild uris. more severe lower respiratory infections (lris) were associated with the recent zoonotic crossovers of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-associated coronavirus (sars-cov) identified in 2002 and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) identified in 2012.a notable feature of the 2003 global sars outbreak was the relative paucity of infections among children. in a published review of case series, the authors noted the absence of mortality in children and adolescents. in particular, children under 13 years of age had milder disease, no mortality, and only mild residual changes in exercise tolerance and pulmonary function at 6 months after resolution of illness. 6 it was suggested that prior exposure to other respiratory viruses, making their immune systems more resilient, and inability to mount a mature immune response during the immune dysregulation phase of sars and thus less organ damage was associated with low morbidity and mortality in children. 7 as of november 2019, world health organization (who) reported a total of 2,494 laboratory-confirmed cases of mers including 858 associated deaths (case-fatality rate: 34.4%) globally. a review of pediatric cases through april 2016 revealed only 31 pediatric cases representing roughly 1% of cases known at the time. only 18 were symptomatic and there was one death reported in a child with cystic fibrosis. the authors postulated a variety of explanations for lower case numbers in children including lower exposure rates, less symptomatic cases, and the presence of yet to be identified factors. 8many theories have been postulated to explain this remarkable difference in the pediatric and adult population with covid-19. besides the various lifestyle factors (less overall and lifetime exposure to smoke or pollution, better nutrition, and more daily exercise), children have other specific advantages that might limit disease progression following sars-cov-2 infection (►fig. 2).like sars-cov and coronavirus nl63, recent evidence indicates that entry of sars-cov-2 into cells requires the presence of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) protein. 9 ace2 receptors are expressed in human airway epithelia, as well as lung parenchyma. of note, undifferentiated cells expressing little ace2 were found to be poorly infected with sars-cov, while well-differentiated cells expressing more ace2 were readily infected. 10 ace2 is less mature in young children and thus may not function properly as a receptor for sars-cov-2. 11 in addition, the intracellular response induced by ace2 in the alveolar epithelial cells of children may be lower than that of adults. ace2 are more abundant on cells of the lower respiratory tract, 12 which is typically the site of severe covid-19 disease. consistent with this observation, recent data indicate that children experience more sars-cov-2 infections in the upper respiratory tract than the lower respiratory tract. 13 fetal hemoglobin sars-cov-2 virus proteins (orf1ab, orf10, and orf3a) have been shown to attack the heme on the 1-β chain of hemoglobin to dissociate the iron to form porphyrin. 14 this attack not only reduces hemoglobin leading to hypoxia but also inhibits the normal metabolic pathway of heme. liu and li suggest that this mechanism moreover interferes with the normal heme anabolic pathway in the human body causing disease. newborn infants have up to 80% fetal hemoglobin, made of alpha and gamma chain, which may be protective against the coronavirus. 15 however, this explanation does acquired immunity with other viruses, including other coronaviruses, may be protective to the pediatric population. a study investigating the presence of short-lived relative crossprotection conferred by specific prior viral infections against subsequent febrile respiratory illness showed that adenoviruspositive participants tended to be protected against subsequent infection with adenovirus, coronavirus, enterovirus, rhinovirus, and influenza virus. 16 on an average, children up to 6 years old can have 8 to 12 uris per year in comparison to adolescents and adults who average 2 to 4 uris per year. 17 severity of sars-cov-2 infection in infants with more likelihood of hospitaliza-tion as compared with toddlers and young children 2 may be explained by the fact that infant's humoral immunity is initially dependent on maternal immunoglobulins.a cytokine storm or systemic inflammatory response syndrome is an overproduction of immune cells and their activating compounds associated with a surge of activated immune cells into the lungs resulting in inflammation and fluid buildup that can lead to respiratory distress and can be contaminated by a secondary bacterial pneumonia. this increases the risk of mortality in patients. 18 this response is underdeveloped in children 19 and could explain the recently published cdc data where only 54% pediatric cases had cough as compared with 80% in adults. 20 19) in pediatric age group. children in generally have healthier lungs and are less exposed to smoke and pollution. the maturity, binding ability and function of angiotensin converting enzyme (ace2) receptors required by severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) to enter the cells, is lower in children resulting in minimal lung injury. more extensive exposure to other viruses may provide cross immunity to sars-cov2. a cytokine storm or systemic inflammatory response syndrome that results in inflammation and fluid buildup leading to respiratory distress is not well developed in children. more efficient t-cells response in children may be another reason for superior outcomes. sars-cov-2 proteins appear to attack β hemoglobin chains and "capture" porphyrins inactivating gas exchange capabilities of hemoglobin (hb) and interfering with heme anabolic cycle. young infants, with fetal hb (α2γ2) without β chains, may potentially be less susceptible to sars-cov-2 mediated effects on hb. image courtesy: satyan lakshminrusimha.breath was also much lower in children compared with adults (13 vs. 43%). 1 clinical observations in wuhan, china, have confirmed that the absolute number of peripheral blood lymphocytes in adult patients progressively declines during the inflammatory response to sars-cov-2, which could help the virus to proliferate and spread. the white blood cell count and the absolute number of lymphocytes in pediatric cases were found to be generally normal, which may be related to the incomplete development of natural immunity. 2the use of convalescent serum containing neutralizing antibodies has been used previously in sars-cov and mers and was recently reported in a small cohort for sars-cov-2. 21 however, several studies imply certain antibody responses may contributed to pathology. 22 in a sars-cov macaque model, antibodies against the spike protein were shown to contribute to lung injury. in the feline infectious peritonitis virus, antibodies against the spike protein contributed to enhancement of infection. 23 higher neutralizing antibody titers against even sars-cov-2 have been correlated with lymphopenia and elevated c-reactive protein; however, this may simply represent increased immune stimulation from more severe illness. 24 because of differences in infectious history, children may use more favorable immunoglobulin isotypes or have improved antibody focused targeting to sars-cov-2.day et al. showed that t-cells are especially important in clearing viruses from mice infected with sars-cov. 25 another study in mice also stressed the importance of cd4þ helper t-cells, which stimulate b-cells to make antibodies against pathogens, in controlling sars-cov infection. 26 in children, the young immune system and its efficient t-cells may potentially perform a superior job of responding to sars-cov-2. t-cell subsets also undergo dynamic changes between younger children and adolescents, particularly with declining t regulatory cells and increasing memory cells. 27the incubation period of covid-19 has been reported in the range of 0 to 24 days. 28 studies have shown asymptomatic and presymptomatic carrier transmission of the disease. 29, 30 in the united states, 27% of the pediatric cases that tested positive were asymptomatic, while only 7% of adults were asymptomatic as stated by cdc. an observational cohort study in zhejiang, china, reported 28% asymptomatic carriers among exposed children as well. 31 another study in shenzhen, china, validated that children are at similar risk of infection as the general population, and less likely to have severe symptoms. 32 these asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic children may play a major role in the spread of sars-cov-2 in the community and hence social distancing may be crucial to reduce the rate at which the pandemic spreads across the world. cdc recommends limiting a child's contact with older adults and people with chronic medical conditions.coronavirus leaves young children and neonates with minimal or no symptoms (a silver lining). this continued mystery may point to vital clues regarding both viral function and optimal immune system targeting. the milder and more often asymptomatic childhood presentations of sars-cov-2 may contribute to increased transmission of the virus to vulnerable adults (a black cloud). studies in this area can help the researchers to develop prophylactic and therapeutic strategies to combat this deadly disease.authors' contributions m.r. drafted the manuscript and approved the final manuscript as submitted; p.c. conceptualized, edited, and approved the manuscript; m.d.h. reviewed, edited, and approved the final manuscript as submitted; s.l. mentored, reviewed, and approved the final manuscript as submitted. all authors approved the final manuscript as submitted and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work. in december 2019, the infection caused by 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19) was first described as pneumonia of unknown cause in wuhan, situated in the hubei province of china [1] . since then, there has been a rapid increase in the number of cases over the past months. on 12th march 2020, there were over 100,000 confirmed cases and almost 4,300 deaths worldwide. as a result, the world health organisation (who) announced that the outbreak of covid-19 should be regarded as a pandemic [2] . this is not surprising given that the world is now a global village and there is limited preparation for such a pandemic [3] . this virus is air borne, and thus transmitted via respiratory droplets and direct contact. common symptoms reported so far include dry cough, fever, and myalgia [1] .many countries worldwide have taken precautionary measures such as raising awareness to frequently sanitise hands, advising those with minor symptoms to self-isolate, and to introduce travel restrictions and social distancing [4] . despite these measures, the spread of the virus remains uncontrolled. recent studies indicate that the mean incubation period of covid-19 is 3 to 5 days, but this could range from 0 to 24 days [5, 6] . the case fatality rate following covid-19 has been estimated to be as high as 7.2% [7] . this may not have considered the asymptomatic individuals and virtually all were reported in adults and the elderly. information on the prevalence of covid-19 in children is very scanty due to very few cases reported in children [8] . it is uncertain as to why there are few paediatric cases considering that children have developing immune systems, and thus should be more vulnerable to the virus. however, as the virus continues to spread, the number of cases in children has been rising significantly [9] . in general, the clinical presentation has been less severe in paediatric cases when compared to adult cases, and the reason for this difference is unknown [8] . in addition, pregnant mothers were also advised to stay indoors, as the long-term and short-term consequences of the virus on the foetus and whether there can be motherto-child vertical transmission is unknown.due to the dearth of evidence and information on covid-19, who has encouraged more research, particularly those involving children and pregnant women to provide a better understanding and overview of the clinical characteristics and natural history of the illness [8] . therefore, this review of all published literature involving children summarises findings from other studies to increase understanding of the clinical presentation, management and outcomes of covid-19 in this particular group of patients. it is hoped that the findings of this review will provide clinicians with a robust evidence base to investigate and manage children suspected with covid-19.a search strategy was designed to identify studies reporting covid-19 in children. in this review, any patient under the age of 18 will be considered as a child. we searched medline, embase, and the cochrane library from 01 june 2019 to 18 march 2020. the medical subject headings (mesh) terms used included "coronavirus", "covid-19", "2019-ncov", "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2", "child", "paediatric", "pediatric", "infant", "baby", "newborn", "children" and "sars-cov-2". these mesh terms were used in different combinations. inclusion criteria required the study to report covid-19 in a child under the age of 18 years old. this was because, in the uk health care system, the cut-off age for admission to paediatric wards is below 18 years in most hospitals. covid-19 was diagnosed by positive results from identification of 2019-ncov nucleic acid using real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) assay from nasal or pharyngeal swab specimens or blood samples. alternatively, genetic sequencing of virus genes from respiratory tract or blood samples, that are highly homologous with 2019-ncov, was another valid method for diagnosis.studies were excluded if they were laboratory, experimental, or animal studies. letters to the editor, case reports, and commentaries were also excluded due to reasons including high probability of bias and low level of evidence. two independent reviewers (c.h. and g.o.) screened the title and abstract of papers identified by the electronic searches, evaluating inclusion and exclusion criteria for all papers. articles that met the inclusion criteria were retrieved and reviewed independently for eligibility.two reviewers (c.h. and g.o.) independently reviewed the methodological quality of included studies, comparability of case and controls, and outcomes. discrepancies were resolved by discussion with a third author (p.o.). the specific variables extracted from the publications included: study design, country, age of participants, year of study, method of data collection, method of diagnosis of covid-19, whether other causes of respiratory illness, such as the influenza and adenovirus, were excluded, clinical presentation, laboratory results, other abnormal test results, duration of illness, management, and presence of any previous medical issues and outcomes. the study quality assessment for reporting systematic reviews was done according to the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (prisma) statement [10] (figure 1 ). all studies included in the review were summarised using descriptive analyses to provide an overview of the information on covid-19 in children in terms of clinical presentations, management, complications and outcome.we identified 303 potential studies during the initial search, of which 10 were duplicates. of the remaining 293 studies, 277 studies were excluded on the basis of title and abstracts, and a further 8 articles did not meet the inclusion criteria ( figure 1 ). for example, guan et al . had paediatric cases, however the data were not separated by age group [6] , and consequently data regarding only paediatric cases could not be obtained. therefore, eight studies were eligible for inclusion in the final analysis [9, [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . of the included studies, all were case series, and these were all published in the year of 2020. all identified cases were patients diagnosed and treated in china. the study by dong et al. included 2143 patients, however 1412 (65.9%) of the patients were suspected cases and therefore were not confirmed by laboratory results [9] . in addition, the suspected cases had more severe symptoms, and subsequently the authors are of the opinion that these cases may have been caused by alternative respiratory conditions. thus, only the remaining 731 confirmed cases were included in this study. this study, by dong et al., did not explicitly describe the clinical characteristics of the confirmed paediatric cases. however, this study provided valuable information on demographics, asymptomatic carriage, diagnostic methods and outcome of cases. a summary of the demographics of the study subjects, method of diagnosis, management and outcome is presented in tables 1, 2 and 3.there was a total of 820 paediatric cases of covid-19 with a mean age of 7 years and 3 months (range of 1 day to 17 years). this average does not include the ages for the patients from the study by xia et al. and dong et al., as they only provided the median age, which was 2.125 and 10 years respectively. out of the 820 patients, 466 (56.8%) were male and 354 (43.2%) were female. all cases, except the cases from dong et al., were confirmed using nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab specimens to identify the covid-19 ribonucleic acid (rna) by the rt-pcr assay. the cases from dong et al. were confirmed using genetic sequencing of virus genes from respiratory tract or blood samples that were highly homologous with 2019-ncov (table 1) .asymptomatic cases represented 14.3% (n = 117) of the total number of cases identified, and thus the remaining 85.7% (n = 703) experienced symptoms. excluding information from the study by dong et al. increases the asymptomatic carrier rate to 25.8% (n = 23/82). data on clinical presentation was unavailable from the study by dong et al. thus, detailed clinical presentations were only available in 7 studies (n = 89), of which fever was the most reported symptom in 53.9% (n = 48) of cases. most studies did not specify the peak and the duration of fever. the second most common symptom was cough in 39.3% (n = 35) of cases, although majority of the studies did not specify whether the patients experienced a dry or productive cough. in the study by wang et al., the proportion of patients with dry cough (57.1%, n = 8/14) was larger than for those with productive cough (42.9%, n = 6/14). rhinorrhoea or pharyngeal congestion was reported in 13.5% (n = 12) of cases, diarrhoea in 7.9% (n = 7) and sore throats in 9.0% (n = 8) of cases. other symptoms, such as headache or dizziness (3.4%, n = 3) and fatigue (4.5%, n = 4) were rarely reported (table 3) . interestingly, hu et al. described a rash in a 14-year-old female patient. the rash was described as most likely due to a reaction to an infusion of intravenous immunoglobulin or a side effect to the medications prescribed: lopinavir/ritonavir and darunavir/cobicistat. only xia et al. reported underlying illnesses in three patients: two had previous history of atrial septal defect surgery and one had epilepsy from previous viral encephalitis.laboratory results were reported in 10.1% (n = 83) of cases. white blood cell counts (wbc) was normal in 68.7% (n = 57) of cases, and the remaining 18.1% (n = 15) and 13.3% (n = 11) had low and elevated wbcs respectively. some studies also reported the levels of c-reactive protein (crp); this was elevated in 29.9% (n = 20/67) of cases. most studies included a computed tomography (ct) scan, except for the studies by dong et al. and cai et al., which mainly used chest x-rays. in 57.3% (n = 51) of cases the radiological findings were abnormal as there were 4 abnormal chest x-rays and 47 abnormal ct scans. two studies did not describe the lesion or report the location of the lesion. in the remaining six studies, the lesions were described, and they generally reported to have occurred in the lower zones of the lungs and appeared to be ground-glass opacities ( table 2) .all patients, including those who were asymptomatic, were admitted into hospital and mainly required symptomatic and supportive treatment. antiviral therapy (n = 52), antibiotics (n = 12), and interferon atomization (n = 6) were also other treatments used. alternative medicines (n = 10), such as those from traditional chinese herbal medicine, was also used by wang et al. and li et al., such as lianhuaqingwen granules and oral yiqi yangyin decoctions. wang et al. described one patient with no treatment, but still recovered fully from their fever and any previous respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms. feng et al. did not specify the outcome of their patients, and dong et al. described a 14-yearold who died but did not specify whether they were a suspected or confirmed case of covid-19. all other cases from the remaining 6 studies survived with no reported mortality.volume 7, issue 2, 258-273. data regarding contact history was provided in all studies, except the study by dong et al., and 65.2% (n = 58/89) reported to have had physical contact with another confirmed patient. recent travel was also reported in 11.2% (n = 10) of cases (excluding cases from dong et al.) where they had been to wuhan, the epicentre of the outbreak, or other epidemic areas such as hubei.a detailed review of all published articles on covid-19 identified a very low rate in children, accounting for ~2% (80,900 cases reported in china as of 12th march 2020) [18] . similar findings were observed in europe with 1% in children less than 10 years old and 4% in 10 to 19 years had laboratory-confirmed cases for covid-19 [19] . one in seven confirmed cases in children were asymptomatic, with fever and cough being the commonest presentation in symptomatic cases. radiological investigations were abnormal in more than half of cases. all cases in children recovered with no reported fatality.despite covid-19 being the cause of the pandemic in 2020, and thus affecting a large population worldwide, very few studies have been published in children to understand the pathophysiology, management and outcome in this cohort. this is not surprising since the first case was only reported in december 2019, and researchers and clinicians are currently heavily occupied with clinical tasks to treat this cohort of patients. currently, most studies on covid-19 are in adults and the elderly [8] . possible explanations for this could include reduced exposure of children to those infected in the community, travellers and clinical areas. other reasons may be that children have a relatively immature immunity to viruses, and consequently may respond to covid-19 differently to adults. recent experimental studies have concluded that, like the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov), the novel coronavirus 2019 (2019-ncov) uses the same receptor: angiotensin converting enzyme ii (ace-ii) [20, 21] . it is therefore possible that the activity or function of ace-ii in children is not up to the same standard as in adults. it can also be argued that it is too early to accurately make any reasonable conclusions, and, in the future, there may be a sudden increase in paediatric cases.it is important to emphasise that there is a high number of asymptomatic cases, as this review have found asymptomatic cases in one in every seven confirmed case. furthermore, there is a lot of stigma on any individual who report to have minor symptoms regardless of the cause of their illness. consequently, the proportion of asymptomatic cases of covid-19 may be higher, as some are unaware or are afraid to contact healthcare services. in addition, there may be fewer children being tested for covid-19, as from what the current literature suggests, there are more silent and asymptomatic cases in this group of patients [9] . therefore, more studies are needed to investigate the epidemiology of covid-19 and the causes of any age-related differences if they exist.this review found that almost two-third of cases had a physical contact with a confirmed case of covid-19 suggesting that the mode of transmission for this virus is person-to-person. for example, chan et al. reported a chinese family who had travelled from wuhan and subsequently, five out of six members were infected. another family member who did not travel to wuhan, but had been in contact with this family, was infected with covid-19 [22] . however, the mode of spread and incubation period was not reported by many studies. cai et al. obtained data concerning the period between symptom onset and exposure to index case, and the median incubation period was 7 days across 8 paediatric patients [13] . a population-level observational study analysed 33 adult patients from wuhan and the estimated median incubation period was 4.5 days [23] . similarly, lauer et al. collected data from 181 confirmed cases, and the median incubation period was 5.1 days. this also demonstrated that 97.5% of patients who do experience symptoms will show symptoms by 11.5 days from the time of exposure [24] . although relatively similar, the difference in the incubation periods between the paediatric and adult cases could be related to the severity of disease. for example, in another similar outbreak, which occurred in 2003, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), the association between incubation period and severity of disease was analysed. it was observed that the severe cases tended to have a significantly shorter incubation period [25] . transmission patterns of the disease caused by covid-19 were comparable with the pattern seen with sars-cov [26] . consequently, given that this review mainly focused on covid-19 cases in children, who are currently believed to experience less severe symptoms than adults and the elderly [9] , the longer incubation period compared to other studies may be accounted for by the milder form of disease in children. however, further studies should specify the incubation period to validate these finding.symptoms associated with covid-19 have so far been non-specific. the most common symptom was fever, followed by cough, in this review. this is consistent with the data from huang et al., which only included adult and elderly patients, as this showed that fever and cough was a symptom in 98% (n = 40) and 76% (n = 31) respectively of all patients included in their study [27] . the higher prevalence of fever found in their study, when compared to cases in children, may reflect the increased severity of disease in adult patients. however, irrespective of the incubation period, the current who guidance recommends laboratory investigations to ascertain cases due to covid-19. this involves collecting specimens from the upper respiratory tract, including the nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal regions for all suspected cases of covid-19 regardless of age. laboratory investigations should include using rt-pcr and bacterial cultures [8] . all studies, except for dong et al. where some patients were diagnosed using genetic sequencing, confirmed diagnosis using investigations that aligned with the who guidance. the diagnostic test for covid-19 is the rt-pcr. in this review, only confirmed cases were included. the report from yang et al. revealed that the sputum and nasal swabs have the potential to achieve a positive rate of 88.9% and 73.3% respectively during the first 14 days after illness onset [28] . as a result, false negatives are possible, which will not only reduce the reported incidence of cases but also be detrimental in contact tracing and containing the spread of this virus. other investigations used by studies included in this review are ct scans and chest x-rays [9, [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . ct scans provide a higher resolution, and therefore may be preferred over x-rays. in comparison, x-rays would be preferred in critically ill patients where only bedside investigations are possible. given the high resolution of ct, this has become the image of choice in severe cases. this may be particularly useful in children as ct scans would provide a clearer image of small lesions, which are more common in children due to milder forms of disease present, than x-rays. however, clinicians should weigh the benefit of the radiation involved in ct scans against trying to make a radiological diagnosis in a growing child. the radiological finding of ground-glass opacities in the lower zones of the lungs was the most frequent findings in this review. the 'halo sign', which is represented by a ground-glass opacity surrounded by a pulmonary nodule or mass, is a relatively rare in adults [29] , however xia et al. found this in 50% (n = 20) of the paediatric patients [16] . in another study with only adult patients, only 3.9% (n = 2) of patients had absence of ground-glass opacities and consolidations, whereas this review estimates this to be 42.6% (n = 38) in children when using the studies that provided this data. this further provides evidence that adults and children present differently, and the explanations for these differences need to be explored further in future studies.the significance of blood inflammatory markers remains controversial, particularly in children. we observed that over two-third (68.7%, n = 57) of cases had a normal wbc and a normal crp in 70.1% (n = 47/67) of cases. whereas in another study by huang et al., which only involved adult patients, 45% (n = 18) of cases had normal wbcs, with 25% (n = 10) and 30% (n = 12) having low and elevated wbcs respectively [27] . however, in contrary, elevation of procalcitonin was reported in 80% of cases involving children in another study, suggesting that a possible co-infection with bacteria might be common compared with adults with covid-19 [16] . these children may therefore benefit from additional antimicrobial cover.more covid-19 related deaths have been reported in the adult population than in children [27] . possible explanations for this could be the impaired immunity in the elderly patients, and the increased prevalence of co-morbidities such as cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular diseases in the adult and elderly. as a result, adult and elderly patients are more prone to end organ damage and systemic failures following covid-19 [27] . in addition, adult patients are more likely to smoke cigarettes, which has been found to be associated with increased risks of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [30] . consequently, ards was a complication in 29% (n = 12) of all adult patients in one study [27] . this risk is not clearly understood, thus future studies should focus on age and sex related factors contributing to the outcomes following covid-19.treatment of symptomatic cases have been rather challenging. current who recommendation for all patients with mild symptoms include antipyretics and self-isolation at the patient's home. in this review, despite some cases being asymptomatic, all were hospitalised. this method was adopted primarily to reduce further transmission in the population and not due to clinical effects of covid-19. for severe cases, including those that experience shock and ards, should be hospitalised, and respiratory and cardiovascular support should be provided [8] . given that there are no specific treatments for covid-19 due to the lack of current evidence, various combinations of treatments were trailed; this ranged from probiotics [14] , antiviral therapy to interferon atomisation [15] . whether this made a difference to the outcome of these cases is yet to be determined. a prospective and randomisedcontrolled trials are warranted to develop a specific and detailed treatment guideline for clinicians. this is a review of covid-19 cases involving children, however there are limitations to this study. the first case of covid-19 was reported in china in december 2019, and subsequently in other countries. as a result, most studies reporting cases of covid-19 were from china, thus, a regional bias may be unavoidable. further studies are needed to understand if there are differences in presentations and clinical features between children from different countries. a second limitation is that some studies were written in chinese, and therefore needed interpretation. as a result, the accuracy of interpretation may be questioned. in addition, the study by dong et al. is a nationwide time limited epidemiological study of all the paediatric patients in china from 16th january to 8th february 2020. consequentially, there is a chance that few of the patients are duplicated and reported in another study included in this review. however, as the data is non-identifiable, it is difficult to eliminate the duplicate studies. it is also important to note that, given the novelty of covid-19, there has been few studies that were eligible to be included in this review. consequently, all studies were case series, which is known to provide a lower level of evidence when compared to other study designs. nevertheless, this review further highlights important findings in the cases of covid-19 reported in children. given that one in seven of all cases were asymptomatic means that contact tracing and testing all physical contacts will help reduce the spread of this novel virus. until a vaccine is available, reporting cases, and especially those that are outside of china, will be required to monitor the trend of the pandemic.the current available data suggests that children are disproportionately affected by covid-19 and are more likely to run a milder course following this infection with covid-19 compared to adults. this study also identified a need for standardised international reporting of covid-19 cases in children to better understand the trend and possible complications associated with this virus. in addition, given that no treatment has been identified, prospective and randomised-controlled trials would be beneficial to provide robust evidence for development of a treatment strategy to reduce current morbidity in children.c.h. reviewed the literature, analysed the data, was involved in the interpretation of the data and writing the report (including the first draft), co-ordinated the production of the manuscript, had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis and approved the final manuscript as submitted.g.o. conceptualised and designed the study, was involved in the interpretation of the data and writing the report, co-ordinated the production of the manuscript, had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis and approved the final manuscript as submitted. p.o., o.o. and m.p. were involved in writing the report and approved the final manuscript as submitted. all authors approved the final manuscript as submitted and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.there was no external funding received for the conduction of this study.background an ongoing outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has spread around the world. it is debatable whether asymptomatic covid-19 virus carriers are contagious. we report here a case of the asymptomatic patient and present clinical characteristics of 455 contacts, which aims to study the infectivity of asymptomatic carriers. material and methods 455 contacts who were exposed to the asymptomatic covid-19 virus carrier became the subjects of our research. they were divided into three groups: 35 patients, 196 family members and 224 hospital staffs. we extracted their epidemiological information, clinical records, auxiliary examination results and therapeutic schedules. results the median contact time for patients was four days and that for family members was five days. cardiovascular disease accounted for 25% among original diseases of patients. apart from hospital staffs, both patients and family members were isolated medically. during the quarantine, seven patients plus one family member appeared new respiratory symptoms, where fever was the most common one. the blood counts in most contacts were within a normal range. all ct images showed no sign of covid-19 infection. no severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infections was detected in 455 contacts by nucleic acid test. conclusion in summary, all the 455 contacts were excluded from sars-cov-2 infection and we conclude that the infectivity of some asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carriers might be weak.a study on infectivity of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carriers.background an ongoing outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has spread around the world. it is debatable whether asymptomatic covid-19 virus carriers are contagious. we report here a case of the asymptomatic patient and present clinical characteristics of 455 contacts, which aims to study the infectivity of asymptomatic carriers. material and methods 455 contacts who were exposed to the asymptomatic covid-19 virus carrier became the subjects of our research. they were divided into three groups: 35 patients, 196 family members and 224 hospital staffs. we extracted their epidemiological information, clinical records, auxiliary examination results and therapeutic schedules. results the median contact time for patients was four days and that for family members was five days. cardiovascular disease accounted for 25% among original diseases of patients. apart from hospital staffs, both patients and family members were isolated medically. during the quarantine, seven patients plus one family member appeared new respiratory symptoms, where fever was the most common one. the blood counts in most contacts were within a normal range. all ct images showed no sign of covid-19 infection. no severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infections was detected in 455 contacts by nucleic acid test. conclusion in summary, all the 455 contacts were excluded from sars-cov-2 infection and we conclude that the infectivity of some asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carriers might be weak.a study on infectivity of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carriers.to many countries recently and sparked world pandemic via mass gathering [1] [2] [3] . as of march 24, 2020, there have been 334981 confirmed cases and 14652 deaths globally [4] .it has been proved that the pathogen of covid-19 is severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), which has high homology with sars-cov [5] . similar to sars-cov, the dominant sars-cov-2 transmission mode is human-to-human transmission [6] . differently, the reproductive number (r0) (the expected number of secondary cases produced by a single infected person in a susceptible population) is estimated between two and three, which is higher than sars [6, 7] . furthermore, the transmission of sars occurs during the symptomatic period [8] . for covid-19, numerous asymptomatic infections were found among close contacts of confirmed patients, like the report on "diamond princess" [9] . however, the epidemiological significance of asymptomatic infections is unclear until now. recent studies indicated that transmission of covid-19 could also occur from these individuals with no symptoms [10, 11] . however, for now, whether asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carriers are contagious still remain controversial.here, we report a case of an asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carrier with nosocomial infection and describe the clinical characteristics of 455 contacts. our purpose is to analyze the infectivity of asymptomatic carriers.case a was a 22-year-old female patient who had a medical history of congenital heart disease (chd) presented to the emergency room of guangdong provincial people's hospital (guangzhou, guangdong province, china) on january 13, 2020. she complained of shortness of breath for 16 years, and the symptom worsened for one month. the accompanied symptom was chest distress, without cough, sputum production and fever. apart from chd, she had no other diseases and had no smoking habit. her temperature was normal, and laboratory measurements showed no apparent abnormalities ( notably, in isolation, the patient had never fever, sore throat, myalgia or other symptoms associated with virus infection [12] . shortness of breath and chest distress, without further aggravation than before, were thought to be caused by chd. laboratory measurements reflected that white blood cells, lymphocytes, c-reactive protein and procalcitonin were within a normal range (table 1) in our study, asymptomatic covid-19 carrier was defined as a patient without related clinical symptoms, but whose sars-cov-2 test was positive. since case a was diagnosed, all contacts, isolated individuals' detailed information during the emergency department (ed) and hospitalization were retrospectively collected from electronic medical records, while other data were reviewed from documents recorded by related departments. emphatically, we gathered their contact history, consisting of the date when they went to the emergency, the reason why they came to the emergency, and the time how long they were exposed to the case a. demographics characteristics were also collected.any new symptoms on each person were taken down, both in ed and quarantine, including fever, cough, sputum production, sore throat, etc.meanwhile, we obtained imaging and laboratory data from hospital staffs and patients, which of family members were not noted. each of patients had undergone a ct scan prior to admission because of the outbreak. it had been reviewed after the medical isolation began. hospital staffs were examined one time. for laboratory test, a complete blood count was focus of attention.nasopharyngeal swab specimens had been collected at least one time in whole people. all samples were processed at clinical laboratory of hospital and sent to gcdc simultaneously.patients and family members were quarantined for medical observation and hospital staffs were not quarantined because of standard protection, in principle.in accordance with the protocol announced previously by the who, rt-pcr can be considered in the assessment of individuals who have had contact with a covid-19 case [13] . consequently, whether the patients were infected with the sars-cov-2 was detected by real-time rt-pcr. chinesecenter for disease control and prevention (cdc) published the sequences of primers and probe targeted to envelope gene of sars-cov-2, in january 21, 2020, which were as follows: forward primer 5′-tcagaatgccaatctccccaac-3′; reverse primer 5′-aaaggtccacccgatacattga-3′; and probe 5′cy5ctagttacactagc-catccttactgc-3′bhq1.all research objects employed fundamental descriptive analysis. continuous variables were expressed as the medians and interquartile ranges (iqr). categorical variables in each category were summarized as counts and percentages. all statistical analyses were conducted with ibm spss statistics 24.0.the statistics of 35 patients are displayed in table 2 . all patients also wore masks except for eating or drinking and were admitted to infectious department for medical isolation. the median contact time was four days (interquartile range, 1.0 to 6.0), whereas the longest among them reached 21 days. last but not least, all dyspnea was associated with heart failure. others include urologic diseases and rheumatic disease. her ct images and laboratory measurements were normal. additionally, she experienced four sars-cov-2 nucleic acid tests successively, all of which were negative. the case was given empirical antibiotic treatment since admission, and her symptoms disappeared afterwards. based on clinical symptoms as well as auxiliary examination results, she received a diagnosis of acute tonsillitis finally. on fberuray 25, she recovered and was discharged from the hospital.to ensure safety, 224 hospital staffs who had come into contact with case a were screened. as is clearly shown in table 3 with ages ranging 21 to 60 years old. the median age was 35 years old (interquartile range, 28.0 to 42.0). most of them were emergency workers so that they had long exposure to confirmed case.oppositely, some doctors in other departments had a brief stay, approximately one to two hours, because of emergency consultation. it is noteworthy that all personnel working in ed must take medical protection -namely, using n95 mask, putting on isolation gown and wearing goggle.no respiratory symptoms were observed, either existing or emerging. blood test results revealed normal leukocyte count in 87.1% and lymphocyte count in 96.5%. lymphocyte counts were decreased in three staffs (1.3%) without leukopenia (<4.0 × 10 9 cells/l). a pregnant nurse failed to accept a ct scan. a minority of hospital staffs (52 [23.3%]) found abnormalities in ct, where pulmonary nodule, fibrosis focus and emphysema were seen. all hospital staffs were tested twice for sars-cov-2 nucleic acid, and the results were negative, which was identical with the two groups mentioned above. in contrast to them, none of 224 hospital staffs required medical observation. in this study, we recorded in detail the hospitalized situation, diagnostic procedure, inspection results, treatment plans and clinical outcome of an asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carrier who was laboratory confirmation by rt-pcr assay, but without related symptoms and imaging changes in concert with previous reports [12, 14] . also, we analyzed epidemiological and clinical data from 455 contacts who had been exposed to the asymptomatic patient. primarily, shortages of ppe were common in the early stages. medical resources were supplied to healthcare workers priorly. due to these factors, patients and attendants can only wear one mask for a long time, resulting in its ineffective. besides, we noticed that some patients and relatives wore ppe incorrectly due to the lack of adequate training, which was also possible for hospital staffs. last but not least, it is unavoidable to take off mask while eating or drinking, which provides an opportunity to spread the virus.considering all the mentioned factors, we suggest that there are more important reasons for achieving "zero infection". as is well-known, person-to-person transmission through respiratory droplets is the main route of covid-19 transmission [6] . earlier research revealed that the viral load of respiratory tract samples in an asymptomatic patient was similar to that in the symptomatic patients [11] . however, a single sample is difficult to be representative. in the light of "zero infection" for this case, we venture to guess that the viral load of respiratory tract samples in the asymptomatic patient might not be high. moreover, although pathogenic nucleic acids can be detected in respiratory tract samples from asymptomatic carriers, the opportunity of transmission is less than that in symptomatic patient owing to the absence of the way expelling pathogen via cough and sneezing.based on the foregoing discussion, we conclude that the infectivity of some asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carriers might be weak. this finding implicates that there is not needful to worry unduly for asymptomatic or mild patients during the ongoing covid-19 pandemic. furthermore, excessive virus nucleic acid detection is unnecessary, which can relieve the pressure on public health resources. under the development of epidemic circumstance, more and more public concerns on the increasing number of asymptomatic or mild patients hid in the community.however, combined with our results and the defense measures currently completed, we hope such worries are misplaced and we also believe the world will win this battle certainly.the limitation of our study is that there is only one case and lack of detailed information on family members quarantined locally. large-scale multicenter studies are needed to verify our conclusion.however, both asymptomatic carrier and 455 contacts were admitted to and treated in designated places. hence, the study results are representative to some extent.infectivity of some asymptomatic sars-cov-2 carriers might be weak. effective prevention and control measures are helpful to prevent covid-19 spread of asymptomatic carriers. the result of this study may alleviate parts of the public concern about asymptomatic infected people.this work was supported by the science and technology planning project of guangdong province (no. 2020b111111005).ming gao: methodology, data curation, writing -original draft, writing -review & editing.i believe that in egypt, the first phase of the coronavirus disease (covid-19) pandemic was characterized by symptomless (covert) carriers. covert carriers are individuals who test positive for the virus on laboratory testing but are symptomless and can shed the virus. numerous researchers assume that there is an unobserved pool of these carriers because in many cases, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infections could not be related to contact with persons with infection or to travel to epidemic areas. recent studies have revealed that some populations may have up to 50% of covert carriers 1 . the sequence of events leading up to the current full-blown epidemic may provide some explanation on this aspect. on february 14, 2020, the first case of sars-cov-2 infection was confirmed in egypt in a chinese national 2 . he was diagnosed on arrival in cairo. his lengthy stay in a confined place (the plane) provided a good opportunity for virus shedding (the time required to travel from china to cairo is nearly 15 hours). considering the additional time taken to arrive at the testing area, the person had sufficient time for transmitting the virus to the surroundings. at that time, sars-cov-2 testing of all contacts showed negative results.on february 28, four foreigners who had travelled to egypt were reported to be infected: two french nationals, one canadian national, and one taiwanese national 3 . at that time, not a single case of sars-cov-2 infection had been recorded in egypt, which raises many inquiries. the next incident which added to the dilemma was provided by the egyptian cruise ship ms a' sara in late february and early march. nearly 18 americans were reported to have sars-cov-2 infection after their voyage to luxor"? . investigations revealed that 12 of the crew members were positive for sars-cov-2 and that the index case involved a taiwanese-american female tourist 4 , who had traveled on the ship between late january and early february. she apparently passed on the virus to the crewmembers. none of the 12 crew members positive for sars-cov-2 showed any symptoms. at that time, no cases of sars-cov-2 infection had been officially reported by the egyptian health authorities.on march 6, three overt cases involving egyptian nationals were recorded. by march 9, 59 covid-19 cases had been announced 4 . this indicates that with the initiation of exposure on february 14 2 , nearly 1 month passed until the appearance of obvious cases; this appears to be a long duration in a country of 100 million people. furthermore, all patients who tested positive for sars-cov-2 earlier 3 had neither signs nor symptoms. a convincing explanation for this epidemiological puzzle is that the sars-cov-2 caused covert/ asymptomatic infection in patients over this period. as reported by researchers from the united states of america 1 , asymptomatic patients play a major role in the transmission of sars-cov-2.after march 6, overt and symptomatic cases have continued to appear. postulated sequences involved in the sars-cov-2 outbreak over time among egyptians are shown in figure 1 . by may 6, a total of 7201 cases have been confirmed. a thorough analysis of data carried out on a scientific basis and guided by the most recent publications resulted in the following important preliminary conclusions. in addition to research on the important role of covert carriers in the initiation of the pandemic, more research is needed on the type of patient-virus interactions encountered among egyptians. theoretically, this interaction can be attributed to host and/or viral factors. host factors are related to angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2). ace2 is known as the key human target for the attachment of the viral spike (s) protein, which is followed by entry of sars-cov-2 into cells with subsequent viral multiplication 5 . since the expression level and pattern of ace2 vary 6,7 , various forms and degrees of disease may be expected. viral factors that may be implicated in patient-virus interactions include a possible change in viral characteristics due to selective pressure, which may be either biotic or abiotic 8 . another significant factor is virus mutation 9 . very recently, it has been assumed that there are three distinct mutants of sars-cov-2 10 , which raises the possibility of other mutants in other geographic locations with differences in the type of clinical infections and outcomes. very recently, researchers from england 11 discovered at least 12 strains of coronavirus in the united kingdom (uk), one of which has only ever been found in the uk; this indicates that this virus mutated on british soil.the magnitude of asymptomatic individuals with sars-cov-2 infection or other infections represent a critical medical problem. a recent article has shown an increase in the proportion of asymptomatic carriers of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) from 0% to 28.6% 12 .contrary to the generally acknowledged notion that early on in the course of any outbreak, the detection of severe cases is followed by that of less severe cases (paucisymptomatic or asymptomatic), it appears that sars-cov-2 transmission started in egypt with asymptomatic carriers. perhaps other outbreaks worldwide also started in a similar manner; it is possible that people were not ill enough to seek medical help or to undergo appropriate testing. however, after the infection of more than 3 million people and the continuous spread of covid-19 worldwide, a new approach is urgently needed that expands covid-19 testing to include asymptomatic persons in prioritized settings 1 .further investigation is required to determine whether all of the above assumptions are true or false and whether they are applicable to various geographic locations and different ethnic groups. indeed, it is crucial to understand the natural history of coronavirus outbreaks in different geographic locations so as to allow policy makers to plan sound prevention strategies, adjust the length bias for the effective implementation of surveillance programs, and to predict prognosis and evaluate interventions. moreover, intensive research at a molecular level is required to characterize the subtypes of sars-cov-2 prevalent in egypt.thanks are due to noha hammad, assistant professor, medical microbiology and immunology, zagazig faculty of medicine, for help in choosing the title.objectives: to determine the clinical and demographical profile of corona-virus illness among tablighi jamaat and zaireen kept in quarantine / isolation center at sukkur and hyderabad sindh. methods: the cross-sectional descriptive study (late march-2020 to mid of april-2020) was conducted at diagnostic & research laboratory lumhs jamshoro / hyderabad. all the suspected cases for covid-19 were recruited and screened for corona virus infection. the study explored the data of the suspected and diagnosed (confirmed) case of covid-2019 (tablighi jamaat and zaireen) reported by diagnostic research laboratory liaquat university of medical and health sciences (lumhs) jamshoro who belonged to various parts of the country in general and province sindh in particular. all the individuals regardless of age and gender presented either as asymptomatic, critical ill or having non-specific symptoms as fever, flu, cough; sore throat and shortness of breath were screened for covid-19 by real time pcr after taking informed consent whereas the frequency / percentages (%) and means ±sd computed for study variables. results: during study period total 920 patients were explored and screened for corona virus infection. the mean ± sd for age (yrs) of overall population of city sukkur and hyderabad was 57.83±8.84 and 59.62±9.72 respectively. the 700 people from sukkur city was screened and out of them 276 (39.4%) were positive and 424 (60.5) were negative while the cure rate was 245 (88.7%) along with mean ± sd for recovery time was 9.41±2.97. the 220 people from hyderabad city was screened and out of them 106 (48.1%) were positive and 114 (51.8%) were negative while the cure rate was 106 (100%) along with mean ± sd for recovery time was 11.54±3.42. the majority of cases at both centers were asymptomatic (90%), symptomatic (7%) and critically ill (3%). the mortality accounted for 2.8% cases at hyderabad isolation center and all were having smoking history and co-morbidities as ischemic heart diseases, diabetes mellitus, obstructive lung disease and cerebrovascular accident whereas no mortality was observed at sukkur isolation center. conclusion: rt-pcr measure allowed fast, delicate, and explicit discovery of sars-cov in biochemical diagnosis. the majority of cases at both centers were asymptomatic while the mortality was identified in 2.8% cases (having co-morbidities) at hyderabad isolation center whereas no mortality was observed at sukkur isolation center.the clinical and demographical profile of coronavirus illnessthe tale of tablighi jamaat and zaireen in quarantine / isolation center at sukkur and hyderabadcoronavirus illness or generally known as covid-19 is the updates on each and every second since it began from wuhan, china, which is announced as a pandemic disease by world health organization, said to be brought about by another strain of the infection. 1 the illness is said to spread through droplets of saliva or discharge from the nose of a contaminated individual, especially when he/she sniffles or coughs. 2 in spite of the fact that the human coronaviruses have been perceived now for a long time, the absence of invulnerability to the recognized new strain, there is a huge segment of the population vulnerable to it. furthermore, the most recent pattern of the exponential increment in the tainted individuals, with a precarious ascent of 69.17% within three days from 21 st march 2020 to 23 rd march 2020 and in light of the absence of preventive immunization, there has been a high fearful situation amongst the local public. 3, 4 the disease severity has varied from self-restricting influenza like illness to fulminant pneumonia, respiratory embarrassment and mortality. there are variations in the death rates and these assessments are quickly changing as more information is opening up and in process. 5 as per who, coronavirus disease (covid-19) situation report -106 released on may 6, 2020, total confirmed cases of covid19 globally are 3, 517, 345 and total deaths were 2,43, 401. 6 a much lower mortality of 1.4% has been accounted for exploration of data of 1099 patients with research center affirmed covid-19 from 552 clinics in mainland china. 7 since the start of the coronavirus pandemic there has been an extended use of spreads and sanitizers realizing exhaustion of resources in the market. an inadequacy of individual guarded apparatus endangers prosperity workers around the globe. 8 the non availability of appropriate protective measures like ppes, proper n95 masks and other protective measures is a matter of concern among hospital workforce. the problem is acute in a country like pakistan which is a thickly populated without a strong and well established health infrastructure. 9 public has been advised through mass media against mass gatherings of all sort including sports, schools and religious nature to heck the spread of this deadly virus. in spite of these endeavors, numerous individuals overlook the significance of social isolation because of public attitude. [10] [11] [12] the development of sars-cov-2 has once again exposed the weaknesses of global health systems preparedness, capacity to react to an irresistible danger, the rate of transmission of contaminations across universal borders and the insufficiency of proper arrangement to counter the rising/reappearing irresistible infection threat. [13] [14] [15] taking into account that the confirmed cases the comprehension of epidemiological attributes of this contamination is advancing every day, the infection is spreading to various parts of the globe presented either with symptomatic or critically ill or remain asymptomatic. this audit can provide important data to future research and may bolster government dynamics on systems to handle this public health emergency at the national and international level.the descriptive case seriesstudy explored the data of the suspected and diagnosed (confirmed) case of covid-2019 during late march-2020 to mid of april-2020 reported by diagnostic research laboratory liaquat university of medical and health sciences (lumhs) jamshoro of patient who belonged to various parts of the country in general and province sindh in particular. the population were divided in two parts i.e. tablighi jamaat and zaireen, the former group were kept in isolation center at hyderabad and had history of contact exposure since they had started their religious journey from raiwind & have hyderabad visit as an religious meeting & gatherings while the latter group was kept in isolation center at sukkur and had history to visit religious place (pilgrims) at iran and came through taftan border to the sindh province. the peoples of tablighi jamaat group belonged to various cities of pakistan while the zaireen group were from various cities of sindh province. all the cases regardless of age and gender presented either as asymptomatic, critical illness or having nonspecific symptoms as fever, flu, cough; sore throat and shortness of breath were then screened for covid-19 by real time pcr after taking informed consent. from the point that a person is tested, a sample has been taken after all aseptic measure by trained technician under the supervision of health care provider and then transported carefully to a diagnostic & research laboratory lumhs and analyzed through the rna extraction done by abbott rt auto extraction system by using extraction kits of abbott labs. and detection was done on abi thermal cycle by haploid bio system by using sansure detection kits. the study was conducted after the approval of ethical review committee lumhs and the data was collected on pre-designed proforma and analyzed in spss-22 to manipulate the frequencies / percentages and mean ± sd of categorical as well as numerical variables.during the study period total 920 patients were explored and screened for corona virus infection. the mean ± sd for age (yrs) of overall population was 57.83±8.84. the demographical and clinical profile of study population (sukkur and hyderabad) quarantine / isolation centers is presented in table- i and ii. the majority of cases of both centers were asymptomatic (90%), symptomatic (7%) and critically ill (3%). the mortality was seen in 2.8% cases of hyderabad isolation center and those who died had smoking history and also co-morbidities as ischemic heart diseases, diabetes mellitus, obstructive lung disease and cerebrovascular accident whereas no mortality was observed at sukkur isolation center. 11 .54±3.42 -on january 30 th , 2020 and the pneumonia scourge brought about by a novel coronavirus was declared an emergency worldwide by the who. 16 the wellspring of the contamination was a novel coronavirus (sars cov2). until now, respiratory beads and direct contact have been recognized as the primary transmissions routes. 17 vaporized and gut related transmission has still to be confirmed. the incubation duration of the disease is commonly 3-7 days, however no longer than 14 days. because of its solid infectivity profile, early diagnosis and treatment are critical; in any case human intervened spread can seriously imperil general population. in intense respiratory disease, rt-pcr is routinely used to identify causative infections from respiratory emissions. 19 the current study depicts the foundation of a symptomatic work process for existence of a developing infection without physical sources of viral genomic nucleic acid. powerful examine configuration was empowered by the ability of researchers from china to share genome data before formal distribution, just as the accessibility of expansive succession information. 20 the relative straightforwardness with which tests could be performed for this infection, rather than sars-cov in 2003, demonstrates the gigantic aggregate estimation of elucidating investigations of illness nature and viral genome decent variety. 21 real time (rt-pcr) test is generally recommended in virology. on account of a general population emergency, capable demonstrative research facilities can depend on this hearty innovation to build up new symptomatic tests inside their standard administrations before pre-formulated assays become accessible. 22 notwithstanding data on reagents, oligo-nucleotides and positive controls, research facilities working under quality control programs need to depend on documentation of specialized capability of the assay plan just as information from clinical assessment tests. 23 this laboratory limit bolsters quick general public health exploration well as empowers destinations to enlist patients during rapid laboratory diagnosis. in the study by mizumoto k et al. 24 , of the 634 diagnosed cases, a total of 306 and 328 were observed to be symptomatic and asymptomatic and soon after detection of infections both groups were transported to get the medical facilities at hospitals. indeed the asymptomatic individuals are useful quantity to determine the true burden of disease & can better interpret the transmission burden as evidence highlights that the fraction of sars-cov-2 positive individuals are mostly asymptomatic. 25rt-pcr measure allowed fast, delicate, and explicit discovery of sars-cov in biochemical diagnosis and offered required indicative help during the ongoing outbreak. broadly speaking this test will improve our capacity to go for a quick detection in case of the conceivable return of sars-cov.the majority of cases of both centers were asymptomatic (90%), symptomatic (7%) and critical ill (3%). the mortality was seen in 2.8% cases at hyderabad isolation center and all were having smoking history and co-morbidities as ischemic heart diseases, diabetes mellitus, obstructive lung disease and cerebrovascular accident whereas no mortality was observed at sukkur isolation center.structural proteins, including the spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), nucleocapsid (n), and sometimes a hemagglutinin-esterase protein (he). the he protein binds to specific receptors and guides membrane fusion; the s protein is responsible for cell entry, the m and e proteins mediate viral assembly process, the inner n protein develops ribonucleoprotein complexes binding to viral rna. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] to date, seven coronaviruses affect humans: in 1960shcov-229e and hcov-oc43 were firstly reported; 6, 7 hcov-nl63 and hcov-hku1 were discovered subsequently in 2004 and 2005, respectively. 8, 9 additionally, three hcovs responsible for outbreaks involving high case fatality rates have been detected in humans in the last two decades: the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov, the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers)-cov and the new coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) ( table 1) . table 1 . principal features of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov, the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers)-cov and the most recent coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) .classification beta-cov beta-cov beta-cov in several studies a similar prevalence in the detection of hcovs in patients with respiratory symptoms compared to healthy children has been found. [36] [37] [38] [39] moreover, patients with other underlying medical conditions or immunocompromised appear more susceptible to developing severe infections than healthy patients. [40] [41] [42] [43] additionally, human coronaviruses are responsible for other common childhood diseases such as acute otitis media [44] [45] [46] [47] , asthma exacerbations 48, and conjunctivitis 8 . they have also been involved in nosocomial infections, especially in the neonatal intensive care units (nicu). gagneur et al. in a prospective study determined the incidence of hcovrelated respiratory infections in newborns hospitalized in a nicu. among 64 neonates, seven positive nasal samples for hcovs (11%) were detected. all children were symptomatic. oxygen and ventilatory support were frequently needed. 49 sizun et al. evaluated the clinical role of coronaviruses respiratory infections in premature newborns. all premature infants infected had severe respiratory symptoms, including bradycardia, apnea, and hypoxemia, while chest x-ray revealed diffuse infiltrates. 50 it has also been shown that coronavirus infections are not only responsible for respiratory symptoms but can also affect other organs and systems in children. several studies have also reported that respiratory symptoms caused by coronavirus infection may be associated with central nervous system (cns) involvement. hcovs have an intrinsic capacity to affect neurons and diffuse centrifugally from cns via the transneuronal route. 51, 52 among neurological symptoms, febrile seizures, convulsions, loss of consciousness, encephalomyelitis, and encephalitis have been reported. [53] [54] [55] primarily in 1980, the viral genome was detected post-mortem in the cerebrospinal fluid of two patients with multiple sclerosis (ms). 56 subsequently, the hcovs neuroinvasion capacity was confirmed in a large panel of human brain autopsy samples affected by ms and other neurological diseases. 57 58 in 2017, a prospective study on 192 children with febrile seizures demonstrated that coronaviruses were frequently detected. 59 additionally, hcovs have been implicated as possible causes of many gastrointestinal disorders in children, and gastrointestinal symptoms have been reported in several studies in more than 50% of pediatric patients 28, 60, 61 . firstly, hcovs could be associated with neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis 62 all hcovs can also be detected in stool samples of patients affected by gastroenteritis. 60, 66 moreover, most of the hcovs found were coinfections with well-known gastroenteric viruses, including norovirus and rotavirus. hcovs may also be found occasionally in healthy children's stool samples. 67 although hcovs have always been associated with respiratory symptoms, these findings suggest that other systems may also be involved in children. the absence of serious symptoms may not be coupled with serological negativity. therefore, these viruses should be considered in the differential diagnoses of most of the common diseases of childhood.the 2002-2004 severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak was a viral respiratory illness caused by sars-cov. the outbreak firstly emerged in the southern chinese province of guangdong in november 2002 and 68 then spread to 29 countries with 8,096 people infected and 774 died. 69 the sars global outbreak was contained in july 2003. since 2004, there have not been any known cases of sars reported anywhere in the world. 70 probably, civet cats or bats could be the initial step of the transmission to humans. humans to humans infection occurs by respiratory droplets or direct contact. healthcare or household contacts are critical routes of transmission. 71, 72 sars-cov infection cases were classified by the world health organization (who) into suspected, probable, and confirmed ( table 2) . 73 the median incubation period ranges between 2-11 days. sars causes atypical pneumonia, which may progress to respiratory failure. symptoms include fever, malaise, myalgia, headache, diarrhea, and rigors. adults are more likely to develop severe illness characterized by dyspnea, lymphopenia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and a fatal clinical course in 10% of cases. the exact number of children affected by sars worldwide is unknown. however, children appear to be less susceptible to sars with a lower incidence of the disease and no reported mortality. the majority of children had documented exposure to adults with sars, usually a family member. most infected children had previously attended school, but the spread of the infection in the school environment has not been demonstrated, and this could probably be linked to lower infectiousness of the virus among children. 74, 75 children have less severe symptoms than adults, and they rarely need intensive care. however, subclinical and asymptomatic infections appear uncommon. most children reported worldwide were healthy, previously and underlying conditions were infrequently reported. [75] [76] [77] usually, children require hospitalization after 3-4 days the onset of symptoms: fever (90-100%), dry cough (43-80%), sore throat (5-30%), rhinorrhea (33-60%), malaise and myalgia (10-40%), headache (14-40%) are common. dyspnea, tachypnea, and febrile seizures are infrequent. aspecific gastrointestinal symptoms, including abdominal pain, appetite lack, vomiting, and diarrhea, have been reported. physical examination at presentation is negative in the majority of children, and chest auscultation does not reveal significant findings. moreover, sometimes crackles or signs of lung consolidation can be detected. as well as the clinical examination, laboratory findings are not specific in children with sars and can be confused with those of other respiratory infections typical of childhood. commonly lymphopenia, the elevation of transaminases, lactic dehydrogenase, and creatine phosphokinase are detected. other hematological abnormalities such as leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, the elevation of d-dimer levels and mildly prolonged activated partial thromboplastin times are also observed. [78] [79] [80] circulating interleukin (il)-1β levels might be increased, resulting in caspase-1-dependent pathway activation responsible for an exaggerated and persistent inflammatory response and the consequent respiratory failure in severe cases. 81 in children, radiological findings are nonspecific and similar to other viral respiratory abnormalities. high fever (>38 °c) and cough or breathing difficulty and one or more of the following exposures during the 10 days prior to onset of symptoms:close contact with a person who is a suspect or probable case of sars cough or breathing difficulty history of travel, to an area with recent local transmission of sars residing in an area with recent local transmission of sars1) a suspect case with radiographic evidence of infiltrates consistent with pneumonia or respiratory distress syndrome (rds) on chest x-ray (cxr). 2) a suspect case of sars that is positive for sars coronavirus by one or more assays. see use of laboratory methods for sars diagnosis. 3) a suspect case with autopsy findings consistent with the pathology of rds without an identifiable cause.www.mjhid.org mediterr j hematol infect dis 2020; 12; e2020042commonly, the chest x-ray shows ground-glass opacity or focal consolidation. linear atelectasis and peribronchial thickening have also been reported.computed tomography (ct) shows more extensive airspace consolidation and ground-glass attenuation than chest x-ray, but it is performed in selective cases in pediatric age. [78] [79] [80] 82 usually, the clinical course is less severe in children compared to adults, and few patients require oxygen supplementation and assisted ventilation but preterm newborns, children younger than one year and older than 12 years of age have more severe symptoms and are likely to develop respiratory distress. [78] [79] [80] in pediatric age, sars infection commonly has a "biphasic" pattern. the first stage of the disease is characterized by virus replication and clinically by the onset of symptoms. the second phase is characterized by pulmonary involvement, which is typically less severe in children than in adults. most children will become afebrile within seven days, and they usually do not progress to respiratory distress, the adult third phase, that is only reported in a minimal number of cases, commonly among teenagers. 83, 84 in pregnant women, sars infection is associated with a high incidence of spontaneous miscarriage, prematurity, and intrauterine growth retardation (iugr). the increased morbidities during pregnancy are likely to be due to the hypoxic state and circulatory insufficiency that worsen placental blood flow and cause miscarriage or iugr. significantly, among pregnant women, mortality is 25%. 85 however, perinatal sars infections have not been documented. in none infants born from pregnant women affected, real-time pcr (rt-pcr) assays and viral cultures conducted on neonatal blood, body secretions and amniotic fluid were positive for sars. in infants, no congenital malformations have been reported. however, in premature newborns, severe gastrointestinal complications such as jejunal perforation and necrotizing enterocolitis have been described 86 . however, it is not known if these neonatal morbidities are related to prematurity or if maternal infection is a factor that increases their incidence.it is unclear why children develop a less serious disease than adults. recurrent viral respiratory infections typical of the pediatric age could be helpful to the immune system in promptly recognizing and defeating new viral pathogens. furthermore, the immaturity of the immune system could be protective because the inflammatory cascade that causes respiratory failure in adults is more difficult to activate. additionally, children generally have fewer comorbidities than adults.children recovered quickly from sars. li et al. assessed the radiological and clinical outcomes of fortyseven children with sars after 6 months from diagnosis. all children were asymptomatic while mild pulmonary abnormalities including ground-glass opacities and air trappings were found at ct in sixteen patients. 87 although clinical and laboratory findings of sars are aspecific in children, certain features can be useful to distinguish sars from other respiratory viral infections. children with sars have a lower incidence of rhinorrhea and productive cough and higher incidence of monocytopenia than children with influenza. 88 additionally, serum lactate dehydrogenase in the presence of a low neutrophil count and low serum creatine phosphokinase could be suggestive of sars infection. 89 sars infections in children appear to be a relatively mild and aspecific disease, and the diagnosis should be accompanied by laboratory assessment. although infants and teenagers are more likely to have a worse clinical course, usually, all pediatric patients recover entirely without significant long-term sequelae.the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) is a viral respiratory infection caused by the mers-coronavirus (mers-cov). the first identified case occurred in 2012 in saudi arabia. 11, 90 subsequently, a total of 2494 confirmed cases of mers, including 858 associated deaths with a case-fatality rate of 34% were reported globally; the majority of these cases were reported from arabian peninsula, and in the middle east. 91 currently, mers is an extremely rare disease: in the last year mers was signaled only in saudi arabia. 92 mers-cov is a zoonotic virus: dromedary camels are the primary reservoir hosts. humans are infected through contact with infected dromedary camels, animal products, or humans, especially among close contact between family members and health care workers. mers-cov infection cases were classified by the who into suspected, probable, and confirmed ( table 3) . 93 usually, the mean incubation period ranges from 2 to 15 days. clinical severity of the disease varies from asymptomatic to fatal forms, and the impact of asymptomatic spread is unclear. the infection can cause severe pneumonia, which may progress to ards, respiratory failure, and death, particularly in older people, immunocompromised patients, and those with chronic diseases. common symptoms include fever, cough, and shortness of breath. gastrointestinal symptoms (including diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain), pericarditis, septic shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation have been reported. [94] [95] [96] [97] children appear to be less susceptible to mers-cov infection, and pediatric cases described in the literature are rare with a low proportion (0.1%-4%) of infected children. 98 age hospitalized with acute respiratory symptoms and/or fever. among these, none of 474 children tested resulted positive for mers-cov. 103 in pediatric age, few cases of mers cov infection have been described. most of the children were asymptomatic and positive during routine screening of mers-cov. al-tawfiq et al. reported a total of 31 pediatric mers-cov cases with a mean age of 10 years. overall, 42% were asymptomatic, while in symptomatic cases, fever and mild respiratory symptoms were common. 104 subsequently, alfaraj et al. reported a total of 7 pediatric mers-cov cases with a mean age of 8 years. in this case series, common symptoms were fever (57%), cough (14%), shortness of breath (14%), and gastrointestinal symptoms (28%). two (28.6%) patients had abnormal chest radiographic findings with bilateral infiltration, one (14.3%) required ventilatory support, and two (28.6%) required supplemental oxygen. 99 four with underlying conditions (cystic fibrosis, nephrotic syndrome, craniopharyngioma, and a right ventricular tumor) had a fatal outcome. these children developed a critical form of mers infection complicated by respiratory and multiorgan failure. frequently, clinical examination revealed bilateral rhonchi and crackles while chest x-ray showed diffuse bilateral infiltrates, ground-glass opacification and pleural effusion. [105] [106] [107] [108] [109] thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, increased creatinine and prolonged prothrombin time were the only laboratory findings reported in literature. 99, 105, 106 mers-cov in children is less frequent than adults and appears to be associated with low mortality unless the patients have underlying comorbidities. few cases of mers-cov have been reported during pregnancy. a pregnant woman, aged 39 years, had a stillbirth at approximately five months of gestation 110 and another woman gave birth to a healthy term baby, but she died after delivery. 107 in conclusion, although mers-cov represents a clinical concern for the adult population with a high fatality rate, it remains a sporadic disease in childhood. clinicians should learn to recognize and suspect mers-cov infection, as the symptoms and signs are nonspecific, based on epidemiological criteria to avoid the spread of the disease in patients at higher risk of worse clinical course.the outbreak of covid-19 infection (coronavirus disease 2019; previously 2019-ncov) began in wuhan, hubei, china, in december 2019, which then spread rapidly to other provinces of china and around the world. 111 on january 30, 2020, the who declared the outbreak of a public health emergency of international concern and, on march 11, 2020, a pandemic. 112 as of june 5, 2020, 188 other countries and regions, with more than 6.669.358 confirmed cases, are declared. among the confirmed cases, 2.904.828 are recovered, and 393.205 died. 113 recent genetic analysis suggests the covid-19 emerged from an animal source. the full genome sequences showed high homology between covid-19, bat coronavirus, and pangolin coronavirus, but further genetic study is required.moreover, according to current evidence, the principal route of transmission of covid-19 is from human to human. 114, 115 covid-19 spread between people through respiratory droplets and contact routes. droplet transmission occurs when there is close contact with a person with respiratory symptoms such as coughing or sneezing, who may spread potentially infectious droplets. transmission may also occur by direct contact with infected persons and indirect contact with infected surfaces or objects. covid-19 can persist on inanimate objects for days but can be efficiently inactivated by common disinfectants. airborne transmission may be possible when a high risk of aerosolization procedures are performed, such as endotracheal intubation and bronchoscopy. the virus is also detected in stool specimens, and consequently, the feco-oral transmission is also hypothesized. [116] [117] [118] [119] the high transmissibility of covid-19 may be explained by its demonstrated presence in the upper respiratory tract of asymptomatic or presymptomatic subjects with viral loads comparable to those detected from symptomatic patients. the real proportion of asymptomatic cases is unclear, ranging from 1% to 78% in different studies. transmission from asymptomatic patients infected with covid-19 most likely contributed to the rapid and extensive spread of pandemic but further studies are needed to more accurately estimate the proportion of genuinely asymptomatic cases and their risk of transmission. [120] [121] [122] [123] [124] [125] [126] covid-19 has been reported among all age groups. the median incubation period of covid-19 infection is 4-5 days with a range up to 24 days. 119, 127 covid-19 infection case is classified by the who into suspected, probable, and confirmed ( table 4) . 128 clinical severity of the infection varies, ranging from asymptomatic forms to critical diseases. common symptoms are fever, dry cough, malaise, lethargy, shortness of breath, sore throat, and myalgia. headache, conjunctivitis, productive cough, and diarrhea are also described. mild forms present as a common cold, and severe cases may worsen in pneumonia that may evolve to ards, shock, and multiple organ dysfunction. more severe clinical pictures are associated with stronger immune response and with the production of proinflammatory cytokines, including il-2, il-7, il-10, and tumor necrosis factor-α (tnf-α). adverse outcomes are common in elderly patients and those with underlying diseases. the need for intensive care admission is in 25-30% of patients. the fatality rate is estimated to range between 2 and 3%. [129] [130] [131] [132] [133] about 2% of covid-19 confirmed cases are children. [124] [125] [126] [127] [128] [129] [130] [131] [132] [133] [134] 135 generally, children appear to be less likely to develop a severe form of covid-19 infection, and commonly they have a mild clinical course with a good prognosis. few children may evolve into lower respiratory infections. probable reasons include having an immune system still immature, healthier respiratory tract, and less underlying conditions than adults. 136 most of them have an infected contact history with family members. moreover, children, especially those with asymptomatic or milder form, may represent significant spreaders. pediatric patients appear to be likely as adults to become infected but are less likely to develop symptoms. however, future studies are needed to understand the role of children in the transmission of the virus. [137] [138] [139] current researches show that the median age of infection in pediatric cases is 6-7 years. in symptomatic cases, symptoms are typical of acute respiratory infections and frequently included fever (59%) and cough (46%), which may be accompanied by nasal congestion, runny nose, conjunctivitis, pharyngitis, wheezing, myalgia, and expectoration. few children have an atypical presentation with gastrointestinal manifestations, including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. low oxygen saturation of less than 92%, dyspnea, cyanosis, and poor feeding, are less common than adults. among infants, symptoms such as irritability, reduced response, and poor feeding could be the main signs of infection. family clustering occurred for all infected infants. rarely infants require intensive care or mechanical ventilation or have any severe complications. common symptoms of pediatric age are summarized in figure 1 . the majority of children recovers 1-2 weeks after the onset of the disease. regarding biochemical results, leukopenia and lymphopenia are frequent in children. elevation of transaminases, myoglobin, muscle enzymes, and d-dimers might be seen in severe cases. [140] [141] [142] [143] [144] [145] [146] dong et al. reported that 94% of 2143 pediatric patients affected by covid-19 developed an asymptomatic, mild, or moderate form of infection. a severe disease characterized by dyspnea, central cyanosis, and oxygen saturation of less than 92% was reported in 5% of cases. a critical disease characterized by ards and multiple organs failure was reported in less than 1% of cases. 141 the prevalence of severe and critical disease appears higher in younger children, particularly in children aged <1-year-old and in children with underlying diseases. to date, death was an uncommon event reported in one 10month-old infant with intussusception and multiorgan failure and in one 14-year-old boy. 145, 147 other systemic symptoms appear to be related to the infection, but their link has not yet been demonstrated. since the outbreak of the pandemic, a large number of rashes, urticaria, and vasculitis affecting hands and feet of healthy children and adolescents have been reported as well as itching, burning, difficulty in joint movements and pain. 142 recently, the relationship between covid-19 infection and the development of cardiac diseases in children has been hypothesized. belhadjer et al. have reported a large number of febrile children resulted positive for covid-19 admitted in intensive care units for acute heart failure associated with a multisystem inflammatory state. in most of the children, clinical features appeared similar to those of kawasaki syndrome: lasting fever, cutaneous rash, lymphadenopathy, persistent activation of systemic inflammation and positive response to intravenous immunoglobulin. 148 similar clinical features have subsequently been reported in children with covid-19 positive serology. 149, 150 as in covid-19 infection, kawasaki syndrome is triggered by proinflammatory cascade activated primarily by innate immunity response. however, further studies are needed to establish the real pathogenetic relationship between emerging covid-19 and kawasaki-like syndromes. 151 dufort et al. 152 have recently reported the emergence of a multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children in new york state coincidental with widespread sars-cov-2 transmission, which can better clarify the relationship between kawasaki disease and covid-19. among 191 children admitted to the new york hospitals for multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (mis-c), 95 patients had a laboratory-confirmed acute or recent severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 [sars-cov-2] infection. this hyperinflammatory syndrome manifested with dermatologic, mucocutaneous, and gastrointestinal features associated with cardiac dysfunction. of these 95 patients, a total of 36 patients (37%) received a diagnosis of kawasaki's disease or atypical (or incomplete) kawasaki's disease; 7 of the 9 patients with coronary-artery aneurysms also received a diagnosis of kawasaki's disease. 152 covid-19 infection may also trigger the onset of other immune-mediated diseases such as immune thrombocytopenia, [153] [154] [155] [156] evans syndrome, 157 and autoimmune hemolytic anemia. 158 among radiological findings, ground-glass opacity, mono or bilateral infiltrates, mesh shadows, and tiny nodules are frequently detected. in severe cases, radiological alterations are diffused, presenting as a "white lung." however, radiologic evidence of pneumonia might be absent in 15-20% of children. 139, 140, [159] [160] [161] [162] [163] in selected cases, lung ultrasound might be useful in the managing and follow-up of covid-19 infection. this radiological technique can precociously identify abnormalities including small pleural effusion and subpleural consolidation and appear more available then x-ray and ct. [164] [165] clinical examination appears mostly negative for pulmonary signs, and in rare cases, rales and thoracic retractions have been reported. 161 whether pregnant women and children born to affected mothers are more likely to have a worse outcome is currently unclear. maternal-infant vertical transmission has not been documented. amniotic fluid, cord blood, neonatal throat swab, and breastmilk samples from newborns delivered by infected women were tested for covid-19, and all samples tested negative. 166 data on the maternal and perinatal outcomes of pregnant women infected with covid-19 is limited. most pregnant women with covid-19 present with fever and coughing. severe and critical maternal symptomatology have also been reported, but no women died. the most common adverse pregnancy outcome is preterm birth, occurring in 41% of cases while the rate of perinatal death is 7%, including one case of stillbirth and one neonatal death. there is no data on miscarriage for covid-19 occurring during the first trimester. in more than a third of cases, fetal distress and frequent admission neonatal intensive care units have been reported. 166, 167 rarely, cases of covid-19 positivity in newborns have been reported. common symptoms are fever, cough, lethargy, and vomiting milk. mottled skin and moderate respiratory distress presented with tachycardia, tachypnoea, subcostal retractions, and low oxygen saturation are also described in newborn babies. [169] [170] [171] [172] [173] although it can be severe in some cases, compared with sars-cov and mers-cov, covid-19 causes less severe disease in children. a recent meta-analysis shows that children infected with covid-19 have less fever than that other epidemic hcovs. 174 despite the rapid worldwide spread of covid-19 infection, additional data are needed to define the severity of the disease in children. the severity of the symptoms and the mortality rate will be better assessed in the future.differential diagnosis with common viral respiratory infections of childhood, such as influenza virus, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, and metapneumovirus, should be considered. in the diagnosis of suspected cases, epidemiological and clinical criteria must be assessed. 73, 93, 138 rt-pcr represents the gold standard to confirm the diagnosis of hcovs infections performed on samples of respiratory secretions. [175] [176] [177] [178] [179] [180] [181] the viral load is higher in lower respiratory tract secretion samples than in upper respiratory tract samples.therefore, suspected cases resulted in firstly negative could be re-tested with a second swab, better if with a low respiratory sampling is performed as proved for sars and mers infection. 182, 183 currently, few data have been published about the sensitivity and specificity of rt-pcr nasopharyngeal swabs for covid-19. in vitro analyses suggest that the rt-pcr test is highly specific and sensitive. 184 in vivo, sensitivity is estimated to be higher than 70% but seems to be lower for "mild" cases while specificity is close to 100%. 185, 186 accuracy of rt-pcr swabs in clinical practice differs depending on the site and quality of the sample. taking swabs from children may be more difficult given the intrusive nature of the procedure and further reduce the specificity and sensitivity of the test. rt-pcr of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid appears the most accurate technique of virologic confirmation, but it may not always be easily collected in all patients, especially in pediatric age. although a negative test cannot currently rule out the disease, further studies are needed to define the exact specificity and sensitivity of rt-pcr nasopharyngeal swabs. 187, 188 moreover, rt-pcr appears to be useful in virus detection on stool samples. 116 to date, serology is not considered a diagnostic method. although most patients with covid-19 appear positive for immunoglobulin-g (igg) within 19 days while igm reaches a peak 20-22 days after symptom onset, the serological response is not useful for early individuation of positive patients. 189 additionally, numerous cross-reactions occur between covid-19 and common hcovs 190, and protective immunity against covid-19 is not proved. despite its potential role in supporting rt-pcr in the diagnosis of covid-19, the clinical and immunological meaning of serology is still unclear. 191 the spread of the infection can be prevented if children and family members were educated about proper hygienic practices and infection control measures, including regular hand washing, cover the mouth with napkin or towel when coughing or sneezing, avoid crowded places and contact with sick people. children with hcovs should receive early supportive therapy and continuous monitoring. additional oxygen, caloric, and hydro electrolytic support should be performed if necessary. frequent checks of oxygen saturation and hematological, urinary, and biochemical parameters, including liver, kidney, myocardial enzymes, and coagulation parameters should be analyzed. finally, blood gas analysis and radiological diagnostics of the chest should be done when necessary. this strategy could be useful in the prevention of ards, multiorgan failure, and other nosocomial infections possibly treated, if bacterial, with appropriate antibiotics. in critical cases, mechanical ventilation with endotracheal intubation and other more invasive interventions, such as blood purification and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (emco), should be adopted. additionally, the use of antiviral drugs in children with severe hcovs infections may help to reduce viral load and the duration of symptoms. however, their safety and real effectivenesshave not yet been proven. interferon alfa and beta, corticosteroids, lopinavir/ritonavir, and ribavirin, were used in the treatment of sars-cov and mers-cov in adults and children. 75, 76, 78, 192 however, ribavirin can cause hemolytic anemia and liver dysfunction, as well as corticosteroids, increase the risk of iatrogenic immune immunosuppression. 193 to date, there is no evidence regarding the management and treatment of covid-19 infection in children. in addition to supportive therapy, the use of nebulized interferonalpha-2b and oral lopinavir/ritonavir together with corticosteroids for complications and hydroxychloroquine or intravenous immunoglobulin for severe cases have been suggested. 145, 194, recently, a position paper of the italian society of pediatric infectious disease on the treatment of children with covid-19 infection has been published. 195 in asymptomatic or mild cases, only antipyretic therapy is recommended. in severe or critical cases, the use of hydroxychloroquine ± azithromycin or lopinavir/ritonavir must be considered. immunomodulating therapy with methylprednisolone or tocilizumab or anakinra must be considered in case of the simultaneous presence of ards or progressive deterioration of respiratory function, the elevation of proinflammatory biomarkers and an interval of at least seven days from symptoms onset. supportive therapy should include antipyretic therapy, inhalation therapy with topical steroids and/or bronchodilators and venous thromboembolism prophylaxis therapy. [196] [197] [198] [199] [200] [201] [202] [203] discharge from the hospital is recommended when the patient is without fever for almost three days, respiratory symptoms have improved, and rt-pcr samples are negative. 195 conclusions. most cases of hcovs infection in children have clinically mild symptoms and a relatively short time to resolution. children seem to have a better prognosis compared to adults, and death is a sporadic event. however, some children, such as infants, adolescents, or those with underlying diseases may be more at-risk categories and require greater caution from clinicians. learning to recognize pediatric clinical presentations often indefinite or similar to other typical infections of this age, allows clinicians to perform a correct and early diagnosis and prevent the spread of infections in the general population. furthermore, the psychological and social impact of the pandemic outbreak should be considered, especially in the pediatric age. moreover, we think it is necessary to implement innovative clinical tools, such as narrative medicine, to recognize the burden of disease in children and caregivers. [201] [202] [203] [204] references:i n late 2019, a new disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) emerged in china that is now known as coronavirus disease 2019 . as of the time of this writing, almost seven million cases have been reported globally in a pandemic that will potentially affect billions. despite being recognized only 6 months ago, clinical information is rapidly becoming available. covid-19 is most severe in older individuals and those with preexisting conditions. in contrast, for most children, covid-19 appears to be mild or asymptomatic. although it is still early in the pandemic and much information is preliminary, there are sufficient data available to analyze the clinical manifestations and possible pathogenesis of covid-19 in the context of the "damage-response framework" (drf).the drf represents a theory of microbial pathogenesis first proposed in 1999, which views host damage as the relevant outcome of host-microbe interactions and posits that host damage stems from microbial traits or the host immune response or both (1) . in the drf, the relationship between host damage and the immune response is represented by a simple upright parabola, whereby host damage is plotted on the y axis as a function of the immune response, ranging from weak on the left to strong on the right (2) . the drf has been useful in advancing understanding of infectious diseases (1) and providing insight into infectious diseases that occur in the setting of weak or strong immune responses, such as candidiasis and cryptococcosis (3) (4) (5) . the drf has also informed our understanding of host susceptibility to infectious diseases (6) and can be a valuable tool for teaching microbial pathogenesis and infectious diseases (7) .according to the drf, clinical signs and symptoms manifest themselves when host damage reaches a threshold that impairs homeostasis. in covid-19, clinical symptoms range from a mild upper respiratory tract-like illness to a life-threatening acute respi-ratory syndrome (8) . in the latter, oxygenation is compromised by pulmonary inflammation, a reflection of host damage. coronaviruses damage infected cells and trigger the production of proinflammatory cytokines, which elicit inflammation that damages host cells and tissues locally and at a distance. any inflammatory response in the lungs has the potential to cripple their primary function of gas exchange. the pulmonary failure associated with severe cases of covid-19 is the result of lung damage caused by inflammation of the airways (9) , although neurological mechanisms and thromboembolism are also contributing factors (10, 11) . while virus is likely to be present in the lungs, lung damage from sars-cov-2 is most likely due to both viral and host factors, although their relative contributions are currently unknown.the emergence of covid-19 was preceded by two other outbreaks of coronaviruses in 2003 and 2012, caused by sars-cov-1 and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), respectively. these two viruses have been studied extensively in recent years. until comparable information from studies of sars-cov-2 is available, the experience with sars-cov-1 and mers-cov provides the most important clues to the pathogenesis of the severe coronavirus-related disease caused by covid-19. like covid-19, severe disease in both sars and mers involved respiratory failure. analysis of viral burden in those with the most severe disease showed that their viral titers were declining (12) . this is consistent with the concept that an overexuberant immune response contributed to lung damage. experiments in animal models showed that highly human-pathogenic coronaviruses such as the agents of sars and mers exhibit rapid viral replication in the lungs that triggers a proinflammatory cytokine response that in turn elicits an inflammatory cell infiltrate that damages the lung (13) . hence, for sars and mers, lung damage that affected pulmonary function and host survival had a strong component of immune-mediated damage. although only a few immunocompromised patients have been reported in the sars and mers literature, two cases suggest that the disease may have been milder in those with impaired immunity, perhaps supporting the idea that lung damage follows a strong immune response. a patient with aids was reported to have a mild case of sars, a fact attributed to the weakened condition of the immune system of the patient having resulted in a lack of severe disease (14) . an early case report describing sars-cov-2 infection in persons with hiv infection did not compare the severity of the disease to that seen in hiv-uninfected persons (15) . notably, a bone marrow transplant recipient on immunosuppressive therapy suffered only mild sars after infection with sars-cov-1 (16) . these reports support the idea that exuberant inflammation may be the primary driver of lung damage in patients with covid-19. while this concept requires further investigation as there are currently no data on the course of covid-19 in immunocompromised patients, it is consistent with findings in fatal cases during the h1n1 pandemic in which inflammatory damage in the lungs occurred in the absence of significant viral particles (17) . on the other hand, older age and low lymphocyte counts, as well as elevated levels of inflammatory markers, were associated with the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome in patients with covid-19 in wuhan, china (18) . although the relationships among immune suppression, the inflammatory response, and lung damage in covid-19 remain to be unraveled, the link between elevated inflammatory markers and respiratory failure has led to the use of immunosuppressive agents ranging from corticosteroids to inhibitors of cytokines, such as interleukin-6 (il-6) and other inflammatory mediators (19) . 4 . individuals with cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity, diabetes, and pulmonary disease have higher mortality. 5. covid-19 disease is less severe and may be asymptomatic in children, but a small minority develop a multisystem inflammatory syndrome with similarities to kawasaki's disease. 6. sudden deterioration with progressive pulmonary failure can occur in younger individuals. 7. the incidence and severity of disease are higher in men than in women. 8. death is usually the result of anoxia due to pulmonary failure, although there is increasing evidence of dysfunction in other organs, including heart, kidneys, and tissues affected by dysregulated coagulation and thrombosis.the drf framework posits that host damage can occur in the setting of either a weak or a strong immune response. an important caveat when considering the strength of the immune response and disease in the context of the drf is that strong immune responses are not necessarily protective if they damage tissue by inducing exuberant inflammatory responses, irrespective of whether they clear the microbe. thus, considering host damage as a function of immune response is a conceptual approach that provides a roadmap for incorporation of viral load and host inflammation into an understanding of the clinical manifestations and pathogenesis of covid-19.the observation that many sars-cov-2 infections are asymptomatic or result in mild disease implies that the immune response in such individuals controls the virus without eliciting damage that translates into clinical manifestations. in contrast, the manifestations of covid-19 that occur in aged persons and/or those with pulmonary, cardiac, and endocrine conditions are likely to reflect a different immune response that may result in a degree of damage that increases disease severity. the immune response of those with comorbidity conditions may be weaker and less effective in clearing virus. aging is known to be associated with weaker immunity (6) . similarly, pulmonary disease, cardiac disease, and endocrine disease are each associated with organ and/or tissue damage that can impair local immune responses and increase the likelihood of viral dissemination and progressive disease. men are also known to be more vulnerable to many infectious diseases than women due to stronger immune responses in women (20) . hence, weaker immune responses might explain the observation that covid-19 is more severe in the aged, the chronically ill, and men.the relative rarity of symptomatic covid-19 disease in children infected with sars-cov-2 (21) is striking. a report from china revealed that 79% of children either were asymptomatic or had mild disease (22) , and in italy, only 12% of children seen in emergency departments with positive tests for sars-cov-2 were ill (23). the mean age of these children was 3.3 years. this is notable since young children are often more susceptible than adults to respiratory viruses that cause pneumonia such as influenza and respiratory syncytial virus. the increased susceptibility of infants and young children to infectious diseases is often attributed to their having immature immune systems, as exemplified by their inability to mount antibody responses to polysaccharides before age 2. however, mers was often asymptomatic in children, except those who were immunocompromised (24) . similarly, children were found to be susceptible to but less likely to have severe disease with sars-cov-1 (25) . thus, the immune response of children to these betacoronaviruses may differ from that of adults. it has been hypothesized that one factor contributing to the relative paucity of severe disease in children may be a higher percentage of cd4 t cells (26) . this is consistent with the idea that the immune systems of children may contain sars-cov-2 more efficiently, leading to less damage. however, a study in wuhan found that infants and younger children were more likely to have severe disease than older children (22) , suggesting that age-related differences in the immune response may play an important role in containment of sars-cov-2. it is also possible that children have a different distribution of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2), the receptor for sars-cov-2 (27) . another possibility is that children's immune systems do not react with a degree of intensity that causes tissue damage, because they have not experienced multiple infections with other endemic human coronaviruses. if this is the case, the more severe disease observed in older individuals could reflect exuberant immune responses fueled by immunological memory of prior coronavirus infections. however, some children infected with sars-cov-2 develop an inflammatory vasculitis known as multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (mis-c) with features resembling those associated with kawasaki's disease (28) . although this syndrome has been described only recently and little is known about its pathogenesis, the clinical findings are those of a severe vasculitis triggered by inflammation, which again implicates strong immune responses in another facet of covid-19 disease.the finding that most sars-cov-2 infections are asymptomatic and that asymptomatic individuals can transmit the virus to others has important implications for the pathogenesis of this disease. the issue of asymptomatic transmission of other respiratory microbes remains a subject of intense study (29, 30) . the presence of high levels of sars-cov-2 in the upper respiratory tract is believed to explain the efficiency of asymptomatic transmission (31) . transmission by persons without symptoms means that sars-cov-2 replicates to a level sufficient to be acquired by another person without damaging host tissues sufficiently to trigger clinical signs and symptoms. this also implies that for some individuals, repeated cycles of viral replication do not translate into damage that results in symptoms. notably, sars-cov-2 antibody levels were lower in hospitalized patients with less-severe disease, suggesting that there is more to learn about relationships among viral load, the immune response, and disease manifestations (32) .the main clinical manifestation of severe covid-19 is pulmonary deterioration. this often occurs in individuals with high levels of proinflammatory cytokines, in whom a "cytokine storm" is believed to drive disease pathogenesis. in support of this hypothesis, patients with more-severe covid-19 had higher serum levels of il-2r, il-6, il-10, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (tnf-␣) than patients with milder disease (33) . however, they also had lymphopenia, suggesting the presence of cytokine storm may reflect a failure of cellular immunity to contain the virus. the association of cytokine storm with severe disease and mortality has led to the use of various immunosuppressive agents in patients with elevated inflammatory markers (34) . although it is too early to assume that the association of elevated inflammatory markers with severe covid-19 implies causation, clinical deterioration in the setting of a strong proinflammatory response is consistent with host damage from an overexuberant immune response.in summary, covid-19 is more severe in people who are likely to have impaired immunity, such as the aged and/or those with comorbidity conditions (35) . this supports the concept that in such individuals, weak or impaired immune responses may predispose to the development of disease. consistent with this hypothesis are data associating lymphopenia and low t cell levels (36) with severe disease and the observation that the prevalence of disease is lower in women, who mount stronger immune responses than men. in contrast, the association of high levels of proinflammatory mediators and cytokine storm with disease severity (37) ; histologic findings of inflammation, an inflammatory prothrombotic state; and an absence of viral inclusions in some postmortem reports (38) (39) (40) suggest that the immune response is itself a major contributor to host damage in covid-19. in this paradigm, the asymptomatic to less-severe responses of younger people without comorbidities and of children may reflect a "balanced" immune response that clears virus without inducing inflammatory damage.the drf provides the ideal paradigm to delve deeper into the pathogenesis of covid-19 by placing its different clinical manifestations on the axes of a parabola to account for their occurrence as a function of host susceptibility and the immune response (fig. 1) . in this schema, individuals are categorized into three groups. group i consists of individuals with comorbid conditions that may impair the immune response. the response of these individuals is located on the left side of the parabola, indicating they may develop higher viral burdens and may be at greater risk for progression to severe disease due to an inability to contain the virus in the nasopharynx. in some such individuals, unchecked viral proliferation may trigger an excessive inflammatory response that further damages the lungs and progresses to pulmonary failure. this would indicate a transition to group iii (see below). in some, progressive disease is also characterized by hematological dyscrasia, coagulation abnormalities, and multiorgan failure, which may stem from immune dysregulation. in contrast, those who do not progress to pulmonary failure may be able to mount an effective response that eventually contains the virus, leading to recovery. group i also includes immunologically intact individuals who acquired a large inoculum that overwhelmed local defenses, resulting in a de facto weak immune response. group ii consists of individuals who are infected with sars-cov-2 and remain asymptomatic or manifest only mild disease. for such individuals, the immune response contains the viral inoculum and subsequent viral replication occurs without leading to a degree of damage that alters homeostasis. these individuals have mild or no symptoms of covid-19, although they may transmit virus to others. this group also includes children, most of whom exhibit mild to no disease manifestations, and possibly some pregnant women who may also be asymptomatic (41) . group iii consists of individuals from group i whose decompensated disease outcome is the result of an excessive immune response as well as individuals who mount an excessive initial inflammatory response to infection, resulting in cytokine storm, pulmonary failure, progressive organ damage, and death.the mode of infection for sars-cov-2 is generally accepted to be introduction through the respiratory tract. diagnosis is made by pcr detection of viral nucleic acids in the upper respiratory airways, usually the nasopharynx. at this time, definitive statements about the relationships between nasopharyngeal virus, pneumonia, and disease are difficult to make because the pcr test may be associated with falsenegative results (42) . with this caveat, we note that asymptomatic group i individuals may be positive for nasopharyngeal virus (43, 44) . those in groups ii and iii manifest clinical signs and symptoms of disease that range from cough to respiratory failure. at this time, the temporal relationship between nasopharyngeal infection and pneumonia is not well understood, but it is clear that in some individuals upper airway infection precedes pneumonia, while in others there is radiographic evidence of pneumonia with negative nasopharyngeal pcr test results (45) . the relationship between nasopharyngeal virus and pneumonia may vary depending on the site of initial infection. infection from large droplets that settle in upper airways or fomites could lead to initial nasopharyngeal infection that subsequently spreads to the lungs. on the other hand, infection from small droplets that reach alveoli would produce lung-first infection that could subsequently reach the upper airways. the relationship between the initial infection site in lung or nasopharyngeal sites and outcomes in groups i to iii is unknown, as progression to disease would depend on rates of viral replication and the nature of the immune response.another way to apply the drf to covid-19 is to consider host damage as a function of time. using this approach, we can organize the outcome of host-virus interaction into discrete states associated with known outcomes of sars-cov-2 infection (fig. 2) . the drf defines four states to describe the outcome of host-microbe interaction: commensalism, colonization, persistence (latency, chronicity), and disease (2, 46). the states of colonization and commensalism are the same when the amount of damage from the host-microbe interaction is nil. latency is a recognized state that follows infection with some viruses. although "colonization" is not a term commonly used to describe viral infections, use of the term in this context helps us to define the outcome of host-virus interaction and to characterize host damage as a function of time. for sars-cov-2, we can think of the time that the virus is replicating in the nasopharynx of an infected individual as representing a state of colonization. during that period, the amount of damage that the host experiences is below the threshold that translates into symptoms. thus, the person is asymptomatic and yet is able to transmit virus, i.e., is in a contagious state. this is the reason that the cdc recommended that all persons wear masks in public (47) , namely, to lessen the chance that an asymptomatic person would transmit the virus to others. colonization can elicit an immune response that leads to sars-cov-2 elimination and resolution of infection or a response that leads to progressive host damage and disease. disease leads to death when host damage is irreparable and compromises vital organ function. at this time, we do not know if there is a chronic persistent state that would correspond to the state of latency.an important tenet of the drf is that strong immune responses do not necessarily represent effective immune responses. in fact, they can be deleterious to the host by mediating inflammatory damage if they eradicate the microbe or if they fail to do so. to make this point for covid-19, we consider parallels between pneumocystis pneumonia (pcp) in patients with hiv-aids and in patients with comorbidities and covid-19. for both covid-19 and pcp, severe disease is accompanied by exuberant pulmonary inflammation that impairs gas exchange and is life-threatening. in pcp, severely immunocompromised individuals develop a progressive pneumonia associated with hypoxia, pulmonary failure, and death as alveolar inflammation compromises oxygenation. addition of corticosteroid therapy significantly improves survival of hiv-infected persons with hypoxia due to pcp (48) . initially, the use of corticosteroids in pcp was frowned upon because it involved giving an immunosuppressive drug to patients with profound immunosuppression. today, the beneficial use of corticosteroids in pcp is a standard of care per the following schema: hiv-associated immune impairment ¡ replication of pneumocystis spp. in the lungs ¡ increase in levels of fungal antigens ¡ florid immune response ¡ pneumonia ¡ impaired oxygenation. we propose that a similar sequence of events may occur in severe covid-19 in those with preexisting cardiovascular and pulmonary disease and the aged, except that there is an increased viral burden instead of an increased fungal burden. like the intense inflammation seen in cases of hiv-associated pcp, the extensive lung inflammation in patients with covid-19 who have conditions associated with impaired immunity may seem paradoxical. however, it is worth noting that impaired immunity includes dysregulated immune responses that are often characterized by chronic and/or inappropriate inflammation. hence, as noted above, individuals in group i include those who mount a weak and/or inadequate response to sars-cov-2 infection that leads to immune responses that result in transition to the type of damage seen in individuals in group iii (as indicated by the line in fig. 1) .another disease with a clinical course that has some parallels to covid-19 is pneumococcal pneumonia. in the preantibiotic era, descriptions of this disease noted progressive symptoms with a "crisis" at 7 to 8 days that was associated with the appearance of serum antibody and agglutinins, that was temporally associated with defervescence and recovery (49, 50) . in contrast, an inability to mount an effective antibody response was associated with extrapulmonary dissemination and a systemic inflammatory syndrome that often led to death. the clinical course of covid-19 may also have a turning point after an initial phase of fever and cough that is followed by either clinical improvement or deterioration that can progress to pulmonary failure. the mediator(s) and/or correlate(s) of this turning point in covid-19 are not currently known. the "turning point" of covid-19 has parallels to sars1, as well as to 2009 pandemic h1n1. in those diseases, the immune system either eliminated the virus without triggering damage, resulting in an asymptomatic state, or triggered inflammation and damage, resulting in respiratory failure.severe covid-19 and other pulmonary infectious diseases, such as pneumocystis infection, pneumococcal disease, and influenza (h1n1) virus and sars1 virus pneumonia, are each notable for clinical manifestations that are largely driven by inflammatory damage despite being caused by a fungus, bacterium, and viruses, respectively, and, for pneumocystis infection, pneumococcus disease, and influenza, the availability of effective antimicrobial therapy. these parallels highlight the ability of the drf to deconstruct microbial pathogenesis in a way that illuminates the role of the host in mediating damage that translates into clinical manifestations. hence, for covid-19, like the other pulmonary diseases, the inflammatory response makes a critical contribution to host damage, and avoidance or abrogation of this damage should be an important component of therapeutic strategies.considering the pathogenesis of covid-19 through the lens of the drf provides a roadmap for therapeutic approaches to this disease. the therapeutic goal is to reduce host damage, which would reduce the prevalence and severity of disease and translate into reduced mortality. currently, there are no validated therapies for covid-19, but many are under development and investigation. therapeutic approaches can be broadly placed into three groups depending on whether the primary goal is to target the virus or the host immune response or both, with the important caveat that antiviral and anti-inflammatory effects are interdependent such that a strategy that targets one is likely to also affect the other.(i) antiviral. the ability of small molecules that interfere with hiv, herpesvirus, and hepatitis virus replication to treat diseases caused by these viruses established the principle that drugs that target the virus can be effective in viral diseases. today, numerous compounds are under investigation that target viral replication and there is confidence that effective antiviral compounds against sars-cov-2 will be developed. from the viewpoint of the drf, these drugs function by reducing viral burden, which can reduce virus-mediated tissue damage and avert or reduce the development of organ-damaging inflammatory responses. one such drug is remdesivir, an antiviral agent that received emergency authorization for use in covid-19 (51) . although the effect of remdesivir on sars-cov-2 viral load in patients has not been published, it ameliorated disease in mers coronavirus-infected macaques by inhibiting viral replication (52) and was recently shown to reduce lung viral loads in macaques (66) .(ii) immunomodulator. this class of agents modifies the course of disease by affecting the immune response and moving the individual's immune response to either the right or the left along the x axis of the drf parabola (fig. 3) . given what we know about the pathogenesis of covid-19, immune modulators that enhance the immune response would be contraindicated, although one can imagine potential usefulness in individuals at the extreme left of the parabola, if they are unable to mount an effective antiviral response. in this regard, we note that although interferons are critical for an effective immune response against coronaviruses, their therapeutic role in experimental and clinical disease is uncertain and could be detrimental (53) , possibly because we currently cannot identify the group of patients on the left of the parabola who would benefit from this intervention. on the other hand, there are ongoing clinical trials with anti-inflammatory drugs targeted to various inflammatory mediators, such as il-6, including tocilizumab and high-dose intravenous gamma globulin (54) . the idea behind the use of these agents is to inhibit the development of damage mediated by the host inflammatory response. targeting inflammation proved successful for pneumocystis pneumonia. some studies support the use of corticosteroids in bacterial pneumonia, and there is anecdotal evidence for the efficacy of immune modulators such as statins in viral pneumonias (55, 56) . steroids are used widely for covid-19 and a press release from a large randomized clinical trial (recovery) reported that they reduced mortality in patients requiring oxygen supplementation (https://www.recoverytrial.net/files/ recovery_dexamethasone_statement_160620_v2final.pdf). from the viewpoint of the drf, immune modulating agents such as corticosteroids reduce inflammatory damage and shift the curve to the left (fig. 3) . although immune modulating agents do not target the virus directly, the hope is that by reducing host damage the host will gain time to mount effective antiviral responses that lead to viral elimination and recovery. however, given the cascade of inflammation that may extend to complement and noncytokine/nonchemokine mediators, the use of two or more types of immune modulator might be necessary to harness and extinguish sars-cov-2-mediated immune dysregulation. the concern about the use of steroids and other agents that suppress the immune response in covid-19 is that they may inhibit antiviral activity and/or increase the likelihood of superinfection with bacteria and fungi. clinicians must be vigilant and aware of the latter. the ability to identify those patients who would most benefit from moving to the left on the drf parabola would help clinicians administer such agents with more confidence.(iii) specific immunoglobulins. the only compounds that reliably target both the virus and the immune response are specific immunoglobulins, as they have both virus-specific neutralizing and protean effects on the immune response ranging from activation of fc receptors and complement to enabling antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity. there is an extensive body of evidence supporting the efficacy of convalescent plasma to treat viral pneumonias that dates back to the 1918 epidemic. although most reports, case series, and uncontrolled studies have been favorable (57) (58) (59) , the approach has not been tested in large randomized controlled trials. we have proposed that this approach be considered and tested (60, 61) , and there is some evidence for its usefulness against covid-19 (62-65).analysis of covid-19 patients in the context of the drf suggests that the optimal therapeutic approach should depend on where their immune response lies on the parabola. although all patients with covid-19 may benefit from antiviral agents that target sars-cov-2, optimal therapy is likely to also require agents that reduce host damage by modulating the immune response and moving the patient's position to the left along the x axis. treatment with immune modulating drugs may be important for those individuals with either insufficient or overexuberant immune responses that result in severe damage and disease. the drf suggests a way to identify patients for clinical trials of investigational therapies, particularly for agents that affect the immune response. clearly, individuals with covid-19 in groups i and iii are likely to respond differently to immune modulating drugs even when presenting with similar clinical conditions (7). as we gain a greater understanding of the way in which the clinical manifestations of covid-19 reflect viral factors and the host immune response, it will be possible to develop algorithms that place affected individuals on the parabola to guide and optimize approaches to therapy.the drf makes it possible to assemble the diverse manifestations of covid-19 into one synthesis that explains the pathogenesis and clinical outcomes of this disease as a function of the host immune response. the drf also provides a schema to design therapy based on anticipated effects on disease pathogenesis and host response and how they affect the position of the patient on the x axis of the drf parabola. the drf is flexible and will be able to accommodate new information as we learn more about covid-19. for example, between the date when this paper was first submitted for publication and its revision, mis-c, which the drf places on the right side of the parabola and the promise of corticosteroids in patients requiring supplemental oxygen were described. most importantly, placing covid-19 in the context of the drf can stimulate new thought concerning the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 as a function of the host immune response. this provides a dynamic approach to research and therapy of this complex disease based on consideration of how to move patients' immune responses from a state of disease to one of health.middle east respiratory syndrome-coronavirus (mers-cov) was first isolated in 2012 from a patient in the kingdom of saudi arabia (ksa) [1] . as more cases were reported, the case fatality rate changed to 40% from 60% [2] [3] [4] [5] . in addition, initially there was a predominance of males; later this ratio decreased [2, 6] . mers-cov is characterized by three different patterns of disease: sporadic cases, intra-familial transmission [7] [8] [9] and health care associated infection [2, 3, [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . despite the increased number overtime and the multiple health care associated outbreaks [17] , the number of pediatric cases remained low during the study period [18] . the initial description of 47 cases included only a 14-year-old child [4] . the first pediatric case was a 2-year-old child reported from jeddah, ksa on june 28, 2013 [19] . later an additional three asymptomatic children were reported [4] . the largest report of childhood mers-cov cases included eleven, of which two patients were symptomatic and nine were asymptomatic [18] . the exact reason for this low prevalence of the disease in children is not known. in this study, we summarize the reported mers-cov cases and the associated clinical presentation and the outcome.we searched the saudi ministry of health website [20] , the world health organization website [21] , the flutracker website [22] , the medical literature and the retrieved published studies for any childhood mers-cov infections. we searched medline and pubmed for the keywords middle east respiratory syndrome-coronavirus, mers-cov, in combination with pediatric, children, childhood, infancy and pregnancy from the initial discovery of the virus in june 2012 until april 19, 2016. the retrieved articles were also read to find other relevant articles.relevant data were placed into an excel sheet and analyzed accordingly. descriptive analytic statistics were used in the final analysis as deemed necessary, including mean and standard deviation when applicable and frequency. the statistical review of the study was performed by a biomedical statistician. statistical review is performed before the submission of the manuscript.from june 2012, to april 19, 2016 , there were a total of 31 pediatric mers-cov cases as shown in table 1 . of all the cases, thirteen (13) or 42% were asymptomatic, and there were 17 males, 10 females and 4 unreported (a male to female ratio of 1.7:1). the mean age of patients was 9.8 + 5.4 (0.75-17) years. twenty-five cases (80.6%) were reported from ksa; the other patients were in jordan, united arab emirates and the republic of korea (table 1 ). the most common source of the infection was household contact (10 of 15 with reported source), and 5 patients acquired the infection within a health care facility. about one half of the cases were reported in 2014, and 29% were reported in 2013 and 22.6% in 2015 ( table 2) .screening of pediatric patients for mers-cov infection using real time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction showed that only 9 out of 552 (1.6%) were positive in ksa [23] . however, serologic testing of pediatric patients admitted with lower respiratory tract infection in jordan and saudi arabia revealed no positive tests [24, 25] (table 3) .the effect of mers-cov infection on the fetus was described in eight cases [26] [27] [28] [29] as summarized in table 4 .the mean age of the mothers was 32.25 + 3.4 years, and the mean gestational age was 28.4 + 6.3 wk. death of the fetus was observed in 3 (37.5%) of the 8 fetuses.despite the total number of mers cases increasing, especially in ksa, the number of pediatric cases remained low during the study period. initially, the testing in ksa was directed towards hospitalized patients with severe pneumonia. in 2015, the saudi ministry of health added a specific case definition for mers-cov infection in children [30] . the definition includes those ≤ 14 years, meets the adult case definition and has either a history of exposure to a confirmed or suspected mers-cov in the proceeding 14 d or a history of contact with camels or camel products in the proceeding 14 d [30] . the case definition also includes children with unexplained severe pneumonia [30] . the 2015 change in the case definition does not account for the low rate of childhood mers-cov infection as 33% of the cases were reported in 2014 before the case definition was changed. one of the reasons for an increased number of cases in 2014 during the jeddah outbreak was increased testing of asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic patients [11] . the pattern of mers-cov pediatric cases was similar to the 2003 sars outbreak. children were less affected than adults and children less than 2 years of age had milder disease [31] . in the largest screening of contacts, the rate of mers-cov positive children (1.6%, 9/616) compared to 2.2% (99/4440) in adults (p = 0.23) [23] . thus, in this study utilizing mers-cov pcr the positivity rate did not differ in children and adults.in adults with mers-cov infections, three patterns of transmissions were observed: sporadic (primary) cases presumed to be due to animal exposure (mainly camels), household contacts or health care associated infections [32] . in ksa, the majority (45%) of cases were health care-associated infections, 38% were primary cases, and 13% were household contacts [32] . in contrast, in the majority of pediatric cases that reported source of acquisition (66.7% of the 15 with reported source), the disease was acquired through household contact. this pattern indicates a low exposure of children to animals and a higher rate of health care associated infections in adult wards. the male to female ratio (2.8:1 and 3.3:1) was initially high [3, 4] . this apparent male predominance could be explained by the nature of hospital outbreaks [2] . eventually the male to female ratio was reduced to 1.3:1 to 1.8:1 [5, 6] . consistent with these studies, the male to female ratio in children with mers-cov was 1.7:1 and may indicate similar exposure of children to index cases in the household settings and differential host factors.possible explanations for the lower number of pediatric cases compared to adults include differential testing of adult patients and milder diseases in children; although, serologic testing of pediatric patients in ksa and jordan did not reveal any positive cases [24, 25] . in the largest sero-epidemiologic survey in ksa, the study did not include children and thus it is difficult to establish the rate of sero-positivity in children [31] . the mers-cov infection rate in children remains low and possible explanations include: a milder disease in children, asymptomatic infection, or the presence of yet to be identified factors. the development of a shorter duration of mers in children is another possible explanation. if this is the case, it may limit the development of a positive serology. in one study, delayed antibody responses as measured with the neutralization test was associated with severe diseases [33] . the longevity of antibodies in mers-cov cases might be limited as was the case with sars [33, 34] . the only study of serology among children was done among hospitalized pediatric cases who presented with lower respiratory tract infections [25] . there is no systematic screening of exposed children using serologic testing; this limited the interpretation of available serologic studies.little data also exist regarding the effect and the likelihood of mers-cov in pregnancy. eight cases were reported [26, 27, 29] . the outcome was favorable in the majority of cases. the exact prevalence of mers-cov antibodies and exposure of pregnant women to mers-cov is not known.in conclusion, the number of mers-cov infections in pediatric patients remains low. possible explanations include low exposure, presence of asymptomatic, mildly symptomatic patients or the presence of yet to be identified factors. the middle east respiratory syndrome-coronavirus (mers-cov) was first isolated in 2012 from a patient in the kingdom of saudi arabia (ksa). despite the increased number of mers-cov cases overtime, the number of pediatric cases remained low. the exact reason for this low prevalence of the disease in children is not known. the aim of this study is to summarize the reported mers-cov cases and the associated clinical presentation and the outcome.the first pediatric case was a two-year-old child reported from jeddah, ksa on june 28, 2013. later an additional three asymptomatic children were reported.the largest report of childhood mers-cov cases included eleven, including nine asymptomatic cases.the number of mers-cov infections in pediatric patients remains low. possible explanations include low exposure, presence of asymptomatic, mildly symptomatic patients or the presence of yet to be identified factors. the immune system predisposing to severe disease and to fatal outcome remains unknown. an exploration of the virus-host interaction may add to the understanding of the low prevalence in this age group.despite the low number of pediatric mers-cov cases, it is important to continue to monitor the development of this disease in this age group and to understand the risk factors.mers-cov is a new emerging virus that was first isolated in 2012.this complication of all known pediatric cases is a useful contribution to the medical literature, and knowing it is possible but rare is important.the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) or the severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (sars-cov-2) as it is now called, is rapidly spreading from its origin in wuhan city of hubei province of china to the rest of the world [1] . till 05/ 03/2020 around 96,000 cases of coronavirus disease 2019 and 3300 deaths have been reported [2] . india has reported 29 cases till date. fortunately so far, children have been infrequently affected with no deaths. but the future course of this virus is unknown. this article gives a bird's eye view about this new virus. since knowledge about this virus is rapidly evolving, readers are urged to update themselves regularly.coronaviruses are enveloped positive sense rna viruses ranging from 60 nm to 140 nm in diameter with spike like projections on its surface giving it a crown like appearance under the electron microscope; hence the name coronavirus [3] . four corona viruses namely hku1, nl63, 229e and oc43 have been in circulation in humans, and generally cause mild respiratory disease.there have been two events in the past two decades wherein crossover of animal betacorona viruses to humans has resulted in severe disease. the first such instance was in 2002-2003 when a new coronavirus of the β genera and with origin in bats crossed over to humans via the intermediary host of palm civet cats in the guangdong province of china. this virus, designated as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus affected 8422 people mostly in china and hong kong and caused 916 deaths (mortality rate 11%) before being contained [4] . almost a decade later in 2012, the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), also of bat origin, emerged in saudi arabia with dromedary camels as the intermediate host and affected 2494 people and caused 858 deaths (fatality rate 34%) [5] .origin and spread of covid-19 [1, 2, 6] in december 2019, adults in wuhan, capital city of hubei province and a major transportation hub of china started presenting to local hospitals with severe pneumonia of unknown cause. many of the initial cases had a common exposure to the huanan wholesale seafood market that also traded live animals. the surveillance system (put into place after the sars outbreak) was activated and respiratory samples of patients were sent to reference labs for etiologic investigations. on december 31st 2019, china notified the outbreak to the world health organization and on 1st january the huanan sea food market was closed. on 7th january the virus was identified as a coronavirus that had >95% homology with the bat coronavirus and > 70% similarity with the sars-cov. environmental samples from the huanan sea food market also tested positive, signifying that the virus originated from there [7] . the number of cases started increasing exponentially, some of which did not have exposure to the live animal market, suggestive of the fact that human-to-human transmission was occurring [8] . the first fatal case was reported on 11th jan 2020. the massive migration of chinese during the chinese new year fuelled the epidemic. cases in other provinces of china, other countries (thailand, japan and south korea in quick succession) were reported in people who were returning from wuhan. transmission to healthcare workers caring for patients was described on 20th jan, 2020. by 23rd january, the 11 million population of wuhan was placed under lock down with restrictions of entry and exit from the region. soon this lock down was extended to other cities of hubei province. cases of covid-19 in countries outside china were reported in those with no history of travel to china suggesting that local human-to-human transmission was occurring in these countries [9] . airports in different countries including india put in screening mechanisms to detect symptomatic people returning from china and placed them in isolation and testing them for covid-19. soon it was apparent that the infection could be transmitted from asymptomatic people and also before onset of symptoms. therefore, countries including india who evacuated their citizens from wuhan through special flights or had travellers returning from china, placed all people symptomatic or otherwise in isolation for 14 d and tested them for the virus.cases continued to increase exponentially and modelling studies reported an epidemic doubling time of 1.8 d [10] . in fact on the 12th of february, china changed its definition of confirmed cases to include patients with negative/ pending molecular tests but with clinical, radiologic and epidemiologic features of covid-19 leading to an increase in cases by 15,000 in a single day [6] . as of 05/03/2020 96,000 cases worldwide (80,000 in china) and 87 other countries and 1 international conveyance (696, in the cruise ship diamond princess parked off the coast of japan) have been reported [2] . it is important to note that while the number of new cases has reduced in china lately, they have increased exponentially in other countries including south korea, italy and iran. of those infected, 20% are in critical condition, 25% have recovered, and 3310 (3013 in china and 297 in other countries) have died [2] . india, which had reported only 3 cases till 2/3/ 2020, has also seen a sudden spurt in cases. by 5/3/2020, 29 cases had been reported; mostly in delhi, jaipur and agra in italian tourists and their contacts. one case was reported in an indian who traveled back from vienna and exposed a large number of school children in a birthday party at a city hotel. many of the contacts of these cases have been quarantined.these numbers are possibly an underestimate of the infected and dead due to limitations of surveillance and testing. though the sars-cov-2 originated from bats, the intermediary animal through which it crossed over to humans is uncertain. pangolins and snakes are the current suspects.epidemiology and pathogenesis [10, 11] all ages are susceptible. infection is transmitted through large droplets generated during coughing and sneezing by symptomatic patients but can also occur from asymptomatic people and before onset of symptoms [9] . studies have shown higher viral loads in the nasal cavity as compared to the throat with no difference in viral burden between symptomatic and asymptomatic people [12] . patients can be infectious for as long as the symptoms last and even on clinical recovery. some people may act as super spreaders; a uk citizen who attended a conference in singapore infected 11 other people while staying in a resort in the french alps and upon return to the uk [6] . these infected droplets can spread 1-2 m and deposit on surfaces. the virus can remain viable on surfaces for days in favourable atmospheric conditions but are destroyed in less than a minute by common disinfectants like sodium hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide etc. [13] . infection is acquired either by inhalation of these droplets or touching surfaces contaminated by them and then touching the nose, mouth and eyes. the virus is also present in the stool and contamination of the water supply and subsequent transmission via aerosolization/ feco oral route is also hypothesized [6] . as per current information, transplacental transmission from pregnant women to their fetus has not been described [14] . however, neonatal disease due to post natal transmission is described [14] . the incubation period varies from 2 to 14 d [median 5 d] . studies have identified angiotensin receptor 2 (ace 2 ) as the receptor through which the virus enters the respiratory mucosa [11] .the basic case reproduction rate (bcr) is estimated to range from 2 to 6.47 in various modelling studies [11] . in comparison, the bcr of sars was 2 and 1.3 for pandemic flu h1n1 2009 [2] .clinical features [8, [15] [16] [17] [18] the clinical features of covid-19 are varied, ranging from asymptomatic state to acute respiratory distress syndrome and multi organ dysfunction. the common clinical features include fever (not in all), cough, sore throat, headache, fatigue, headache, myalgia and breathlessness. conjunctivitis has also been described. thus, they are indistinguishable from other respiratory infections. in a subset of patients, by the end of the first week the disease can progress to pneumonia, respiratory failure and death. this progression is associated with extreme rise in inflammatory cytokines including il2, il7, il10, gcsf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnfα [15] . the median time from onset of symptoms to dyspnea was 5 d, hospitalization 7 d and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) 8 d. the need for intensive care admission was in 25-30% of affected patients in published series. complications witnessed included acute lung injury, ards, shock and acute kidney injury. recovery started in the 2nd or 3rd wk. the median duration of hospital stay in those who recovered was 10 d. adverse outcomes and death are more common in the elderly and those with underlying co-morbidities (50-75% of fatal cases). fatality rate in hospitalized adult patients ranged from 4 to 11%. the overall case fatality rate is estimated to range between 2 and 3% [2] .interestingly, disease in patients outside hubei province has been reported to be milder than those from wuhan [17] . similarly, the severity and case fatality rate in patients outside china has been reported to be milder [6] . this may either be due to selection bias wherein the cases reporting from wuhan included only the severe cases or due to predisposition of the asian population to the virus due to higher expression of ace 2 receptors on the respiratory mucosa [11] .disease in neonates, infants and children has been also reported to be significantly milder than their adult counterparts. in a series of 34 children admitted to a hospital in shenzhen, china between january 19th and february 7th, there were 14 males and 20 females. the median age was 8 y 11 mo and in 28 children the infection was linked to a family member and 26 children had history of travel/residence to hubei province in china. all the patients were either asymptomatic (9%) or had mild disease. no severe or critical cases were seen. the most common symptoms were fever (50%) and cough (38%). all patients recovered with symptomatic therapy and there were no deaths. one case of severe pneumonia and multiorgan dysfunction in a child has also been reported [19] . similarly the neonatal cases that have been reported have been mild [20] .a suspect case is defined as one with fever, sore throat and cough who has history of travel to china or other areas of persistent local transmission or contact with patients with similar travel history or those with confirmed covid-19 infection. however cases may be asymptomatic or even without fever. a confirmed case is a suspect case with a positive molecular test.specific diagnosis is by specific molecular tests on respiratory samples (throat swab/ nasopharyngeal swab/ sputum/ endotracheal aspirates and bronchoalveolar lavage). virus may also be detected in the stool and in severe cases, the blood. it must be remembered that the multiplex pcr panels currently available do not include the covid-19. commercial tests are also not available at present. in a suspect case in india, the appropriate sample has to be sent to designated reference labs in india or the national institute of virology in pune. as the epidemic progresses, commercial tests will become available.other laboratory investigations are usually non specific. the white cell count is usually normal or low. there may be lymphopenia; a lymphocyte count <1000 has been associated with severe disease. the platelet count is usually normal or mildly low. the crp and esr are generally elevated but procalcitonin levels are usually normal. a high procalcitonin level may indicate a bacterial co-infection. the alt/ast, prothrombin time, creatinine, d-dimer, cpk and ldh may be elevated and high levels are associated with severe disease.the chest x-ray (cxr) usually shows bilateral infiltrates but may be normal in early disease. the ct is more sensitive and specific. ct imaging generally shows infiltrates, ground glass opacities and sub segmental consolidation. it is also abnormal in asymptomatic patients/ patients with no clinical evidence of lower respiratory tract involvement. in fact, abnormal ct scans have been used to diagnose covid-19 in suspect cases with negative molecular diagnosis; many of these patients had positive molecular tests on repeat testing [22] .the differential diagnosis includes all types of respiratory viral infections [influenza, parainfluenza, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), adenovirus, human metapneumovirus, non covid-19 coronavirus], atypical organisms (mycoplasma, chlamydia) and bacterial infections. it is not possible to differentiate covid-19 from these infections clinically or through routine lab tests. therefore travel history becomes important. however, as the epidemic spreads, the travel history will become irrelevant.treatment [21, 23] treatment is essentially supportive and symptomatic.the first step is to ensure adequate isolation (discussed later) to prevent transmission to other contacts, patients and healthcare workers. mild illness should be managed at home with counseling about danger signs. the usual principles are maintaining hydration and nutrition and controlling fever and cough. routine use of antibiotics and antivirals such as oseltamivir should be avoided in confirmed cases. in hypoxic patients, provision of oxygen through nasal prongs, face mask, high flow nasal cannula (hfnc) or non-invasive ventilation is indicated. mechanical ventilation and even extra corporeal membrane oxygen support may be needed. renal replacement therapy may be needed in some. antibiotics and antifungals are required if co-infections are suspected or proven. the role of corticosteroids is unproven; while current international consensus and who advocate against their use, chinese guidelines do recommend short term therapy with low-to-moderate dose corticosteroids in covid-19 ards [24, 25] . detailed guidelines for critical care management for covid-19 have been published by the who [26] . there is, as of now, no approved treatment for covid-19. antiviral drugs such as ribavirin, lopinavirritonavir have been used based on the experience with sars and mers. in a historical control study in patients with sars, patients treated with lopinavir-ritonavir with ribavirin had better outcomes as compared to those given ribavirin alone [15] .in the case series of 99 hospitalized patients with covid-19 infection from wuhan, oxygen was given to 76%, noninvasive ventilation in 13%, mechanical ventilation in 4%, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) in 3%, continuous renal replacement therapy (crrt) in 9%, antibiotics in 71%, antifungals in 15%, glucocorticoids in 19% and intravenous immunoglobulin therapy in 27% [15] . antiviral therapy consisting of oseltamivir, ganciclovir and lopinavirritonavir was given to 75% of the patients. the duration of non-invasive ventilation was 4-22 d [median 9 d] and mechanical ventilation for 3-20 d [median 17 d]. in the case series of children discussed earlier, all children recovered with basic treatment and did not need intensive care [17] .there is anecdotal experience with use of remdeswir, a broad spectrum anti rna drug developed for ebola in management of covid-19 [27] . more evidence is needed before these drugs are recommended. other drugs proposed for therapy are arbidol (an antiviral drug available in russia and china), intravenous immunoglobulin, interferons, chloroquine and plasma of patients recovered from covid-19 [21, 28, 29] . additionally, recommendations about using traditional chinese herbs find place in the chinese guidelines [21] .prevention [21, 30] since at this time there are no approved treatments for this infection, prevention is crucial. several properties of this virus make prevention difficult namely, non-specific features of the disease, the infectivity even before onset of symptoms in the incubation period, transmission from asymptomatic people, long incubation period, tropism for mucosal surfaces such as the conjunctiva, prolonged duration of the illness and transmission even after clinical recovery.isolation of confirmed or suspected cases with mild illness at home is recommended. the ventilation at home should be good with sunlight to allow for destruction of virus. patients should be asked to wear a simple surgical mask and practice cough hygiene. caregivers should be asked to wear a surgical mask when in the same room as patient and use hand hygiene every 15-20 min.the greatest risk in covid-19 is transmission to healthcare workers. in the sars outbreak of 2002, 21% of those affected were healthcare workers [31] . till date, almost 1500 healthcare workers in china have been infected with 6 deaths. the doctor who first warned about the virus has died too. it is important to protect healthcare workers to ensure continuity of care and to prevent transmission of infection to other patients. while covid-19 transmits as a droplet pathogen and is placed in category b of infectious agents (highly pathogenic h5n1 and sars), by the china national health commission, infection control measures recommended are those for category a agents (cholera, plague). patients should be placed in separate rooms or cohorted together. negative pressure rooms are not generally needed. the rooms and surfaces and equipment should undergo regular decontamination preferably with sodium hypochlorite. healthcare workers should be provided with fit tested n95 respirators and protective suits and goggles. airborne transmission precautions should be taken during aerosol generating procedures such as intubation, suction and tracheostomies. all contacts including healthcare workers should be monitored for development of symptoms of covid-19. patients can be discharged from isolation once they are afebrile for atleast 3 d and have two consecutive negative molecular tests at 1 d sampling interval. this recommendation is different from pandemic flu where patients were asked to resume work/school once afebrile for 24 h or by day 7 of illness. negative molecular tests were not a prerequisite for discharge.at the community level, people should be asked to avoid crowded areas and postpone non-essential travel to places with ongoing transmission. they should be asked to practice cough hygiene by coughing in sleeve/ tissue rather than hands and practice hand hygiene frequently every 15-20 min. patients with respiratory symptoms should be asked to use surgical masks. the use of mask by healthy people in public places has not shown to protect against respiratory viral infections and is currently not recommended by who. however, in china, the public has been asked to wear masks in public and especially in crowded places and large scale gatherings are prohibited (entertainment parks etc). china is also considering introducing legislation to prohibit selling and trading of wild animals [32] .the international response has been dramatic. initially, there were massive travel restrictions to china and people returning from china/ evacuated from china are being evaluated for clinical symptoms, isolated and tested for covid-19 for 2 wks even if asymptomatic. however, now with rapid world wide spread of the virus these travel restrictions have extended to other countries. whether these efforts will lead to slowing of viral spread is not known.a candidate vaccine is under development.at the time of writing this article, the risk of coronavirus in india is extremely low. but that may change in the next few weeks. hence the following is recommended:& healthcare providers should take travel history of all patients with respiratory symptoms, and any international travel in the past 2 wks as well as contact with sick people who have travelled internationally. & they should set up a system of triage of patients with respiratory illness in the outpatient department and give them a simple surgical mask to wear. this new virus outbreak has challenged the economic, medical and public health infrastructure of china and to some extent, of other countries especially, its neighbours. time alone will tell how the virus will impact our lives here in india. more so, future outbreaks of viruses and pathogens of zoonotic origin are likely to continue. therefore, apart from curbing this outbreak, efforts should be made to devise comprehensive measures to prevent future outbreaks of zoonotic origin.a new strain of coronavirus (sars-cov-2), that emerged from wuhan, china is the cause of the covid-19 pandemic that is currently ravaging the world [1] [2] [3] . as of may 12, 2020 , about 4, 337, 602 confirmed covid-19 infections and 292, 451 deaths were reported worldwide [4] [5] [6] [7] . although the pandemic originated from china, most of the reported cases are now from the united states of america (approximately 1, 408, 636 infections and 83, 425 deaths). the epicenter of the pandemic is expected to shift to sub-saharan africa, which as of may 12, 2020 had reported about 46, 976 confirmed cases and 1, 111 deaths. of these, about 19, 750 confirmed cases and 428 deaths were from west-africa. the first confirmed west-african case was in nigeria on february 27, 2020, i.e., approximately two months after the first case was officially announced in china [1] . the highest burden of the disease in west-africa on may 12, 2020 is in ghana(with about 4, 700 cases and 22 deaths) and nigeria (with about 4,641 cases and 150 deaths) [8] . a multilayered-risk assessment based on nine risk factors identified nigeria as the west-african country with the highest covid-19 risk [9] . martinez-alvarez et al. [10] projected that some west-african countries, e.g., burkina faso and senegal might experience sharp increases in the number of covid-19 cases that are similar to those observed in european countries in march and april, 2020.humans can acquire the novel coronavirus when they come into contact with contaminated surfaces or from droplets released by infectious symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals [11] . mild to moderate infection symptoms of the disease include fever, cough, sore throat, nasal congestion, malaise, headache, muscle pain, and shortness of breath (or tachypnea in children). in severe cases, fever is associated with severe dyspnea, respiratory distress, and tachypnea [12] . currently, there is no vaccine or widely accepted drug for covid-19. therefore, governments and individuals are forced to rely on public health preventive measures such as basic hygiene, travel or movement restrictions, social-distancing, wearing masks, etc. current control measures being implemented in west-africa include regular hand washing with hydroalkolic solutions, quarantine of suspected cases, isolation of confirmed cases, social distancing (e.g., travel restrictions, school closures, and banning gatherings involving more than 10 people), contact tracing, and testing and treating identified cases. additionally, wearing of masks in public was recently recommended as another control measure in many countries in this region. unfortunately, it is difficult to implement these basic public health measures effectively in some west-african countries due to wide-spread poverty and poor investment in health care (staff, equipment, and infrastructure). for example, in many west-african countries less than five hospital beds and less than two medical doctors are allocated to every group of 10, 000 inhabitants [13] . furthermore, the annual per capita spending on health for about half of the countries in the region is less than us$50, i.e., about 50 times below the average per capita health spending in countries like italy and spain-two european countries with high covid-19 burden [14] . as a result of poor investment in health care and health care systems, the region has been an epidemic hotspot for emerging and neglected tropical diseases including the ebola virus (ebov), lassa virus (lasv), and buruli ulcers in recent years [15, 16] . with such inadequate healthcare systems and personnel in the region, the impact of covid-19 might be catastrophic. to compound matters, some countries in west-africa are still not well prepared to tackle this pandemic despite the observed devastating impacts and trend of the pandemic in the us and europe [10] .there is, therefore, the need to exploit every existing tool and/or develop new tools that can be useful in guiding public 2 health decision-making in the fight against the pandemic. this includes developing and using new qualitative and quantitative methods such as mathematical models. there has been an influx of mathematical models to assess the impact of covid-19 and to guide public health response in different cities, countries and regions of the world (see, for example, [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] ). few of these mathematical model frameworks have focused on the covid-19 pandemic situation in west-africa as a whole. among these few models, some have focused only on one or two countries, e.g. nigeria and ghana, while others have used used basic regression or exponential growth models [25, 26] to analyze and predict disease trends. martinez-alvarez et al. [10] used a simple graph-plot based comparative analysis of observed covid-19 data for the first 23 days of the pandemic to examine the future trajectory of the epidemic in six west-african countries (burkina faso, senegal, nigeria, côte d'ivoire, ghana, andthe gambia). this far, only one study has considered the entire region of west-africa [27] . in this study, a co-variate-based instrumental variable regression framework was used to predict the number of disease cases (2.8 million by june 30, 2020) and to assess the epidemiological, socio-economic and health system readiness of the region to the pandemic.in this study, we develop a new susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (seir)-type mathematical model for covid-19 in west-africa and use it to (i) study the current transmission pattern of covid-19, (ii) evaluate the impact of currently implemented public health control measures such contact tracing, social distancing and use of face masks on covid-19 transmission, and (iii) predict the future course of the pandemic with and without currently implemented and additional control measures in west-africa. in addition to incorporating various basic public health control measures in our model, it accounts for asymptomatic infectious individuals -a class of individuals that render disease control more difficult since they do not exhibit clinical disease symptoms, although they contribute to disease transmission [21] . to our knowledge, this is the first study that has used an explicit seir-type compartmental mathematical model together with data for the west-african pandemic period (from february 28, 2020 to april 23, 2020) to understand the spread of the covid-19 pandemic in the region, assess the impact of current control measures, and discuss possible further control measures that might be required to better control the pandemic in the region.we develop a deterministic seir-type model framework, where the entire population of west-africa is subdivided in four categories: susceptible (s), exposed (e), infectious asymptomatic (i a ), infectious symptomatic (i s ), infectious at treatment or isolation centres (i c ), and recovered (r). the model accounts for public health control measures that lead to a reduction in the force of infection λ, such as social distancing and face mask use. following the approach in ngonghala et al.[17], we model the force of infection as (1 − ψ)(β a i a + β s i s + β c i c )/(s + e + i a + i s + r), where β k (k ∈ {a, s, c}) is the disease transmission rate by individuals in the i k class and 0 ≤ ψ ≤ 1 is the percentage reduction in disease transmission due to public health control measures such as social distancing and face masks use. note that ψ = 0 implies that no public health control measure leading to a reduction in disease transmission is applied and that ψ = 1 implies that implemented public health control measures are efficient enough to stop disease transmission. after the average incubation period 1/σ, 3 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint a proportion π of the exposed population does not develop symptoms, i.e., joins the i a compartment, while the remaining proportion (1 − π) join the i s class. identification and isolation of infectious asymptomatic individuals, e.g., through contact tracing occurs at rate ρ a , i.e., 1/ρ a is the average time it takes for an infectious asymptomatic individual to be identified and isolated, while infectious asymptomatic individuals develop symptoms at rate α. isolation or hospitalization of symptomatic cases occurs at rate ρ s , i.e., 1/ρ s is the average time it takes for an infectious symptomatic individual to be isolated. individuals from the i a , i s , and i c compartments recover at rates γ a , γ s , and γ c , respectively, while individuals in the i s and i c classes die due to covid-19 at respective rates δ s and δ c . the flow diagram for the model system is presented in fig. 1 . the susceptible population is denoted by s, the exposed population is denoted by e, the infectious asymptomatic population is denoted by ia, the infectious symptomatic population is denoted by is, the isolated infectious population is denoted by ic, and the recovered population is denoted by r. the parameters of the model are described in the text.using the flow-chart and the preceding description, we obtain the following model system:dr dt = γ a i a + γ s i s + γ c i c .(2.1)4 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint 2.2. west-african covid-19 data and parameter estimation west-africa comprises sixteen countries: benin, burkina-faso, cape verde, ghana, guinea, ivory coast, mali, mauritania, niger, nigeria, senegal, togo, sierra leone, liberia, guinea-bissau and gambia. based on the latest united nations estimates, the current population of west-africa is 399, 386, 502, i.e., about 5.16% of the world population [28] . the region includes nine of the 25 poorest countries in the world [29] . application of basic public health control measures against covid-19 spread in most west-african countries started on march 15, 2020, i.e., about 17 days after the outbreak in the region. since mass testing in the region only started around april 24, 2020 and since many countries in the region are not carrying out mass testing yet, we avoid using data collected after april 23 in our study. therefore, the data considered for this analysis spans the period from february 28, 2020, i.e., one day after the first case through to april 23, 2020 (before mass testing started), i.e., 39 days after the start of control measures. this allowed us to assess the dynamics of the disease before the start of control measures (i.e., the worst case scenario) and for the entire period (with control measures) by estimating model parameters for the first 17 days of the outbreak, when no control measures were put in place and then for the entire period of data collection (feb. 28-apr 23). in west-africa, the reported confirmed cases are infectious symptomatic individuals who have been tested at a treatment center or infectious asymptomatic individuals who have been contact-traced and then tested at a treatment centre. hence, we assume that confirmed disease cases correspond to individuals in the i c class, i.e., isolated infectious individuals at isolation or treatment centers. we use the cumulative number of cases in west-africa, downloaded from the global rise of education website [8] to fit our model and estimate some of the key parameters presented in table   1 . the fitting was done using a nonlinear least squares procedure, and involved finding the best set of parameter values that minimized the sum of the square differences between the observed number of daily cases in west-africa and the predicted cumulative number of cases from our model. we repeated this procedure 5,000 times to approximate the distribution of each of the parameters by a normal distribution and obtain the mean value with a 95% confidence interval. the goodness of fit of our model, assessed using the root mean squared error (rmse) was 2.25 and 70.62, respectively, for the fits before the onset of interventions and for the entire period of data collection. the estimated parameters are presented in table 1 and the model fit is illustrated in fig. 2 (a), (b). the other model parameters that were extracted from the literature or estimated based on covid-19 information from west-africa are presented in table 2. it is worth noting that the choice of parameters to estimate from the data or to extract from the literature was motivated by its importance to the transmission dynamics of the disease. although the transmission rate at the treatment centre β c , is important in influencing disease dynamics, we extracted its value from the literature based on the experience in other infectious disease management ( e.g: ebola and lassa fever) in west africa. we considered the value in [30] . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint parameter value reference β c 0.02 [30] δ c 0.0654 calculated from our data γ a 1/9.5 [31] γ c 0.0206 calculated from our data σ 1/5.1 [32] α 0.304 [33] π 0.78 [34] 6 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint tables 1 (entire period) and table 2. .in this section, we derive the reproduction number of the model (which is defined as the average number of new infections generated by a typical infectious individual introduced in a population where everybody is susceptible) denoted by r c and a threshold value for the reduction in disease transmission required for eliminating the disease. using the next generation matrix approach in [35, 36] , the reproduction number is:. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint three components, which represent the contribution of the infectious asymptomatic class r a c , the infectious symptomatic class r s c , and the infectious isolated class, r c c . the time-dependent effective reproduction number is r c s/(s + e + i a + i s + r).the approach in [35, 36] also assures us that the disease-free equilibrium (s 0 , e 0 , i 0 a , i 0 s , i 0 c , r 0 ) = (s(0), 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)of system (2.1) is locally and asymptotically stable whenever the reproduction number r c is less than one and unstable if r c > 1. to derive the threshold reduction in the disease transmission ψ c , required to reduce the control reproduction number to one, we set r c = 1 in eq. 3.1 and solve for ψ. this yields:.note that the fraction in the right hand side of the threshold value ψ c of ψ is greater than zero and less than or equal to one since 0 ≤ ψ ≤ 1. note also that ψ = ψ c , which corresponds to the case in which r c = 1 now serves as a threshold for an outbreak or the disease dying out. in particular, disease elimination is possible if ψ > ψ c (since r c < 1) and impossible if. the epidemiological implication of this is that massive adherence to control measures that reduce covid-19 transmission, e.g., social distancing can lead to disease elimination, while low adherence to such measures will reduce disease burden, but might not lead to elimination.in this section, we use the parameters presented in tables 1 and 2 (table 1 ) and the other parameters in table 2 to test the short-term predictive power of the model (fig. 3) . observe that the predicted cumulative number of cases resulting from the simulations captures the actual cumulative reported cases for the period from april 23 to april 30, 2020 very well.8 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint fig. 4 (a) shows the change in the control reproduction number in response to changes in the percentage reduction (ψ) of disease transmission due to public health control measures such as social distancing or using face masks. it shows that about a 53% reduction in the disease transmission is required to reduce r c to one (fig. 4 (a) ). this value (53%) corresponds to the numerical value of ψ c from eq. (3.2) computed using the baseline parameter values from tables 1 and 2 and a 28% increase from the 25% baseline value of ψ. our results also show that there will be a 52% reduction in the effective reproduction number from february 28, 2020 to may 06, 2020 if no control measures are applied, and a 15% reduction if there is a 45% reduction in disease transmission from february 28, 2020 to june 02, 2021, i.e., an additional reduction of 20% in ψ ( fig. 4 (b) ). additional simulations were carried out to investigate the dynamics of the system (2.1) for different values of ψ. the results show that applying control measures at the baseline level of 25% will bring about a 60% reduction in the number of cases (from the worst case scenario) when the pandemic peaks and also delay the peak to mid september 2020.improved control measures resulting in 35% and 45% reduction in disease transmission will lead to reductions of 76% and 92%, respectively, in the number of confirmed cases when the epidemic attains its peak (fig. 4 (c) ). thus, improved control measures that are related to reducing disease transmission have a significant effect in reducing the number of cases and flattening the epidemic curve-an outcome that will prevent the already weak and fragile health care systems in west-africa from being overwhelmed by a high covid-19 burden.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint . other basic public health control measures include isolating symptomatic infectious humans and contact tracing and isolating asymptomatic humans. in our model we assume that isolating symptomatic infectious humans is at rate ρ s and contact tracing and isolating asymptomatic infectious humans is at rate ρ a . as of april 23, 2020, there was no mass testing in west-africa. in particular, mostly suspected and symptomatic cases were tested. hence, the most common pathway through which infectious asymptomatic individuals were identified in west-africa was through contact tracing. heat maps were plotted to investigate the individual and combined effects of pairs of control measures such as contact tracing, isolation, and using controls that lead to a reduction in disease transmission, e.g., mask use, social and physical distancing on covid-19 in west-africa (fig. 5 ).our analysis show that the spread of the disease decreases with a higher reduction in the disease transmission rate and a decreasing proportion of exposed humans who do not develop clinical disease symptoms (i.e., become asymptomatic) after the incubation period, π (fig. 5 (a) ). thus, if a higher proportion of exposed humans do not develop clinical disease symptoms after the incubation period, a higher reduction in the disease transmission rate will be required to eliminate the disease. in particular, if every exposed individual develop symptoms at the end of the incubation period, i.e., π = 0, then only a 29% reduction in disease transmission rate is required to eliminate the disease. but, if 78% and 50% of the exposed become asymptomatic after the incubation period, then 53% and 47% reductions in the disease transmission rate are required to eliminate the disease (fig. 5 (a) ). the combined impact of detection and isolation of asymptomatic humans (by contact tracing or mass testing) together with a reduction in the disease transmission rate is explored in fig. 5 (b) . if asymptomatic individuals are detected and isolated fast enough, e.g., within 2 days, i.e., ρ a = 0.56, then a 20% reduction in the disease 10 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint transmission rate would suffice for elimination, while if it takes a long time to detect and isolate asymptomatic individuals, e.g., within 10 days, a 48% reduction on the disease transmission rate is required to contain the pandemic in west-africa ( fig. 5 (b) ). we also found out that disease elimination is possible even if detection and isolation of asymptomatic humans is not complemented with any other measure. but such identification and isolation must occur in a timely manner, e.g., within 1 day, i.e., ρ a = 1 (fig. 5 (b) ). on the other hand, disease elimination is also possible if more exposed humans develop symptoms at the end of the incubation period and asymptomatic humans are detected and isolated in a timely manner. for example, if only 78% of humans fail to develop symptoms at the end of the incubation period, then asymptomatic humans must be identified and isolated within 3 days for disease elimination to be possible (fig. 5 (e) ). thus, disease control is more difficult if it takes long to contact trace and isolate asymptomatic humans.our results also show that timely isolation of symptomatic cases is important in reducing the disease burden in west-africa, although disease elimination is only possible if isolation of infectious symptomatic cases is complemented with another control measure (fig. 5 (c), (d) ). in particular, if symptomatic humans are identified and isolated within 3 days, i.e., ρ s = 0.39, then a 43% reduction in the disease transmission rate is required for disease elimination, while if it takes a long time to isolate symptomatic infectious individuals, e.g., within 10 days, a 51% reduction on the disease transmission rate is required to contain the pandemic in west-africa (fig. 5 (c) ). when isolation of symptomatic infectious disease cases is complemented with identification and isolation of asymptomatic infectious cases, disease elimination is only possible through timely identification and isolation of asymptomatic cases (fig. 5 (d) ). thus, identifying and isolating asymptomatic individuals in a timely manner contributes more in curtailing the pandemic in west-africa than isolating symptomatic infectious individuals. furthermore, if more exposed humans develop disease symptoms at the end of the incubation period and more symptomatic infectious individuals are identified and isolated in a timely manner, disease elimination is possible (fig. 5 (f) ). in particular, if 58% of exposed humans develop clinical disease symptoms at the end of the incubation period, then symptomatic infectious humans must be isolated within 2 days in order to eliminate the disease. however, if 37% of exposed humans develop clinical disease symptoms at the end of the incubation period, then symptomatic infectious cases must be isolated within 3 days in order to eliminate the disease.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint mathematical models have been useful in understanding disease-outbreaks and in informing policy aimed at curtailing such diseases in a timely manner [17-19, 23, 24, 37] . in the context of the covid-19 pandemic that is currently spreading around the world, mathematical models have been very useful in predicting the course of the disease and in assessing the impacts of basic public health control measures [17] [18] [19] 23] . in this study, we develop a mathematical model to inform the covid-19 trend and possible course of control measures in west-africa. the model is trained with covid-19 data from west-african countries for the period from february 28, 2020 to april 23, 2020 and used to compute the reproduction number, as well as assess the impact of basic public health control measures in the region.we obtained a reproduction number r c = 1.60 for west-africa, which is close to the reported value for south korea (1.5) [38] but lower than the value reported for wuhan one week before travel restrictions were introduced (2.35) [39] . hence, although the disease is still spreading (r c > 1) in west-africa, the spread is slow compared to other parts of world. this low transmission in the region can be attributed to a number of factors, e.g., the pandemic might still be in the early stage, since the statistics for west-africa within the first seven weeks of the pandemic (3, 661 cases and 79 deaths), are similar to those of france and higher than those of the us (1, 025 cases and 28 deaths) when these countries were within the same outbreak time-frame. also, the low transmission could be due to the fact that there is limited movement of individuals within 12 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint the region and between the region and the rest of the world [9] . furthermore, the low number of confirmed cases in west-africa might result from under-reporting of cases as was the case in peru [40] . this is supported by the growing number of asymptomatic infectious individuals observed in our study. de leo et al. observed a similar trend in mexico, where over 90% of the infectious population was asymptomatic [21] . in the absence of sufficient test kits in many west-african countries, and with the limitations in health care facilities and personnel, identifying cases is difficult [41] . irrespective of the current trend, the covid-19 pandemic is still a more serious health problem in west-africa compared to previous outbreaks like the 2014 ebola outbreak (1.50 ≤ r c ≤ 1.60) [42, 43] or the lassa fever outbreak in nigeria (1.29 ≤ r c ≤ 1.37) [44] .although most countries in west-africa started implementing basic control measures since march 17, 2020, our simulation results indicate that improvements are necessary to effectively control or eliminate the pandemic from the region. because there is currently no safe and effective vaccine or drugs against the novel coronavirus, basic public health control measures have been used to curtail the pandemic in many parts of the world including west-africa. these measures include contact tracing, isolation, and measures that lead to a reduction in disease transmission, e.g., mask use and social or physical distancing [17] . in the absence of such measures, the worst case scenario prediction for west-africa from our model is over 2 million confirmed covid-19 cases by mid may 2020 when the epidemic peaks. this projection is within the range (517, 489 -15, 056, 314) in [27] for the same west-african region, although the peak in the latter study was predicted to occur in june 2020. the higher upper limit in [27] might be linked to the fact that the authors used linear models and considered the rate of infection between the first and second weeks of the epidemic in countries in which the number of cases might have been overestimated. we found out that basic public health control measures, especially those associated with a reduction in the disease transmission rate such as social distancing and mask use have a significant effect on reducing the burden of the disease, e.g, at baseline values, control measures reduce the number of cases when the epidemic peaks by about 60% and the disease transmission rate by about 25%. also, improving control measures such about an estimated 45% reduction in the disease transmission is attained, reduces the number of confirmed cases when the epidemic attains its peak approximately 92%. such interventions are useful in reducing ensuring that the already limited and fragile health care systems are not overwhelmed by the covid-19 burden [19] .our results suggest that early identification and isolation of both symptomatic and asymptomatic infectious individuals is an important step towards curtailing the burden of the pandemic. in particular, identifying and isolating asymptomatic individuals early enough, e.g., within 1-2 days after the end of the incubation period can result in disease elimination, even without any other control measure. the same is not true with identifying and isolating symptomatic individuals or when it takes a longer time to identify and isolate infectious asymptomatic individuals. in this case, the measure must be complemented with another measure that involves a reduction in the disease transmission rate in order to eliminate the disease. asymptomatic infectious individuals can be identified through contact-tracing and testing. however, since mass testing in most west-african countries only started during the last week of april, the primary way in which asymptomatic individuals were identified in west-africa during the study period was through manual contact tracing and then testing the contacts suspected to have the virus. one way in which contact tracing has been used successfully to identify and isolate both pre-symptomatic and 13 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint asymptomatic infectious individuals is through mobile phone applications, see for example, ferretti et al. [45] . we showed that a higher reduction in the disease transmission rate, e.g., through social distancing or using masks will be required to eliminate the disease if a higher proportion of exposed humans do not develop clinical disease symptoms after the incubation period.these results highlight the importance of early identification and of disease cases and are consistent with the results of previous studies on ebola virus and lassa fever virus in west-africa [43, 46] . the results are also consistent with those of a study by hellewell et al. [47] , who used simulated data to illustrate that contact tracing and isolation is highly effective in controlling the pandemic and can lead to disease elimination within 3 months. although, contact tracing is already being implemented in west-africa, the measure is not very effective due to the lack of resources and the high community transmission in the region.for example, as of april 8, 2020, about 4 in every 5 reported cases in the region resulted from community transmission [5] .therefore increased compliance with measures like social distancing and mask use is very important for the region.since the disease can be transmitted from one human to the other through droplets from infected individuals that can travel though a few meters in air [23, 48] , using masks and social distancing are very important in the fight against the pandemic.masks play a dual role-they prevent acquisition of the virus by infected individuals and also prevent infectious individuals from spreading the virus [17] . both using masks and social distancing are ongoing in many west-african countries. however, the effectiveness of these measures in reducing the spread of the virus is linked to the extent to which they are applied, the compliance level by public, and how long they will last [17, 21] . our analyses show covid-19 can be eliminated in west-africa through social distancing and using masks if 45% of the population complies with the measures. this is consistent with recent results in [17, 23, 49] , where strict compliance with social distancing and mask use can lead to disease elimination. some west-african countries, e.g., benin have implemented measures involving isolating some densely populated portions of the country, especially overcrowded urban areas with dilapidated sanitary facilities and limited basic amenities like clean water [28] . this has a positive effect on reducing the spread of the virus.finally, our study suggests that mass application of control measures coupled with appropriate testing and timely isolation of asymptomatic humans will go a long way in keeping disease numbers low. however, with the fragile economic conditions and health care systems in the region, interventions like complete lock-down as observed in most european countries for a couple of months can be more catastrophic than the disease itself. therefore, the choice of interventions by public policy makers in the region should aim at balancing the prevention of the epidemic with the need for maintaining livelihoods and social cohesion.our study confirms the fact that the novel coronavirus (covid-19) is highly contagious and that infectious humans who do not show clinical disease symptoms (asymptomatic or unreported cases) contribute significantly in disease transmission.this study also indicates that early identification of these unreported cases through contact tracing or mass testing, and then isolating individuals who test positive plays a significant role in diminishing the burden of covid-19 in west-africa. furthermore, this study suggests that social distancing measures such as stay-at-home orders, closing educational institutions,.cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint limiting mass gatherings, etc., and using masks can reduce the spread of the disease significantly, with the possibility of disease-elimination if about one in every two people in west-africa respect these control measures. to enhance, the study shows that implementing more than one measure at the same time is better for disease control, and that under current control measures, the disease might not be disappearing from the region any time soon, unless there are improvements in these control measures. we conclude that mass-testing, contact tracing and isolation of confirmed disease cases, as well as improvements to the other existing basic public health measures (e.g., social distancing and mask use) in the region, are required to better manage or eliminate the pandemic. also, due to uncertainties and various disparities between the economies and health care systems of countries within the region, we conclude that country-level studies are necessary and will provide more insights into disease dynamics and control in the region.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111294 doi: medrxiv preprintin late 2019, a respiratory infection began to spread amongst residents in the city of wuhan china. it was quickly attributed to a previously unknown coronavirus, which was given the name novel sars-cov-2. the clinical disease was subsequently named covid-19 and as of this writing (late may, 2020), has affected over 5.7 million people in virtually every country and region in the world, accounting for over three hundred and sixty thousand deaths. initial epidemiological reports indicate that those over 65 years of age and/or who have pre-existing conditions are at increased risk for covid-19. these risk factors including asthma and other chronic lung diseases, diabetes, morbid obesity, significant cardiovascular disease, or immune compromise (1) . some have included pregnancy as a risk factor for covid-19 (2) . the purpose of this review is to describe the current information available at the time of writing regarding the potential and known effects of this novel sars-cov-2 in pregnant women, their fetuses, and their newborns, to help inform neonatologists who might be called upon to counsel expectant mothers and to care for their babies. like all information about this disease, this is a rapidly developing field. after initial case reports, enough data and experience have rapidly accumulated to inform their clinical care. however, it is very important to note that virtually all reports to date are based on selective, often anecdotal case accrual, primarily using only hospitalized patients or those sick enough to seek hospital care. there are limited data at present about the prevalence of affected individuals in the population as a whole, which may differ from current estimates, as the estimated number of asymptomatic individuals may be as high as 52% (3) . it is likely, therefore, that any estimate rates or proportions will be lower than what is currently reported. it must also be noted that, while the need and benefit for rapid dissemination of medical information has been very beneficial during this pandemic, the careful peer review process has, of necessity, been placed on hold, for example, by rapid releases of pre-prints. it is therefore likely that some of our current understanding may later change as further data are more carefully scrutinized.pregnancy as risk factor sars-cov-2 closely resembles the original coronavirus species which caused the sars epidemic of 2002-03, with 79% gene sequence homology (4) . that epidemic affected nearly 8500 individuals with an overall case fatality rate estimated to be 9% (5) . in a case series from hong kong of a dozen pregnant women, there was a 25% mortality rate, along with three first trimester miscarriages, and two of the infants were growth restricted (6) . as a result, some authors suggested that pregnancy was a significant risk factor for sars morbidity and mortality.this was true during the last world-wide pandemic, spanish flu of 1918-19 (7) as well as during the 1957 h2n2 influenza season, where half the women between 18 and 49 who died did so from influenza (8) . for these historical precedents, there are possible biological factors that might explain the amplified the risk of coronavirus infection during pregnancy. diabetes is more common during pregnancy; there is relative immunosuppression of the th1 response, making pregnant women more susceptible to viral infections (9) ; and expression of the ace2 membrane protein, the receptor for both sars-cov and sars-cov-2 is relatively increased during pregnancy (10) .with rapid publication, several series of covid-19 infection in pregnancy cases have now been published. table 1 presents data from fifteen studies that included more than 3 subjects (11 -26) . these include 511 subjects, 82.5% diagnosed by sars-cov-2 rt-pcr, the others by current clinical criteria. the vast majority presented with symptoms and were then diagnosed, meaning that those who are asymptomatic or who have mild disease are most likely underrepresented. this, therefore, might be best viewed as a current snapshot of the most significantly affected pregnant women.as shown in table 1 , a small proportion were in the first or second trimester (10 and 20 subjects respectively). there were eight spontaneous miscarriages and seven elective terminations due to concerns about the potential effects of sars-cov-2 on the fetus. in pregnancies beyond 23 weeks gestational age, one report from iran noted that five out of nine had intrauterine fetal demise (14) , but this has not been replicated in any other published studies to date. more than two thirds (68.1%) of the births were by caesarian section, most probably reflecting the fact that these reports preferentially included symptomatic mothers.to understand sars-cov-2 and pregnancy in a more comprehensive manner, it will be important to acquire more data from asymptomatic and mildly affected mothers. estimates of asymptomatic rates in pregnant women are preliminary and quite variable. one study from new york reported that, in the first five days of universal testing for women presenting to the labor and delivery unit, 12 women were lab-test positive but were asymptomatic (27) . of note, 8 of them (67%) developed intrapartum or post-partum fever. it was not possible to differentiate the cause of the fever between clinical chorioamnionitis or covid-19 but other reports also suggest that fever occurs after delivery in affected mothers. in another, larger series from new york, 33 of 215 screened women were positive (15.3%) (28) . however, only four (1.9% of the whole screened population or 12.1% of the positive group) were symptomatic, although three (1.4%, 9.1% respectively) of the asymptomatic patients did develop fever peri-natally or post-natally. another study from new york screening asymptomatic women scheduled to deliver during the first two weeks of april also had a 15% positive rate (24/155) (29) .in contrast, of 635 pregnant women admitted to northwestern hospital in chicago, only 23 (3.6%) were positive, including ten who were asymptomatic (30) . this is similar to the experience in richmond virginia where 6 of 177 (3.4%) patients undergoing general screening upon presentation to the labor and delivery unit were positive. virginia has approximately the same population as new york city but only one fifth the number of confirmed cases (31) . these observations probably reflect how the prevalence of sars-cov-2 colonization in pregnant women is likely to reflect that of the general population.covid-19 for the benefit of the neonate should they be born prematurely is not very clear (32) .there are no systematic data available as yet for this infection, so recommendations are primarily based on our experience with other viruses, especially pneumonia due to influenza virus, where corticosteroid use was associated with a higher mortality rate and higher rates of icu admission (33) . these considerations have led to the recommendation that treatment decisions be individualized, based on the risk to and condition of the mother and the potential benefit to the infant. an asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic mother at 24 -26 weeks' gestation is a very different scenario compared to a mother who is in the intensive care unit (icu) on a ventilator at more than 34 weeks gestational age.many viruses, including rubella, cytomegalovirus, varicella zoster and zika, are well known to be teratogenic to the fetus. these include rubella, cytomegalovirus, varicella zoster and zika. coronaviruses are associated with 20% of upper respiratory tract infections, involving the four main sub-types but none of these are of specific concern during pregnancy (34). there were two cases of intrauterine growth restriction in babies born during the 2002-03 sars outbreak, although the underlying etiology was not investigated (6) . in the other human coronavirus epidemic, middle east respiratory syndrome mers-cov, there was no reported evidence for teratogenicity among the 12 pregnant patients (35) . similarly, up to mid-may 2020, there have not been any reports of congenital abnormalities in infants born to mothers with covid-19 or who are positive for sars-cov-2. whilst these data are encouraging, additional data accumulation is urgently required to confirm these observations.as shown in table 1 , 322 offspring of covid-19 mothers were tested after birth, and 10 were noted to be positive (3.1%). it is not possible, however, to know when and by which route (prenatal, perinatal like herpes simplex, or postnatal) the virus passed to the neonate, as few samples were reported to have been obtained immediately after birth or was sampling done serially. in addition, it is not clear if the infants who tested positive were separated from their mothers beginning immediately after birth, so it is not possible to determine if these were cases of postnatally acquired virus.on the other hand, an initial case report from china described elevated igg and igm against sars-cov-2 drawn at 2 hours of age, born to a mother with covid-19. however, the baby had 5 negative rt-pcr nasopharyngeal tests (36) . in another study of six infants born to covid-19 mothers who had blood and nasopharyngeal samples obtained at birth (37) two had elevations in their igg and igm antibodies against sars-cov-2, although neither had viral rna detected. these results taken together raise the possibility that the fetus responds with an immune response to virus at some point prior to delivery, but they need to be confirmed by larger, more systematic studies, using validated serological assays are required to establish the true nature of the associations between sars-cov-2 and neonatal infections (38) .overall, children are a small minority of diagnosed covid -19 cases. the incidence in south korea among children as of may 16, 2020 was 3.4 cases/100,000, one eighth the rate in the elderly population. there were also no deaths reported in those under 9 years of age (39) . this is consistent with observations from other countries. in the united states, as of april 2, 2020, only 398 (0.3%) of the 149,370 covid-19 patients were under 1 year of age (40) current recommendations in most countries, including the us, are to test all babies born to mothers who are either positive for or who are suspected of having covid-19 (41) . the us centers for disease control adopted this approach in late may, 2020 due to concerns that the disease may be more severe in neonates. over two dozen neonates (less than 30 days old at presentation) have been reported in the medical literature as of may 21, 2020. table 2 summarizes the available information (22) (23) (41) (42) (43) (44) (45) (46) (47) (48) (49) (50) (51) (52) (53) (54) (55) (56) . two thirds were born to mothers with covid-19, the others presumably acquired the virus from household contacts. three were preterm. fever was noted in 48%, respiratory symptoms in 30%, and emesis or diarrhea in 37%.many reports listed lethargy or changes in neurological status, poor feeding, and other nonspecific symptoms. notably, three (11%) were asymptomatic. only one baby, who presented at 3 weeks of age with nasal congestion, poor feeding, and lethargy, progressed to hypotension and respiratory failure requiring intensive care (52) . encouragingly, there were no deaths.one question that frequently arises is whether those called to attend at the delivery of a newborn should wear coronavirus-resistant personal protective equipment since positive pressure ventilation, which can generate aerosols, is a potential intervention at each delivery.considerations include the availability of the equipment, whether mothers presenting for delivery are being routinely screened, and what is known regarding the baseline rate of positive tests in the general population, including those who are asymptomatic.for newborn infants born to mothers who have or are suspected to have covid-19, viral rt-pcr testing from the nasopharynx, oropharynx or nares is recommended beginning after 24 hours of life (57) . until proven negative with at least two tests 24 hours apart, these babies should be kept separate from any other neonates. separation of sars-cov-2 positive mothers and negative or status-unknown babies is still encouraged, but it is acknowledged that this is not based on evidence-based data of post-natal transmission. if the decision is made to keep the mother-baby pair together, there are guidelines for physical distancing, maternal hand hygiene and face mask use. breast-feeding should still be encouraged, which will affect whether the mother and infant are separated (unless expressed breast milk is considered as an option) (58).regarding breast-feeding, there are no extensive reports about whether sars-cov-2 is present in breast milk. two publications indicate that the virus can be detected in breast milk (58, 61) . further information may modify current guidelines that breastfeeding may be advisable in covid-19 mothers under strict measures of infection control (physical distancing when not feeding, mother wearing mask, thorough cleaning) (57, 58) . human milk banks have added covid-19 questions to their donor screening and requirements for pre-donation quarantine. during the common holder pasteurization process, the breast milk is raised to 62.5 o c for thirty minutes. the infectivity of the sars-cov-2 virus was eliminated when the virus was exposed to temperature of 56 o c for thirty minutes (62) .a definitive recommendation for adding testing for the presence of sars-cov-2 by rt-pcr to the evaluation for early-or late-onset neonatal sepsis is not yet possible, given the paucity of data, especially in the absence of any known risk. as outlined in table 2 , neonates are affected, both before 72 hours and after. note that all the neonates reported in table 2 had a history of exposure to either tested or symptomatic covid-19 contacts. until more extensive epidemiologic studies are published, health care professionals will have to factor the prevalence in the obstetric and general population as well as local testing practice to decide.overall, it may be that children are relatively protected from covid-19 in general and in the severity of disease when they do acquire due to the observation that there is a linear relationship between age and the ace2 receptor (63) . of note, this was only sampled from the nasal epithelium, and did not include any neonates.although the attack rate in children is far lower than in any other age group, a worrisome complication has become apparent. termed multiorgan inflammatory syndromechildren (mic-s), over a hundred children have had this kawasaki syndrome-like condition, including some who were asymptomatic for covid-19 but tested positive, by rt-pcr or serology (64) . to date, we are unable to find any cases in a child under the age of one year.because there are so few neonates who have been diagnosed with covid-19, therapeutic recommendations or guidelines based on evidence or clinical experience are not possible. most of the cases listed in table 2 received supportive or routine care. at this point, if a baby is critically ill and either positive for sars-cov-2 by rt-pcr (not serology), or strongly suspected of having the disease based on exposure history and symptoms, consulting experts in adult disease is advised, given their larger accumulated experience. any recommended drug therapy will require risk-benefit assessment including adjustments for dose and timing considerations for this specific population. the best hope for the longer term is for a longlasting effective vaccination together with an effective serology test that will identify both recent and past infection with sars-cov-2..the rapidity with which sars-cov-2 has spread, and the number of cases, and deaths, from covid-19 is unlike anything seen since at least the spanish flu pandemic of 1918-19, but a hundred years later, international cooperation and rapid dissemination of experience has permitted those facing the need to care for a patient with a disease they have never seen before to tap into the experience of others. we can expect case reports and small series to be replaced by larger and more systematic studies, followed by prospective trials and long-term follow-up reports. for anyone who may have a patient with sars-cov-2 or covid-19, it is important to follow the medical literature, including consensus expert guidelines. (2) cs (14) vag (2) fetal distress (2) preterm < 3 weeks (2) china (7) (17) fever (5), cough (5) sab (3) cs (18) vag (2) none noneitaly (42) (4), 34 -37 (7), > 37 (31) prenatal fever (20), postnatal fever (6), cough (18), dyspnea (8), lymphopenia (6) cs (24) vag (18) icu (4) nicu (3) italy (77) 26 masking seems inconsistent with our knowledge of the rate of asymptomatic infections and the risk of transmission from these individuals.the u.s. cdc has recommended a policy of cloth face covering in public where social distancing is hard to maintain, but this policy has been practiced in many different ways. 11 following this recommendation, mandatory universal masking for all hospital visitors, patients, and healthcare workers has been proposed 12 and implemented as a robust preventive strategy in many american healthcare facilities including massachusetts general hospital, the johns hopkins university and health system, the university of maryland medical system, the university of chicago medical center, the university of illinois hospital, the university of rochester medical center, the university of california san francisco, the university of virginia heath system, rochester regional health, and st. luke's university health network. this list is growing fast.outside of healthcare settings, for many people, the motivation for wearing a mask is primarily for their own protection, which unintentionally leads to protecting their community. we consider both protection of the wearer and of the community to be important, but we believe that source control is most important. in a systematic review before the sars-cov-2 pandemic, wearing face masks reduced the odds of contracting acute respiratory infections by 6% among casual community contacts and by 19% among household contacts if both the infected and healthy individuals wore masks. 13 masks have been shown to be effective in reducing respiratory virus shedding from droplets and aerosols of symptomatic individuals infected with coronavirus, influenza virus, and rhinovirus. 14 there is also laboratory evidence that homemade masks effectively stop droplets from infecting the wearer. 15 surgical masks are disposable and designed to protect healthcare workers, although surgeons used cloth masks to protect wounds from droplets many years ago. the barrier layer in cloth masks is usually two layers of cotton-woven fabric, compared with two to four layers of nonwoven polypropylene fabric with filtration holes in surgical masks. effectiveness of cloth masks compared with surgical masks needs further evaluation because some clinical studies have raised concerns regarding their effectiveness. 16 however, the wearing of cloth masks by asymptomatic individuals is justified by evidence that droplets and aerosols get trapped when they hit the weave of the fabric, with potentially better trapping than surgical masks. in any case, cloth masks have been adopted as an alternative when surgical masks are limited in supply. 17 moreover, cloth masks are cheap, washable, easy to make, and can be used by the general population without imposing extra cost to local governments while they are already overwhelmed by lack of resources.while the sars-cov-2 pandemic rages, most nations are not receiving clear and concise instructions about public masking from public health authorities. we call on who and country-level public health leaders to urgently consider revising their policies on mass masking to facilitate implementation of appropriate interventions in communities around the world. considering the close community contact in densely populated areas around the world and documented evidence of sars-cov-2 transmission from asymptomatic individuals, it is appropriate to consider masking as a robust tool to limit sars-cov-2 transmission. this is highly recommended in public places including public transportation, grocery stores, bakeries, pharmacies, hospitals, rehabilitation units, nursing homes, offices, places of religious worship, workplaces, or even crowded streets. in summary, laboratory data support both surgical and cloth masks, but real-world efficacy of cloth masks needs further evaluation. cloth masks are affordable globally and might be the only option in some areas with limited resources. based on our current level of evidence, we highly recommend mass masking around the world during the pandemic. whereas surgical masks are the preferred recommendation for the general public, cloth masks should be considered as a substitute if supplies are limited or surgical masks are not available.the epidemic of the 2019 novel coronavirus disease infections that developed in wuhan, hubei province has spread to other provinces in china. as of 16 february 2020, 51,857 patients with covid-2019 have been reported and 1,121 deaths were confirmed in china (ding et al., 2020) . to date, accumulated evidence has indicated personto-person transmission both in hospital and family settings (chan et al., 2020; guan et al., 2020; phan et al., 2020; yang et al., 2020) . since january 23, 2020, the source city was locked down to suppress the spread of the disease; however, the massive human movement during the traditional chinese new year holidays might have fueled the spread of the disease. at present, there were at least 10,000 cases in other provinces, mostly identified through symptoms plus recent travel history to hubei province, china. genetic analysis of covid-19 revealed that the virus was similar to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) . unlike sars-cov, transmission of covid-19 occurs during the prodromal period when those infected are mildly ill, and carry on usual activities, which contributes to the spread of infection (heymann and shindo, 2020; zou et al., 2020) . according to the report on "diamond princess", among the 1,723 tested travelers, 189 asymptomatic individuals were positive for the covid-19 virus as of 17 february 2020 (wikipedia, 2020) , which indicated that a large number of asymptomatic carriers and mild patients remain undiscovered in the community. it is crucial to identify and isolate asymptomatic carriers and mild patients in order to contain the outbreaks in later stages.here, we conducted an epidemiological investigation among close contacts of covid-19 patients in nanjing, jiangsu province, china and identified 24 asymptomatic carriers. we sought to delineate the clinical characteristics and the transmission potential of asymptomatic infections.the demographic characteristics of the 24 asymptomatic cases are shown in table s1 in supporting information. none of the cases were healthcare workers and 8 (33.3%) had a history of recent travel to hubei (case 1 and 5 were residents of hubei (marked with blue arrows), case 3, 4, 6, 9, 13 and 17 have travelled to hubei (marked with blue boxes), and the period in hubei might be the suspected contact time. the suspected contact time of other cases who stay in nanjing was marked with gray boxes according to the epidemiological investigation). the diagnosis date of each case showed that the number of cases who have been to hubei decreased since jan 28, 2020 ( figure s1 in supporting in-formation). individuals of all ages were involved in the covid-19 asymptomatic infection with age ranging from 5 to 95 years old (median: 32.5 years), whereas 20.8% (5/24) of the cases were aged below 15 years. eight cases (33.3%) were males. two cases had a history of smoking (case 1 and case 13), and 2 were diagnosed with diabetes and hypertension (case 8 and case 13).five cases (case 2, 4, 5, 6, and 10, figure 1 ) had symptoms during hospitalization. all the five cases developed fever without chills, with body temperatures fluctuating from 36.5°c to 38.0°c, but none presented high fever (body temperature >39°c). cases 4, 6 and 10 were free of other symptoms. case 2 also had cough, fatigue and nasal congestion, and case 5 presented cough, fatigue, dizziness and arthralgia. several cases also occurred transient symptoms during hospitalization, including fever with chills (case 8), diarrhea (case 21 and 22) and rashes (case 16 and 18), that were discussed by clinical expert panel and considered as an infusion reaction of intravenous immunoglobulin, side effects of lopinavir/ritonavir and darunavir/cobicistat, respectively; and were therefore not grouped as cases with symptoms caused by covid-19.on admission, all 24 cases had a chest ct scan. twelve (50.0%) cases showed typical findings of chest ct images of ground-glass or patchy shadows in the lungs ( figure s2 in supporting information). five (20.8%) cases showed stripe shadows in lungs, an atypical image finding. ct scans of the rest 7 (29.2%) cases showed normal images. four (16.7%) of the 24 cases had lymphopenia (<0.8×10 9 cells/l) on admission. leukopenia was also observed in 4 cases. elevated levels of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, creatine kinase, c-reactive protein and d-dimer were uncommon (table s1 in supporting information). during hospitalization, case 2 and case 5 developed leukopenia. seven cases presented an elevated level of serum lactose dehydrogenase, among whom 3 were accompanied with an increased level of c-reactive protein ( figure s3 in supporting information).antiviral therapy was given to 21 cases (87.5%) as initiated therapy, in which, one case also received antibiotics therapy, antifungal therapy plus immunoglobin therapy; and immunoglobin therapy was also given to 2 cases. all these cases were treated with interferon atomization. none of the cases developed severe pneumonia, requiring systemic cor-ticosteroids treatment, mechanical ventilation, or admission to icu, and none died (table s1 in supporting information). as of feb 18, 2020, a total of 18 cases (75.0%) had the virus cleared (2 continuous negatives of nucleic acid tests), among whom 9 cases were discharged from the hospital while the rest 9 were kept in hospital for further observation. six cases (case 3, 8, 13, 16, 19 and 23) had nucleic acid tests reversed to positive after one negative result. of particular concern, case18 showed positive again even after the continuous negative of nucleic acid tests. five cases (case 7, 9, 11, 14 and 24) had the virus cleared within a short time. the communicable period, defined as the interval from the first day of positive nucleic acid tests to the first day of continuous negative tests, ranged from 1 to 21 days (median: 9.5 days, iqr, 3.5-13.0 days, figure s4 in supporting information, table s1 in supporting information). due to the censored data of 6 cases and the indeterminate date of the exact first infection, the communicable period was underestimated.we found that 7 (29.2%) cases had normal ct images and no symptoms during hospitalization. as compared with other cases, these 7 cases were younger (median, 14.0; p=0.012) ( table s2 in supporting information). there were no differences in other characteristics between these 2 groups, possibly due to the limited sample size. the blood test of these 7 cases showed no obvious abnormity. the median communicable period of the 7 patients was 4.0 days (iqr, 2.0-15.0).we reviewed the medical records and epidemiological history of each case and of their family members if they were admitted in hospital for confirmed or suspected covid-19 infection. in the family of case 13, relative 1 (wife of case 13) first visited the hospital ( figure 2 ). relative 1, a 64-yearold otherwise healthy woman, developed fever (the highest temperature was 38.7°c), cough, fatigue and vomiting on jan 30, 2020. three days later (feb 2, 2020), she visited the hospital and was tested positive for the covid-19 virus. then, epidemiological investigations and nucleic acid tests were conducted on her son (relative 2), daughter-in-law (relative 3) and case 13. relative 2 and 3 had developed respiratory symptoms before investigation and were demonstrated positive for the covid-19 virus. nucleic acid test was also positive for case 13, but he had no symptoms during admission. through epidemiological investigation, case 13 admitted his travel history to the city of huanggang, hubei province on jan 19-20, 2020. relative 1, 2 and 3 are all local nanjing residents and denied the history of contact with any confirmed or suspected covid-19 patient, except for case 13, in the recent 14 days. during hospitalization, case 13 had no symptoms but remained positive for the covid-19 virus till feb 18, 2020, which indicated that the communicable period could be as long as 29 days (from jan 21 to feb 18, 2020). among the 3 infected family members, relative 1 developed severe covid-19 pneumonia and was admitted to the icu on feb 6, 2020. relative 2 and 3 cleared the virus on feb 18, 2020. in brief, case 13, an asymptomatic covid-19 carriers transmitted the virus to his cohabiting family members, and 1 of the infected individuals developed severe covid-19 pneumonia and was admitted to icu.in the present study, we provided epidemiological and clinical data of 24 asymptomatic covid-19 infections identified from the screening of close contacts in nanjing, jiangsu province. these asymptomatic cases were mildly ill as compared to those previously reported in wuhan, hubei (guan et al., 2020; huang et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020) . none of the 24 cases developed severe pneumonia as of feb18, 2020, and only 5 cases showed typical symptoms during hospitalization. similar to previous studies (chang et al., 2020; huang et al., 2020) , fever, cough and fatigue were the main symptoms. lymphopenia and leukopenia, previously associated with disease severity (chen et al., 2020; guan et al., 2020; huang et al., 2020) , were uncommon in the asymptomatic cases of the present study. interestingly, we found that young cases (<15 years old) were prone to be asymptomatic even during hospitalization and to have a normal ct image, which partially suggested that nucleic acid testing would be crucial to identify asymptomatic infections in young close contacts. notably, we provided evidence for transmission from an asymptomatic infector to close contacts that led to severe covid-19 pneumonia. these findings indicate that asymptomatic carriers can result in person-to-person transmission and should be considered a source of covid-19 infection. it is also implicated by the report of the "diamond princess" that large numbers of asymptomatic or mild patients might have been hiding in the community. therefore, it is of great public health significance to strictly monitor close contacts via multiple nucleic acid screenings to contain potential outbreaks. of particular, since massive movement returning to the work place and the school is in progress, active contact tracing and strict health monitoring should remain an important strategy in china, or worldwide. guidance of self-protection, active isolation of close contacts (either at home or centralized) should be continuously highlighted. isolation and multiple virus nucleic acid detections are also recommended for discharged covid-19 patients.our study was conducted in nanjing, a city with adequate medications and public health interventions. the included cases were identified from systematic screening of the close contacts of covid-19 patients (or suspected patients) both in clinic and in community. all asymptomatic carriers were admitted to and treated in the second hospital of nanjing, and therefore the study population has strong representativeness of the whole city. we collected the contact history and followed longitudinal nucleic acid tests of the close contacts during their hospitalization, which provided a relatively reliable communicable period of asymptomatic cases. however, it is notable that the real communicable period was longer than calculated, due to the censored data of 6 patients and the indeterminate date of the exact first infection. secondly, our study was conducted in nanjing, and the results might not be generalizable to other areas in china. thirdly, there is still a possibility of missing carriers when screening from close contacts using the pharyngeal swab specimens. at last, this study is limited by the small sample size and lack of data on nucleic acid tests before the diagnosis date. large-scale multicenter studies are needed to verify our findings.all screening-identified asymptomatic covid-19 cases in nanjing were admitted to the second hospital of nanjing, the only hospital to admit for covid-19 patients of the city, from jan 28 to feb 9, 2020. we retrospectively reviewed documents on epidemiological investigation and medical records. asymptomatic carriers were screened from close contacts both in clinic and in community. close contacts were defined as: 1) cohabiting family members of the covid-19 patient or suspected patient; or 2) individuals who were exposed to the covid-19 patient within 2 meters for more than 1 hour within 2 days before the symptom onset of the patient. nucleic acid test was performed on the same day when the contacts were tracked. the asymptomatic covid-19 cases here were defined as cases who were tested for covid-19 nucleic acid positive, but without symptoms while screening. actually, among the 24 cases, only 19 cases have not developed symptoms during hospitalization. this study was reviewed and approved by the medical ethical committee of second hospital of nanjing (approval number 2020-ls-ky003). written informed consent was obtained from each enrolled patient.upon admission, detailed contact history of each case was collected, including their travel history in hubei, the date/ time of suspected contact, the symptom onset after contacting with the confirmed patient, and information of other family members. history of smoking and coexisting disorders was also collected.for each case, computed tomography (ct) was performed upon admission. laboratory assessments include whole blood count, blood chemistry, coagulation test, liver and renal function, electrolytes, c-reactive protein, procalcitonin, lactate dehydrogenase and creatine kinase. pharyngeal swab specimens were collected on admission day and every other day thereafter for the covid-19 virus test. all samples were processed simultaneously at the department of clinical laboratory of second hospital of nanjing. the symptoms presented on each case during their hospitalization were recorded in this study, including fever, cough, nasal congestion, dizziness, fatigue, arthralgia, etc. the virus clearance was defined as 2 continuous negatives of nucleic acid tests.pharyngeal swab specimens, as described above, were tested for covid-19 by using qrt-pcr kits (bgi genomics, beijing, china) recommended by the chinese center for disease control and prevention (cdc) following who guidelines (china, 2020) . the total nucleic acids were isolated from 200 μl virus preservation solution containing throat swabs through automatic nucleic acid extraction system (bioperfectus technologies company). the primers and probe set for open reading frame1ab (orf1 ab) were as follows: forward primer 5′-agaagattggttagatg-atgatagt-3′; reverse primer 5′-ttccatctctaatt-gaggttgaacc-3′; and probe 5′-fam-tcctcac-tgccgtcttgttgacca-bhq1-3′. the human gapdh gene was used as an internal control (forward primer 5′-tcaagaaggtggtgaagcagg-3′; reverse primer 5′-cagcgtcaaaggtggaggagt-3′; probe 5′-vic-cctcaagggcatcctgggctacactbhq1-3′).continuous variables were expressed as the medians and interquartile ranges (iqr). categorical variables were summarized as the counts and percentages in each category. wilcoxon rank-sum tests were applied to continuous variables, and fisher's exact tests were used for categorical variables. all analyses were conducted with stata/se 14.0.this work was reviewed and approved by the medical ethical committee of second hospital of nanjing (approval number 2020-ls-ky003). written informed consent was obtained from each enrolled patient.the author(s) declare that they have no conflict of interest.the transmission evidence from an asymptomatic covid-19 carrier to his cohabited family members, and his wife admitted to the icu after being infected.the national natural science foundation of china (81903382) , cheung kong scholars program of china. figure s1 date of asymptomatic covid-19 infection onset among close contact in nanjing and the distribution of travel history to hubei.representative chest ct abnormalities of asymptomatic covid-19 infections.the abnormal blood test during hospitalization.the calculation process of the communicable period.clinical characteristics of 24 asymptomatic infections with covid-19 grouped by cases with/without symptoms after diagnosis table s2 clinical characteristics of 24 asymptomatic infections with covid-19 grouped by grouped by cases with/without symptoms plus abnormal chest ct the supporting information is available online at http://life.scichina.com and https://link.springer.com. the supporting materials are published as submitted, without typesetting or editing. the responsibility for scientific accuracy and content remains entirely with the authors.beta coronavirus (bcov) was first detected and characterised from a foal with enterocolitis in 1999 (davis et al. 2000) . a more recent prevalence study demonstrated the equal likelihood of isolating ecov from both gastrointestinal-diseased and healthy foals (slovis et al. 2014) . as a co-infecting agent, however, this same study showed a significant association between ecov and gastrointestinal disease in foals (slovis et al. 2014) . aside from gastrointestinal disease in foals, ecov has also been associated with outbreaks in adult horses in racing facilities in japan and in boarding facilities in the us (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013) . in these outbreaks of adult horses, the most common clinical signs associated with ecov infection were anorexia, lethargy, fever and less commonly specific signs of gastrointestinal disease (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013; nemoto et al. 2014) . ecov has also rarely been associated with necrotising enteritis and hyperammonaemic encephalopathy in horses giannitti et al. 2015) . the purpose of this study is to describe an outbreak of bcov that occurred on an american miniature horse (amh) breeding farm in upstate new york. to the authors' knowledge, this outbreak of bcov constitutes the largest one described in a single, closed herd situation. the clinical presentation, faecal pcr results and faecal shedding of the virus for the animals involved in this outbreak are described. possible transmission of bcov via human movement from the outbreak site to one horse at a barn off the premises is also described. aside from the size of this outbreak, several other factors also set it apart from other bcov outbreaks previously described in the literature including the mortality rate, morbidity rate and duration of faecal shedding (pusterla et al. 2013; nemoto et al. 2014; fielding et al. 2015) .the bcov outbreak reported here occurred at an american miniature horse farm in upstate new york from late january to early february of 2013. the outbreak of bcov on this farm included 29 miniature horses and one donkey ranging in age from 6 months to 15 years (median 5.5 years). the horses were housed in individual pens within a single open barn, and the adult jennet was housed in a separate shed outside, disconnected from the main barn (fig 1) . the pens within the main barn allowed for physical contact between individuals in adjacent pens. the most recent addition to the farm arrived approximately 3 months prior to the onset of this outbreak. there was no recent travel history for any of the animals on the farm.the outbreak began with the onset of fever, lethargy and mild colic signs (flank watching, laying down frequently, and anorexia) in two 3-year-old mares in adjacent pens (fig 1, index cases 1 and 2). these two cases, beginning simultaneously, were considered the index cases of this outbreak. in total, five horses (all positive for bcov on faecal pcr and ages ranging from 6 months to 12 years; median 5 years) developed clinical signs. the clinical signs of anorexia, lethargy and fever (ranging from 102.5 to 104.4°f; 39.2 to 40.2°c) were consistent among the five miniature horses who developed clinical illness over the course of the outbreak (table 1) . one infected horse also developed diarrhoea while two other infected horses developed mild colic signs and had decreased faecal production. clinical signs in four of the five horses were selflimiting and resolved in 2-5 days with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (nsaid), flunixin meglumine, administration by the owner for febrile episodes. two mares (the index cases) were given antibiotics at the onset of clinical signs, including trimethoprim sulphamethoxazole tablets orally and oxytetracycline intravenously. these treatments were administered prior to the diagnosis of bcov. an 8-year-old stallion also required supportive care on the farm with intravenous fluids due to dehydration associated with diarrhoea. one of the index cases (index case 2) continued to be febrile, inappetent, had no manure production, and mild colic signs after 5 days of treatment on the farm and was referred for more intensive care to the cornell university equine hospital (see hospitalised mare section). once the diagnosis of bcov infection was made via molecular detection of the virus in the faeces (pcr testing) from the hospitalised horse, faecal samples were collected from both clinically ill and healthy horses and the donkey on the premise for pcr detection of bcov at various times over a 26-day period beginning 9 days after the onset of clinical signs. all individuals on the farm had a minimum of one faecal pcr performed and a maximum of six faecal pcr tests for bcov over that period. edta whole blood was also collected from six faecal bcov pcr positive horses (three affected and three unaffected) and tested for bcov by pcr. these blood samples were collected on day 9 after clinical signs began in the index cases; days 2, 4 and 9 after clinical signs developed in the three affected horses. complete blood count (cbc) and serum chemistries were also performed on the index case who required hospitalisation.one faecal sample was also collected for molecular detection of bcov from a 10-year-old quarter horse mare who was owned by an employee of this farm, but housed at a separate location with additional horses. this horse developed a fever of unknown origin approximately 1 week after clinical signs were first detected in the two index cases at the primary farm.on arrival to the cornell university equine hospital, index case 2 was lethargic and slightly underconditioned with a body condition score of 4/9. her mucous membranes were dark red with a toxic line and her capillary refill time was about 3 s. her sclera appeared mildly icteric and she was tachycardic (60 beats/min). digital pulses were palpable in both front limbs and all four hooves were warm, but lameness was not noted. her rectal temperature was 38.1°c (100.6°f). significant cbc findings included an elevated hct (47%, normal 34-46%) and low total solids (ts 49 g/l; normal 52-78 g/l) suggestive of both dehydration and protein loss. a leucopenia (4.7 910 9 /l; normal 5.5-12.5 910 9 /l) characterised by lymphopenia (1.5 910 9 /l; normal 1.8-5.0 910 9 /l) and neutropenia (2.8 910 9 /l; normal 3.0-7.0 910 9 / l) was present. serum chemistry abnormalities included hyperlactataemia (3.56 mmol/l; normal 0.3-1.5 mmol/l), hyponatraemia (126 mmol/l; normal 128-142 mmol/l), hypochloraemia (93 mmol/l; normal 100-111 mmol/l) and elevated aspartate aminotransferase (ast) (834 u/l; normal 100-600 u/l). the mare was treated with supportive care including intravenous fluids (crystalloids and colloids), omeprazole, pentoxifylline and ice boots.the mare continued to improve over the next few days: her temperature remained normal, clinical pathologic parameters normalised, appetite gradually increased and she finally passed faeces on day 3 of hospitalisation (8 days after onset of clinical signs). a sample of that faeces was collected and tested positive for beta coronavirus by pcr. for infection control purposes, all animals admitted to cornell university equine hospital are required to have a faecal salmonella culture performed. this faecal sample was negative for salmonella by culture. a faecal quantitative floatation was performed, and two strongyle eggs/gram were detected. targeted diagnostic testing was performed on this case due to economic concerns. for this reason, along with season of the year (january in upstate new york), and the clinical signs present, other enteric pathogen testing was not performed.the aetiologic agent of the outbreak was determined to be a beta coronavirus based on molecular detection of virus in the faecal sample from the hospitalised mare initially, followed by molecular detection in additional faecal and whole blood samples from other miniature horses on the farm. the pcr assay used will also detect other members of the betacoronavirus family, including bovine enteric coronavirus, canine respiratory coronavirus, human coronavirus oc43 and equine enteric coronavirus. the primers and probe sequences target a conserved region within the nucleocapsid gene and were provided by a third party under a confidentiality agreement. the assay was originally validated using in vitro rna transcripts containing the target region derived from bovine enteric coronavirus. analytical sensitivity was determined to be 100 copies with a slope of 3.327 and an efficiency of 99.79%. all samples are run with an exogenous rna control (encapsulated rna phage) added at the samples lysis step to monitor for rt-pcr inhibition.once the diagnosis of beta coronavirus was made on the hospitalised index case, faecal samples were collected from the remaining 29 animals at the farm (four of which also had current or previous clinical signs). molecular diagnostic test results and clinical signs are summarised in table 1 . fifteen of those animals sampled initially were positive via faecal pcr for bcov. in total, 25 animals (83%) on the primary premise tested positive over the course of the 4-week period during which faecal samples were collected. five (20%) of the 25 animals who tested positive demonstrated clinical signs associated with bcov, while 20 (80%) of the positive animals remained asymptomatic. no animals displaying clinical signs tested negative for bcov. edta whole blood was also collected from six of the miniature horses that were pcr positive on faeces. these blood samples were collected one time, 9 days after the outbreak began on the farm. four of these animals were pcr positive for bcov on whole blood, three of which had previously (n = 1) or currently (n = 2) demonstrated clinical signs. furthermore, virus isolation (vi) was performed on the edta whole blood samples and equine herpesvirus-2 (ehv-2) was isolated from two of the horses, one yearling without any clinical signs and one adult stallion with clinical signs. isolation of this (ehv-2) virus from edta whole blood in conjunction with molecular detection of bcov in whole blood has not been reported previously and the role that ehv-2 played in this outbreak, if any, is unclear. bcov (including ecov) is not routinely recovered by vi and most studies on ecov prevalence rely on pcr assays (pusterla et al. 2013 miszczak et al. 2014; hemida et al. 2017) . to the authors' knowledge, this was the first time that bcov had been diagnosed in an adult horse in new york state and little was known about its role in disease in adult horses at the beta coronavirus outbreak on an american miniature horse farm time. vi is not a pathogen-specific testing modality, so it is often performed on whole blood samples from horses with fevers of unknown origin as a means of detecting viraemia due to unknown viral pathogens. vi was performed on the whole blood samples in this outbreak as part of an investigative workup for a fever of unknown origin and also because of the possibility, although unlikely, of isolating bcov for further characterisation. the faecal sample collected from the farm employee's horse (housed in a separate location, approximately 6 miles from the primary premises) tested positive for bcov by pcr. no additional samples were collected from this horse, so follow-up testing was not performed. to the authors' knowledge, no other horses present at this separate facility (6-8 total horses in the barn) became ill or were tested for bcov. faecal samples were collected intermittently over the next several weeks from all amh and the donkey on the primary premises. one horse tested positive initially and was still positive 25 days later on faecal pcr. two other horses demonstrated bcov shedding in faeces on two samples collected 22 and 18 days apart. there was no correlation seen between beta coronavirus cycle threshold (ct) values in faecal samples and expression of clinical signs. follow-up samples beyond that time period were not collected and all three of these horses remained asymptomatic throughout the entire duration of the outbreak.the lack of mortality in this bcov outbreak is in contrast to the case fatality rates reported in some previous outbreaks involving adult horses (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015) . previous studies have demonstrated that ecov is a very common agent present in healthy foals <20 weeks of age (slovis et al. 2014) . for this reason, it has been hypothesised that there may be a protective effect of breeding farms against ecov due to constant exposure of the mares to ecov shed by the foals. this farm was not bringing in outside mares to be bred to their stallion. the stallion was only used for breeding the mares on this farm and the farm generally produced up to 6 foals per year. all mares and geldings were turned out together for exercise, so all had contact with each other daily and the stallion was turned out separately. perhaps, the presence of foals on this farm helps explain the lack of mortality and the low morbidity seen in this outbreak compared with that described elsewhere. the exposure of adult horses to foals, could however, also explain the source of this outbreak as the two index cases were on one side of the barn, adjacent to the only two weanlings (6 months old) in the barn, who also tested positive for bcov but never developed clinical illness. ventilation of the barn, alone, does not offer much insight to disease spread of aerosolised viral particles as the barn had upward ventilation throughout. ecov has been described in one outbreak among adult miniature horses and a miniature donkey originating from a single competition . the case fatality rate of this outbreak was 27% among those animals who tested positive for ecov in their faeces . other prior outbreaks have published case fatality rates ranging from 0 to 7% (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013) .the published durations of faecal shedding of ecov has ranged from 3 to 14 days among outbreaks and experimental infections in adult horses (nemoto et al. 2014; fielding et al. 2015) . over the course of this outbreak, bcov pcr was performed on faecal samples from each animal as few as one time and as many as six times. the prolonged shedding periods of at least 25, 22 and 18 days duration occurred in three horses who failed to demonstrate any associated clinical signs throughout the outbreak period. to the authors' knowledge, these durations of faecal detection are longer than previously described in animals lacking clinical signs of illness. in contrast, a european paper described one horse who shed ecov in faeces for 35 days but subsequently died with severe diarrhoea (miszczak et al. 2014) . similarly, faecal samples from a 28-year-old horse, submitted to the animal health diagnostic center (ahdc) at cornell for bcov faecal pcr testing, were positive at days 1, 28, 63 and 99 after onset of disease. this horse originally demonstrated clinical signs of a fever 40°c (104°f), mild colic signs, lethargy, anorexia and developed softformed faeces. clinical illness lasted for a total of 7-10 days (a. glaser, personal communication 2014) . this information suggests that a potential for prolonged shedding, longer than the previously published 14 days, should be considered in any biosecurity plan following bcov infection at a facility.horse 13 (fig 1) was the most recent addition to this farm. this gelding was brought to the farm approximately 3 months prior to the onset of the outbreak. in this outbreak, horse 13 tested positive for bcov on faecal pcr during the outbreak but remained asymptomatic. while this may represent another possible source of this outbreak, it is difficult to explain why clinical disease would not have been seen sooner in the index cases if the new horse was shedding beta coronavirus upon arrival, as the incubation period for ecov has been demonstrated to be 2-4 days post inoculation (nemoto et al. 2014) . if this horse was the source of the outbreak, it would represent a very prolonged shedding period (which is possible, as mentioned above) or else intermittent shedding of bcov, which, to the authors' knowledge, has not yet been documented.an association has been demonstrated between viral load and mortality in ecov outbreaks . although viral load was not measured in this outbreak, there was no correlation detected between beta coronavirus ct values in faecal samples and expression of clinical signs, so it is unlikely that differences in viral load were solely responsible for the differences seen in disease expression in this outbreak. other factors affecting mortality may include strain differences as well as environmental and host characteristics. the miniature horses of this report were all in excellent lean body condition. such ideal condition may have offered protection from the common secondary complication, hepatic lipidosis, that may plague sick, inappetent miniature horses. the one animal which required care at a referral veterinary hospital had been treated for 5 days on the farm with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications, perhaps contributing significantly to the prolongation of clinical signs.previously described outbreaks of ecov demonstrated morbidity rates ranging from 20 to 67% (pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015) . the morbidity rate in this bcov outbreak was only 17% (5 of 30 horses showing clinical signs), with 80% of the positive animals in this outbreak remaining asymptomatic. this is in contrast to only 33% asymptomatic, positive animals in a previously described ecov outbreak among a similar population . as mentioned previously, this discrepancy could also be explained by the hypothesis that exposure of adult horses to bcov from foals may offer some protection against morbidity and mortality associated with this virus. this also suggests that there may be a greater likelihood than previously suspected of asymptomatic animals perpetuating an outbreak of bcov. at the time of this outbreak, there was no equine-specific antibody test available to detect horses with subclinical or previous ecov infections. currently, there is an ecov s protein-based elisa that would have been useful to further characterise the role of asymptomatic shedders in this bcov outbreak (kooijman et al. 2016) .this outbreak also suggests that people can play a role in transmission of bcov among horses. the horse who was housed at a separate facility, but owned by an employee of the primary premises, developed clinical signs compatible with bcov and tested positive for bcov on faecal pcr. although an unrelated bcov transmission and infection could have occurred on the second farm, a more likely explanation for the source of transmission was the farm employee as there were no other common contacts shared between the two farms. this highlights the need for stringent biosecurity efforts, including the limit of human movement to other farms during a bcov outbreak.our findings suggest all individuals at risk for disease should be tested, not just those demonstrating clinical signs, prior to lifting quarantine measures. further work is necessary to establish guidelines for bcov quarantine timeframes as animals both with and without obvious clinical signs may shed virus for prolonged periods of time.a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) originating from wuhan rapidly spread around the world to give rise to the most important pandemic event in recent history. the cumulative number of confirmed cases has reached 3.5 million cases including 250000 deaths as of may 17, 2020 [1] . early mean estimates of the reproduction number based on the epidemic's growth rate have been estimated in the range 1.4-3.5, comparable with estimates for seasonal, 2009 pandemic flu, sars and mers [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] . considering the explosive spread and significant severity associated with the novel coronavirus, the who declared this public health emergency a pandemic on march 11, 2020 , and the world is coming together to fight the spread of the coronavirus.evidence suggest that the novel coronavirus likely jumped from a primary reservoir (e.g, horseshoe bats) to an intermediary reservoir, possibly generating an outbreak among wild animals in at least one wet market in wuhan, china [8] [9] . the virus first infected multiple individuals working or visiting the huanan seafood wholesale market at an early stage, initiating multiple chains of transmission that ensured sustained transmission in the human population [10] . while the detailed origin of the outbreak remains uncertain, significant evidence strongly links the huanan seafood wholesale j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f market in wuhan for the early spread of the novel coronavirus (covid-19) among humans [9] .in this paper we conduct quantitative modeling analyses to quantify the role of the wet marketplace on the early transmission dynamics of the novel coronavirus in china [11] .for this purpose, we analyzed and modeled data that stratifies the market hazard (market-to-human transmission) and human-to-human transmission dynamics.daily series of laboratory-confirmed covid-19 cases were extracted from a recently published study [9] . from december 8, 2019 to january 21, 2020, we analyzed a total of 425 confirmed cases by date of symptoms onset including information on whether the case was linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market. that is, this unique case series stratifies cases with visiting history to the huanan seafood wholesale market, which has been purported as source of this large epidemic at an early stage [9] , and those arising from human-to-human transmission. because the corresponding incidence curve is subject to reporting delays, the last 12 epidemic days j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f were excluded from our analysis. thus, the study period is set from december 8 th , 2019to january 9 th , 2020.we model two types of infections: a) market hazard (market-to-human transmission, including primary infections arising from zoonotic transmission to some extent) and b) human-to-human transmission chains. a model schematic of the transmission dynamics is provided in figure 1 . primary infection (index case) occurs as a result of a spillover event, and primary infections may generate secondary cases. the number of infected individuals stemming from the market-to-human and the human-tohuman route are denoted by im and ih, respectively.we employed a discrete-time integral equation to capture the daily incidence series with contact history. let fs denote the probability mass function of the serial interval of length s days, which is given by , where e[cm(t)] represents the expected number of new cases with onset day t infected through market-to-human transmission, p is the conditional probability of extinction j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f within one generation, given by 1/(rm+1) [12] [13] , where rh and rm represents the average number of secondary infections generated by one single infection generated from the market-to-human or from the human-to-human transmission, respectively.to account for the type of infection dependent probability of occurrence, θ j [14] , we assume that the number of observed cases for infection type j on day t, hj(t), occurred according to a bernoulli sampling process, with the expected values e(cj;ht-1), where e(cj; ht-1) denotes the conditional expected incidence, on day t, given the history of observed data from day 0 to day (t-1), denoted by ht-1. thus, the number of expected newly observed cases is written as follows:subsequently, we also account for the reporting probability that depends on the type of infection. we assume that the number of reported cases by infection type j on where α1 and α2 scale the intensity of public health interventions (where α1 and α2 is expected to be smaller than 1) and period1 and period2 define the study periods the number of expected newly observed cases should be updated aswe assume the incidence, hj is the result of the poisson sampling process with the expected value of e[hj]. the likelihood function for the time series of observed cases of primary infection through the market-to-human transmission and secondary infection through human-to-human transmission that we employ to estimate the reproduction number and other relevant parameters is given by:where u indicates parameter sets that are estimated from this likelihood.the serial interval is assumed to follow a lognormal distribution with the mean and sd at 4.7 and 2.9 days, respectively, based on ref. [15] . the maximum value of the serial interval was fixed at 16 days as the cumulative probability distribution of the lognormal distribution up to 16 days reaches 0.99.for sensitivity analyses, we examined the effect of varying the mean of the serial interval on rj by varying the mean serial interval from 2.7 to 6.7 days. the [16, 17] .our method is a powerful tool to estimate the underlying cases including asymptomatic and mild symptoms, and our results suggests that those proportions constitute a large fraction of the epidemic's magnitude. in fact, the result of careful screening, detailed examination and follow-up studies to confirm that the people did not turn symptomatic at a later stage of a total of 565 japanese returnees evacuated from wuhan city by government-chartered planes during january 29-31, 2020, revealing a ratio of 4 asymptomatic to 9 symptomatic cases, and the estimated asymptomatic proportion was reported to be 30.8% (95% confidence interval: 7.7-53.8) [18] [19] . for the covid-19 outbreak that unfolded aboard the diamond princess cruise ship, the proportion of truly asymptomatic infections was estimated at 17.9% (95%cri: 15.5-20.25) among a largely senior population [20] . in addition, one study reported that the majority of seasonal coronavirus infections are asymptomatic by most symptom definitions and only 4% of individuals experiencing a seasonal coronavirus infection episode sought medical care for their symptoms [21] . taken together, this evidence further underscores the need to account for a significant fraction of asymptomatic cases. furthermore, reporting probabilities for cases stemming from market-to-human and human-to-human cases were estimated to be low, but we estimated that the reporting rate for market-to-human route was 2-34 fold higher, suggesting that contact history with the huanan seafood wholesale market played a key role in identifying cases with covid-19, in the context of the influenza season when many influenza patients with non-specific symptoms, fever and respiratory symptoms, visit medical facilities, which further complicates an accurate diagnosis of covid-19 based on nonspecific symptoms [22] . indeed, during the initial disease stages, infected individuals with covid-19 exhibit clinical features that are similar to those of other common respiratory diseases [23] .our results are not free from limitations. we cannot rule out the possibility that some cases with contact history with the huanan seafood wholesale market got infected by relatively lower compared to human-to-human transmission. the power of our approach lies in the ability to infer epidemiological parameters with quantified uncertainty from limited data collected by surveillance systems.the authors declare no conflicts of interest.no ethical approval is requested. routes are classified into market-to-human transmission and human-to-human transmission. infected through market-to-human route and human-to-human route is indicated by im and ih, respectively. reported cases of primary case infected through market-to-human route and of secondary or later cases though human-to-human route is indicated by cm and ch, respectively. a virus with substantial human-to-human transmission potential could yield subsequent transmissions caused by human-to-human transmission.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 